Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I would like to thank Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK), for his informative briefing
about the situation in the province. We welcome the
participation in today's meeting of Mr. Ivica Dacie,
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, and we share the
serious concerns he has expressed about the situation in
Kosovo. We have also taken note of Ms. Vlora Citaku's
participation in the meeting.

The situation in the Kosovo settlement is not
promising and does not inspire optimism. The dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina under the auspices of
the European Union, which has long been in a state of
paralysis, now seems to be comatose. Nothing has been
done in that format for a very long time, and it exists
only on paper and in people's statements. We hope that
the European Union will spring into action once the
new membership of the European Commission becomes
fully operational. We expect more productive efforts
and unbiased mediation from our European partners
in that regard. There must be an end to the damaging
practice of condoning Pristina's provocations, which
led the dialogue to wither on the vine, and we would
like to point to Belgrade's restraint in that regard.
We see no improvement in the situation in Kosovo
from the point of View of security and respect for the
rights of non-Albanian communities. And I should
point out to Ms. Citaku that we are talking about
today, not yesterday. We continue to see new instances
of intimidation, seizure and vandalism of property,
cemeteries and Serbian Orthodox Church sites. It is
understandable that in such conditions there is no real
room to talk about the return of refugees and internally
displaced persons. The Kosovo-Albanian special
force's incursions into Serb-populated communities on
false pretexts of fighting crime, with the most recent
incident on 16 October, are gradually bringing the
situation to a dangerous point where conflict could
erupt once again. The reluctance of the international
presence, especially the Kosovo Force, to do anything
to prevent such incidents is dispiriting. The indulgent
attitude of Western partners to Pristina is encouraging
increased aggression on the part ofthe authorities there
towards UNMIK. I noticed that Ms. Citaku listened
to Deputy Prime Minister Daeic' very carefully, but
she clearly was not listening to the Head of UNMIK,
or rather she preferred not to hear his statement and
the conclusions drawn by the commission specially
assigned to investigate the incident of 28 May. I can
remind her of what happened, so she should now listen
to me.

We agree with the findings of the United Nations

representatives regarding the incident in northern
Kosovo of the beating and detention on 28 May by a
Kosovo-Albanian special force of two UNMIK staff
members, Mikhail Krasnoshchekov, a Russian citizen,
and Dejan Dimovic, a Serbian citizen. The conclusions
accord with the results of the Russian investigative
committee. Our investigators established that the goal of
the Kosovo agents was to prevent Mr. Krasnoshchekov
from carrying out his lawful duties in full compliance
with the provisions of resolution 1244 (1999). They
ignored his United Nations immunity despite the fact
that Mr. Krasnoshchekov showed his identification and
introduced himself in English, and despite the fact that
his car had United Nations plates, which meant that he
could not be subject to arrest or detention.

The details are shocking. The agents dragged him
out of his car by force, banged his head against the car
door, punched him numerous times and then brought
out their equipment and handcuffs. He was pushed into
the back of his own car, where they continued to beat
him up. They seized his identification and his United
Nation staff driver's licence and broke his mobile phone.
As a result, he suffered multiple injuries, including a
concussion and a complex fracture of the jaw, not to
mention emotional trauma and post-traumatic stress.
The actions of the Kosovo agents showed a total
disregard for the norms of international law, including
the United Nations staff guarantees of immunity from
arrest and detention. Separately, I would like to point
out that the justifications we heard subsequently from
the Kosovo security force and today from Ms. Citaku,
as well as the fabricated allegations against him, were
not confirmed and are in fact disproved, including by
video recordings of the events of 28 May.

That picture is evidence of the immaturity of the
Kosovo-Albanian security force and its despicable
culture. In that context, the idea of Kosovo joining
international organizations, including INTERPOL,
is mistaken and without foundation. We demand that
those responsible be prosecuted and punished. We
believe that the Security Council should definitively
condemn this crime against United Nations staff.

But that is not the main thing. What we are
witnessing is the Kosovo Albanian authorities' desire
to force the United Nations Mission out of Kosovo.
There are no longer any UNMIK personnel in northern
Kosovo, and in general the Mission is having to
operate in the difficult conditions of a de facto boycott
by the Pristina authorities. Today Ms. Citaku openly
confirmed that the Pristina authorities' dream is to see
the United Nations leave Kosovo as soon as possible so
that there will be no one left to witness the lawlessness
that is going on there and that we are discussing today.
And of course Ms. Citaku would prefer that the Security
Council not discuss the situation in Kosovo and waste
its valuable time, as she put it. The lawlessness we
are discussing somehow does not fit the image of the

beautiful young democracy in Kosovo that Ms. Citaku
described to us today.

The participation of the Kosovo security force in
the multinational military exercise Albanian Effort
19 was yet another gross violation of resolution 1244
(1999). The initiators of these military games openly
ignored the provision of the resolution that requires that
all Kosovo Albanian armed groups be demilitarized
and certainly does not permit their inclusion in military
manoeuvres or even their transformation into regular
armed forces. Together with the promotion of the so-
called Greater Albania project, such activity poses a
serious threat to regional security.

Kosovo continues to be fertile ground for recruiting
various types of terrorists. The return to Kosovo of
former fighters for the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant is a threat to peace and stability in the region.
Terrorists who have been trained to kill and who are
spreading correspondingly radical ideas represent
a ticking time bomb for security in the region. It is
baffling that the architects of Kosovo's independence
are attempting to ignore those problems. Nothing has
been done through the European Union in Brussels
either to resume full-fledged dialogue between Pristina
and Belgrade and implement the key agreement on the
establishment of a community of Serb municipalities
in Kosovo or to abolish Pristina's 100 per cent customs
tariff imposed on goods from Serbia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The real work of the Specialist Chambers
in investigating the crimes of the Kosovo Liberation
Army has not yet begun, despite the fact that a third
prosecutor has already been appointed. We see all
of that as a desire to roll up the investigation of the
crimes uncovered by Dick Marty, the Council of
Europe rapporteur.

All those guilty of heinous crimes must be brought
to justice and duly punished. The slogans that we often
hear in the Security Council with regard to other crisis
situations should be translated into practical solutions.
To put it bluntly, we are simply stunned by the utter
helplessness of Pristina's patrons. And not one of them
is capable of explaining what they are doing to restart
the political process and make the Kosovo authorities
see reason.

Russia's position on Kosovo has been consistent.
We support enabling Belgrade and Pristina to arrive at
a viable and mutually acceptable solution on the basis
of resolution 1244 (1999). It should first and foremost
be in line with international law and approved by the
Security Council, because this is a matter of ensuring
international peace and security. In our view, forcing
any so-called final normalization between Belgrade
and Pristina tied to artificial deadlines is destructive.

All of this is testament to the fact that the problems
in Kosovo are piling up rather than being resolved.
In that context, we consider that the calls that we
have frequently heard in this Chamber for UNMIK's
withdrawal or conducting a so-called strategic review
are baseless. We once again want to draw the attention
of the Secretariat to the importance of carefully
monitoring the developing situation, which, as the
facts have shown, requires vigilance on the part of
the international community. In the light of that, we
believe that the Security Council must react to the
current situation. We have prepared a draft presidential
statement that reflects the issues outlined in our
statement, and I ask the Secretariat to circulate the text
to the members of the Security Council. We hope that
the Council will be able to approve it.

