Mr. Salam (Lebanon): The idea of preventive
diplomacy is rooted, as we all know, in the purposes
and principles of the United Nations, which are defined
in its Charter, in particular in Article 1, paragraph 1,

"[t]o maintain international peace and
security, and to that end: to take effective collective
measures for the prevention and removal of threats
to the peace".

That has inspired successive Secretaries-General,
from Dag Hammarskjold - your fellow citizen, Madam
President - to Boutros Boutros Ghali and our current
Secretary-General, to move the United Nations "from a
culture of reaction to a culture of prevention", as is often
said. It has also been the central piece of many debates
in the Security Council, including the one organized by
Lebanon in September 2011 (see S/PV.6621), to which
my country, as President, submitted a concept paper
entitled "Strengthening and consolidating preventive
diplomacy" (S/2011/570, annex). That concept has
been reinvigorated in three global policy reviews and
many reports and resolutions adopted by the General
Assembly. Suffice it to mention here the preamble to
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and its
Goal 16.

Yet at the beginning of 2017, our world continues
to face a multitude of challenges: from occupation and
protracted conflicts to large movements of refugees
and migrants to extreme violence, terrorism, violation
of human rights and crises in global governance.
Today's debate on the topic "Conflict prevention and
sustaining peace" should be an opportunity to sharpen
the existing tools on prevention and to restore our faith
in multilateralism's ability to push forward the agenda
for peace and its sustainability.

In an attempt to answer the questions raised in
Sweden's concept note (S/2017/6, annex) framing the
debate, allow me to highlight the following points.

The United Nations currently has at its disposal
a significant array of assets in the field of conflict
prevention, including the Secretary-General's good
offices, envoys, resident political missions, United
Nations country teams, situation briefings, the
Mediation Support Unit of the Department of Political
Affairs, regional offices, peacekeeping operations,
groups of friends and their diplomatic support, fact-
finding missions, inquiries and investigations. We look
to the Secretary-General for a reinvigorated approach to
strengthening those assets and streamlining their roles.
Close cooperation between the Council and an effective
and efficient Secretariat is pivotal in our preventive
endeavours. Moreover, partnerships with regional and
subregional organizations, youth, women, civil society
and academia will improve our early-warning systems'
ability to identify the source oftension, to address it and
to consolidate the national, regional and international
support needed to support peaceful and developmental
processes built on respect for human rights.

We, the Member States, should remain committed
to achieving the reform of the United Nations, which
will strengthen its ability to fulfil its mandate in our
increasingly interconnected world with its new threats
to peace and security. While wishing to respect the
mandates of the various organs, we can see that the
nature of those challenges requires an integrated
approach within the United Nations. It is imperative
to build upon the preventive initiatives taken by other
agencies, such as UNESCO in the field of education
and the United Nations Development Programme in
the area of good governance, democratic processes and
elections, just to name a few.

My region, the Middle East, is a clear example of
the importance of placing the need to address the root
causes of conflicts at the top of our agenda. Moreover, in
the context of conflict prevention, I remind the Council
of Lebanon's initiative in 2016, namely, to seek, based
on the Charter of the United Nations and paragraph 10
of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006), the good
offices of the Secretary-General in the demarcation of
the disputed maritime border of the exclusive economic
zones between Lebanon and Israel, emphasizing that
the non-resolution of that issue will remain a source
of conflict that threatens the peace and security of
our region.

Article 99 of the Charter of the United Nations,
which entrusts the Secretary-General with the authority
to

"bring to the attention of the Security Council
any matter which in his opinion may threaten the
maintenance of international peace and security",

should always be considered in the context of shared

responsibility in the maintenance of peace and security.

Regular briefings, frank reviews of situations and open

debates, just like the one we are having today, will pave

the way towards the collective ownership of conflict
prevention and sustaining peace.

