Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I would like to thank Assistant Secretary-
General Mueller for her briefing. I also welcome His
Excellency Mr. Vershinin, Deputy Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Russian Federation, to New York and his
presence here among us at this meeting.

We are paying close attention to the humanitarian
situation in Syria and support the tireless efforts of the
United Nations and the parties concerned to improve
it. The problem in Idlib is due to terrorist forces that
still have a grip on the region. We should therefore
use common criteria in our fight against all terrorist
organizations listed by the Council. The local terrorist
groups not only violate the rights of civilians and
humanitarian workers but also launch frequent attacks
on Russian military bases and areas controlled by
the Syrian Government, threatening the security and
stability of Syria and the region. It will not be possible
for the Syrian people to enjoy peace or to fully resolve
the humanitarian problems faced by those in Idlib until
the threat of terrorist organizations is eliminated.
China supports the continued efforts of Russia
and Turkey to implement the memorandum of
understanding and to seek a comprehensive long-term
solution through dialogue and consultations. China also
supports the United Nations and other relevant actors
in their humanitarian relief operations for displaced
civilians and their efforts to improve the humanitarian
situation in the north-western part of the country. Since
the beginning of the year, there has been a massive
influx to the Al-Hol camp of civilians fleeing conflict
in north-eastern Syria. The population of the camp has
rapidly increased and the situation is very complex.
The humanitarian response should be strengthened
in the light of the camp's demographics and proper
arrangements should be made for the resettlement of
those in the camp.

With regard to the Rukban camp the international
community has proposed various solutions. Dialogue
and consultations should be enhanced in order to reach
an agreed solution as soon as possible. China supports
the Syrian Government in actively taking steps to
ensure the proper living conditions for those who leave
the camps and to end displacement.

In areas where the security situation is relatively
stable, the international community should support
the Syrian Government in demining, rebuilding
infrastructure, restoring health care, education and
other social services, launching industrial projects,
promoting development and improving people's
livelihoods so that an increasing number of people will
step out of the shadow of war and gradually live a stable
and ordered life.

To fundamentally alleviate the humanitarian
situation in Syria, we must persist in advancing a
political settlement. The international community
should stand resolutely behind the United Nations
as it plays its role as mediator and pushes the Syrian
parties to seek a solution that addresses the concerns of
all parties, while respecting the principle of a Syrian-
led, Syrian-owned process and adhering to resolution
2254 (2015). The Syrian parties should put the future
of the country and the well-being of their people first
and continue to overcome their differences through
dialogue and consultations towards a political solution.
China supports the constructive role played by Special
Envoy Pedersen in seeking a political settlement of the
Syrian issue.

Since the outbreak of the Syrian crisis, China has
provided many batches of emergency food aid and
donated medical equipment. Through the International
Committee of the Red Cross, we have provided water,
food, temporary shelter and medical services to
displaced persons and returnees. China will continue
to contribute to alleviating the humanitarian situation
in Syria to the best of its ability. The international
community must continue to increase its humanitarian
relief to Syria and to fulfil its assistance commitments.

