Mr. Malloch Brown: I am very pleased to be
able to join the Council today, on behalf of the
Secretary-General, to brief members on the steps which
the Secretariat is taking on the recent audit of the
Office of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS) on
peacekeeping procurement and the actions we are
taking to improve our procurement systems and to
crack down on waste, fraud and other potential abuse.

This is obviously an unusual meeting, both in the
subject and for myself as briefer, but as you, Sir, had
requested the views of three different parts of the
United Nations - the Office of Internal Oversight
Services, the Department of Management and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) -
the Secretary-General felt, given my role in working
closely on his behalf with all three departments, that I
would be the most appropriate senior official to be able
to update you and your colleagues on those important
issues, which are very much, we recognize, of interest
to you. However, I might add that I have also been
asked to brief the Fifth Committee later this week,
which I will be very pleased to do, given the General
Assembly's lead role in those matters.

As this body is well aware, along with the growth
of peacekeeping itself, peacekeeping-related procurement
has been the single fastest growing segment of
Secretariat operations. Indeed, during the Secretary-
General's nine years in office, the value of United
Nations global procurement - 85 per cent of which
represents peacekeeping - has grown from around
$400 million to over $1.6 billion last year and an
expected $2 billion-plus this year. In the past four
years alone, the Security Council has mandated the
establishment of six new peacekeeping missions,
including complex integrated missions in Liberia, Cote
d'Ivoire, Burundi, Haiti and the Sudan, as well as
authorizing significant changes and growth in five
missions' mandates and creating eight new special
political missions.

That surge in activity has produced a 70 per cent
increase in the number of military personnel deployed
in peacekeeping missions, the vast majority of which
rely on the United Nations for nearly all logistical
support. Civilian staff has grown by 30 per cent over
the same period and now comprises more than twice as
many people as in the Secretariat in New York.
Deploying, feeding and supporting that number of
people requires literally thousands of contracts every
year. Last year alone, for example, the United Nations
rotated 150,000 troops; provided fuel, rations and
movement for a field force of over 65,000; chartered
hundreds of flights and dozens of sea lifts; moved
hundreds of thousands of tons of cargo; and operated
thousands of vehicles in the field.

In that context, we very much welcomed the
General Assembly's request to the Office of Internal
Oversight Services to conduct an independent review
of peacekeeping procurement as one part of the overall
management audit of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations. As indicated in General Assembly
resolution 59/296, the main objectives of the audit,
conducted between July to December 2005, were to
review DPKO practices and identify risks and
exposures to duplication, fraud and abuse of authority.

The audit also assessed the overall economy and
efficiency of the operational areas reviewed, in this
case procurement. United Nations missions in the
Sudan and the Democratic Republic of the Congo were
used as case studies. The audit included follow-up of
the implementation of previous recommendations of
OIOS pertaining to procurement.

The auditors made numerous findings. OIOS has
separately already made a presentation to interested
Member States. I will therefore not go over the
findings in detail, which are available to Member
States in the published audit report. However, the
bottom line of the report was three-fold. First, the
Organization is exposed to serious risk of financial loss
because internal controls are inadequate, managerial
supervision and strategic guidance have at times been
lacking, and management has not done enough to
exercise due diligence and establish high levels of
ethical behaviour and accountability, despite numerous
irregularities reported in previous audits.

Secondly, OIOS believes there is evidence of
financial loss having occurred through over-budgeting
or inflation of requirements, while controls to ensure
that the Organization received value for money in its
procurement activities - including document submission
and performance guarantees - were lacking.

Thirdly, there are some indications of serious
potential irregularities, including collusion or conflict
of interest with vendors - as evidenced by
inappropriate communications between United Nations
officials, national Governments and vendor
representatives - bid cancellations and resubmissions
without proper justification, and alteration of bid prices
by procurement officers. That is very alarming and
merits urgent investigation.

A majority of the 32 OIOS audit
recommendations to address those findings have been
accepted by the Departments of Management and
Peacekeeping Operations. The remaining
recommendations are the subject of ongoing discussion
between OIOS and management. There is strong
disagreement between OIOS and DPKO about the
methodology and quality of some parts of the report,
which we need to resolve.

Let me add a reservation of my own, as someone
who worked in the field for the United Nations at an
earlier stage in my career. I am concerned that some of
the findings contain judgements of the operations using
criteria relating to a procurement system and to
procedures that are out of step with field realities and
themselves need reform.

In response to the findings and as a precautionary
measure to protect the Organization, I, at the request of
the Departments of Management and Peacekeeping
Operations, placed eight staff members on special
leave with full pay while the issues raised by the audit
are looked into more fully. That special leave is, I
stress, an administrative and not a disciplinary
measure, and does not presume any wrongdoing by the
staff affected. We are looking carefully into the
situation of each of those eight staff members. For
some, the investigatory arm of OIOS is undertaking an
accelerated review within a broader investigation of
other allegations of possible procurement-related
wrongdoing by staff. OIOS has formed a 16-person
special task force to handle those cases as quickly as
possible. Several of the staff members on leave are not,
however, the subject of any current investigation. In
their cases, we have a management review under way
to determine whether there were lapses or errors of
management that we need to address before they can
go back to work. But let me add that, once that is
resolved, we will happily welcome them back to the
Organization, as we are concerned to see them be able
to resume their careers without any inappropriate
sanction.

In addition to the OIOS investigations, a more
comprehensive, multi-year forensic audit by external
experts, commissioned by the Department of
Management and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, is now being undertaken. At the Secretary-
General's instruction, the United Nations is also fully
cooperating with concerned national law-enforcement
bodies in their investigations. Our hope is that those
investigations will be quickly concluded. I can assure
the Council that swift action will be taken against any
United Nations staff members found to have acted
inappropriately, including, if necessary, the waiving of
immunities by the Secretary-General. One company
has also been suspended from the United Nations list
of approved vendors at this time.

I know there is concern, which I share, that those
eight colleagues have been damaged by what
happened, particularly through the disgraceful leaking
of the draft audit report. But I would ask the Council to
contemplate the alternative, namely, having left them
where they were as though the audit and its findings
had not happened. The Volcker Panel on the oil-for-
food programme made it clear that a complacent,
business-as-usual approach in the face of critical audit
findings was a major breakdown of management that
must be corrected. If wrongdoing is found, staff
members under our procedures will be charged and
then given full rights of due process within the United
Nations justice system.

Let me turn to the specific implications of all this
for peacekeeping procurement. Allow me start my
puncturing the myth that has already started to take
hold, namely, that the OIOS audit uncovered evidence
of nearly $300 million in fraud. Actually, what the
audit documents revealed is the likelihood of fraud in
some specific instances - which is now being
investigated - and significant potential waste, based
in part on extrapolation from findings in the two
missions investigated across all peacekeeping
operations, in other words, not those just investigated.

Specifically, OIOS concluded, first, that
justification in support of $110 million worth of
expenditures was insufficient or lacking, which is very
different from saying that those were necessarily
inappropriate expenditures; secondly, that the
procurement of contracts totalling about $61 million
bypassed financial regulations and rules and
established procurement procedures; thirdly, that, as
result of mismanagement of the inventory of vehicle
spare parts, the Organization lost $46 million; fourthly,
that financial exposure as a result of inadequate
management of performance bonds could be as high as
$36 million; and, fifthly, that unclear payment terms in
a contract resulted in an estimated over-expenditure of
$7 million.

Clearly all of that is of great concern, even if it is
a failure of budgeting and control processes rather than
a loss of resources. We take the findings very seriously.
I do, however, need to repeat the caveat that we, based
on DPKO's reservations, do not accept all of the above
as representing losses to the Organization. We will be
making the response of DPKO to those points available
to Member States.

Take one of the most glaring findings of the
audit, namely, that in two missions the fuel contract
fell short of the contract ceilings that had been set by a
total of $65 million - the so-called under-budgeting
problem. One of those missions was the United Nations
Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS), where considerably
less fuel needed to be consumed than had been planned
for, simply because many of the troops had not arrived
in theatre on their original planned schedule. Council
members are well aware that delays in troop
deployments, whether to the Sudan or elsewhere, are
not always foreseeable and are not under the
Secretariat's control. Second thoughts by troop
contributors, a deterioration of security conditions, a
rainy season and many other acts of man and nature
can disrupt deployment. We therefore need to be clear
on our terms. Funds reported as not spent on fuel that
has been over-budgeted remain in the bank; they are
not missing or lost.

Nevertheless, it is clear to management that the
audit report requires a very serious response. We urgently
need to take corrective action and put in place a reform
strategy that addresses three distinct sources of risk.

First, significant risk arises from reliance on a
regulatory framework ill-suited to the exigencies of the
field. For example, the otherwise sensible requirement
that bids must be found from multiple vendors can
prove a real obstacle to the effective and timely
delivery of critical services in remote locations.
Moreover - particularly in the early stages of mission
start-up, where it is vital politically to hit the ground
running - uncertainties routinely present themselves
regarding the free movement of goods, customs
clearances, taxation, the provision of rent-free
property, visa problems for contractors and staff,
et cetera. In short, peace operations are not
environments well suited to our current complex and
cumbersome procedures.

Secondly, we face additional risk from the
demanding, unpredictable and sometimes dangerous
operating environment typical of the field. We expect
our managers to make judgements and to act in the best
interests of the Organization. But we must be careful
how we second-guess them from our armchairs in New
York, and not put staff in the position of having to
choose between doing their job and breaking the rules.

Thirdly, we face risk in the human resources
dimension. We do have a cadre of seasoned, hard-
working managers and procurement officers in our
missions, but not enough of them. Indeed, 50 per
cent- half - of peacekeeping procurement field
positions are currently unfilled, largely because
potential employees with suitable skill profiles are not
willing to serve in the demanding environment of the
field under current conditions of service. We fall short
on adequate training, including ethics training, as well
as on implementing routine safeguards and best
practices, such as regular rotation.

In short, while we have undertaken significant
peacekeeping-related reforms in recent years - most
notably as a result of the implementation of many of
the Brahimi Panel recommendations - we are still not
there and need to do more. Council members will see
in our proposals on management reform next week
some expansive proposals for improving the conditions
of field service to address those issues.

Resulting innovations that we have introduced
already, such as strategic deployment stocks and pre-
mandate commitment authority, have made it possible
to a large degree to meet rapid deployment timelines
hitherto thought impossible. But I acknowledge that
whatever progress we have made in some areas on the
human resource side, we will have real gaps, despite
our very committed staff.

In order to address the broader underlying
weaknesses that have been identified in procurement,
the Department of Management is currently
undertaking a comprehensive review of procurement
rules, regulations and policies focused on updating
procurement procedures, including the need for greater
transparency and accountability, implementing an
internal control framework, which includes a risk-
management framework to provide a comprehensive
prevention and diagnostic controls environment, and,
as I have said, more systematic rotation of staff serving
in procurement, as well as training and ethics.

Early elements of that strategy are already being
implemented - we have said that. And as I have
already indicated, we will come back to the Council
next week with much more radical proposals to address
the human resource weaknesses exposed here. On the
procurement issues per se, in terms of that improved
control environment, we will come back with more
details in June.

Last but not least, the whole process sharply
underlines the need for a stronger Office of Internal
Oversight Services (OIOS), both in terms of audit and
investigation. In carrying out this audit, we have seen
the very real capacity constraints the OIOS faces, not
least in performing appropriate follow-up and related
investigations, given the scale, scope and complexity
of today's United Nations operations. This, too, is
currently the subject of a review commissioned by the
General Assembly. As the Secretary-General
recommended last year, we hope that review will
recommend - and Member States endorse -
substantial strengthening of OIOS.

But at the end of the day, this is not simply a
question about better rules or stronger systems. It is
about the men and women that the Security Council
sends into active war zones to do what no one else
would or could do. As with our approach to dealing
with sexual exploitation and abuse, we have adopted a
policy of zero tolerance for fraudulent behaviour or
gross negligence. That means zero complacency when
serious allegations of impropriety arise, and zero
impunity for those found guilty of misdeeds.

Despite the challenges I have outlined today,
United Nations peace operations are an indispensable,
proven tool in promoting peace and stability. The vast
majority of our people are honest, hardworking and
committed to implementing the Council's mandates
faithfully, often at a cost of great personal sacrifice and
risk to life, and certainly at a cost to their family life.
Our challenge now is to work together to build a
system that lets them do their job effectively, while
management and Member States have the information,
tools and resources to ensure proper accountability and
oversight.

