Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): Allow
me to congratulate Jordan on bringing this important
issue to the Security Council. I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this meeting and
for proposing this important topic for our debate today.
As the topic encompasses a wide range of issues,
I believe that we need to adopt a two-fold approach
with a view to addressing the general and particular
questions that the topic implies. First, we need to adopt
a general approach to consider the lessons of wars
and how a permanent peace could be established and
maintained. Secondly, we need to review in particular
how the Security Council has so far fulfilled its primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security.

Generally speaking, peace could be maintained
and strengthened in the long run only by removing
the conditions that nurture war, conflict, terrorism
and violence, by ensuring the rule of law at all levels
and by increasing the effectiveness of the international
institutions responsible for enhancing and maintaining
peace and security. To that end, the economic, social,
political and geopolitical aspects of the different
situations should be taken into consideration and an
inclusive approach and coordinated policies at the
various levels should be adopted by all the relevant
actors in order to address those situations. While States
have the primary responsibility to address issues in their
entirety, the contribution of regional and international
organizations in areas such as poverty eradication,
the promotion of human rights, education and cultural
diversity is also crucial and will help to create a strong
base for peace within and among nations.

In that regard, the Islamic Republic of Iran is a
country in which all minorities and ethnic groups live
in peace as one Iranian nation. Their rights are fully
recognized by the Constitution of the Islamic Republic
of Iran and its Government. We strongly believe that
respect for other religions and ethnic groups is a vital
element in maintaining peace and security in the
country and beyond.

With regard to regional issues, Iran has always
played a constructiove role in promoting peace,
tolerance and security in the region and with its
neighbours, from Afghanistan to Iraq. Our hosting of
about 3 million Afghan refugees for more than three
decades in Iran and providing for their educational and
living needs, regardless of their religion or ethnicity,
is a good example of Iran's commitment to promoting
peace, security and tolerance.

Let me remind the Council of a phrase in the
UNESCO Constitution that is relevant here. It states,
"since wars begin in the minds of men, it is in the
minds of men that the defences of peace must be
constructed". On that basis, any contribution by the
relevant organizations to the promotion of a culture of
peace, tolerance and coexistence and the prevention
of the spread of violent and extremist mindsets helps
further the cause of peace. Crimes that we witness
currently in parts of the Middle East, in which innocent
civilians are targeted, emanate from violent extremism
and sectarianism. Such mentalities disrupt smooth and
friendly relationships among nations.

In that regard, we should recognize the timely action
of the General Assembly in adopting by consensus
resolution 68/127, entitled "A world against violence
and violent extremism", which was based on an idea
presented by the President of the Islamic Republic of
Iran to the General Assembly.

Undoubtedly, the General Assembly has an
important role to play in furthering peace and addressing
all aspects of any issue or crisis that may compromise
peace. One of the aspects that I should highlight here
is the Assembly's role in addressing disarmament in its
entirety, and I draw attention to the important step that
the Assembly took in holding the first-ever High-level
Meeting on Nuclear Disarmament (see A/68/PV.11) in
September 2013.

With regard to how the Security Council in
particular has so far fulfilled its primary responsibility
in maintaining international peace and security, I
would like to stress that the picture is rather gloomy. A
glance at the performance of the Council over the past
68 years would be rather indicative of many instances
in which it failed to rise up to the expectations of the
general membership. In many cases, the Council failed
to act promptly and effectively. There are instances
where political considerations led to the paralysis of
the Council and resulted in the frequent use of the
veto power. As a result, wars spread, conflicts were
prolonged and aggressors and violators persisted in
their acts and were further emboldened. Also as a
result, many precious lives were lost and much misery
was spread. The failure of the Council to address the
blatant invasion of Iran by the then Iraqi regime, which
led to a bloody eight-year war and the unchecked use of
chemical weapons by that regime, is a clear example in
that respect.

Another clear example is the Palestinian crisis,
which has unfolded before the eyes of succeeding
generations for more than 60 years. The failure of the
Council in that case has meant the continuation of the
occupation of the lands of other nations by the Israeli
regime, a situation that lies at the heart ofthat crisis and
many other difficult situations in the Middle East. The
very basic right of a whole people to self-determination
has been denied in that case, and the Council has yet
to lift a finger to reinstate that right. Even worse,
despite the condemnation of the whole world, the illegal
settlement building by the Israeli regime continues
unabated, while the Council fails to address it, owing
to political considerations.

While the Council is primarily responsible for
maintaining peace and security and could be fairly
criticized for what it has done and has failed to do over
the past 68 years, I believe that we need to look earnestly
at the way it is structured and at the way it functions.
Almost 20 years ago, all Member States rejoiced at the
start of a process to reform the Council, and now we
are all dismayed at the impasse that that process faces.

As the Council is a relic of the past and with its
record before us, I believe that only a transparent,
democratic and truly representative Council that
reflects the new makeup of the current international
community could rise up to the expectations that we
the peoples of the United Nations have for it.

