Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French): I
should like at the outset to thank Under-Secretary-
General Egeland for his presentation. Seven years after
the Council resolved to address the issue of protecting
civilians in armed conflict, he is still reporting on that
distressing reality.

Like my colleagues who have already spoken, I
pay special tribute to Mr. Egeland, who has spoken to
the Security Council today for the last time in his
capacity as Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs. Thanks to his work and tenacity, the Council

today has a better understanding of the tragic situations
in his field of responsibility. His role in raising the
international community's awareness of the very
serious humanitarian crisis in Darfur has been critical,
and we thank him for it.

At this time last year, we found that the
resolutions adopted by our Council in 1999 and 2000
did not go far enough and that their implementation left
much to be desired. In March, at the initiative of the
United Kingdom, the Council adopted the new and
ambitious resolution 1674 (2006), whose full
implementation we must now ensure. The resolution
must be taken into account in the Council's activities,
including in the definition and implementation of the
mandates of peacekeeping operations. The Council's
credibility is at stake therein.

I must stress that the responsibility to protect
civilian populations falls first and foremost to the
Governments concerned. Wherever populations are
threatened, Governments must fully assume their
responsibilities to protect them. The international
community must ensure above all that they do not Shirk
those responsibilities. Regional organizations and the
United Nations must encourage them and, if necessary,
assume their own responsibilities. In a number of
situations, such as in Darfur, the United Nations and
regional organizations must work closely with one
another.

The issue of access to threatened populations is
key to protection. It is unacceptable that 10 million
people should be deprived of that access. It is also our
responsibility to promote access of humanitarian
assistance to those populations, and we must therefore
be especially attentive to the protection of United
Nations humanitarian workers and those affiliated with
non-governmental organizations, as provided for in our
resolution 1502 (2003). We must also see to the
protection of thousands of humanitarian workers.

My country notes that systematic violations of
humanitarian law, and particularly indiscriminate
attacks on civilian populations and the humanitarian
actors seeking to protect them, are becoming
increasingly common. Humanitarian space is no longer
the sanctuary it should be, and that distresses us.

We also share the Under-Secretary-General's
concern with regard to the specific situation of
journalists in armed conflict, and we thank him for
drawing the Council's attention to that issue. Without
journalists in the field, we will often be ignorant of
events. Without information, we cannot protect civilian
populations in a timely manner. In 2005, 65 journalists
were killed throughout the world; 75 media
professionals have already been killed in 2006. Those
figures are the highest in 10 years, and we cannot fail
to react to them. We feel that the Council must send a
very clear message to all parties to conflicts, reminding
them of their obligations to prevent any violence
against journalists, and of potential investigations and
sanctions in their failure to do so. International
humanitarian law that protects journalists must be
respected. It is in that spirit that Greece and France,
together with the United Kingdom, Denmark and
Slovakia, plan to submit proposals to the Council. The
message of the Council on this subject is expected, and
we hope that it will be possible to arrive at a consensus
very quickly.

The last point that I wanted to raise was the
protection of the most vulnerable parts of the civilian
population - women and small girls victims of sexual
violence. Children are already a particular issue of
attention for the Security Council. When it comes to
children, my delegation has invested itself particularly
in being vigilant in these matters. As president of the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflicts, I
have learned a lot from the fertile debates in the
Council and the Assembly on this subject. The
remarkable work that is being done on the ground by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, by
UNICEF and by child protection offices within various
non-governmental organizations permits us to hope
that progress can be made.

Women, girls and boys are very often victims of
internal displacement in and external displacement
from the States from which they come. Millions of
displaced persons are being provided with a very low
level of protection on the ground, if any at all, though
now there are more of them than there are of refugees.
We need to seriously think about how we can meet
their needs, while respecting the Charter. We also wish
to reiterate our attachment to the rights of these people
and their return to their homes in security and dignity.

