Mr. Delattre (France) (Spoke in French): France
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2374
(2017), which establishes a specific sanctions regime
on Mali.

The adoption of resolution 2374 (2017) is the result
of a request by the Malian Government to the Security
Council to establish a sanctions regime, without delay, in
order to meet the numerous challenges in implementing
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
and in overcoming serious threats to the fragile gains
made thus far. The idea to impose sanctions on those
hindering the implementation of the peace agreement
is not a new one. It is clearly stipulated in the text of
the Agreement and therefore formally endorsed by all
signatories. It has been mentioned on several occasions
by the Agreement Monitoring Committee in response to
the deadlock. The Secretary-General has often called for
such sanctions in his quarterly reports on the situation
in Mali, and the Security Council has supported the
idea in its most recent resolutions on Mali.

The Malian Government believes - and we share
that belief- that it is time to take further steps on the
issue by implementing a specific sanctions regime on
Mali. The peace process is now at a critical juncture,
more than two years after the Agreement was signed.
Although progress has been satisfactory, political will
has been lacking, to some extent, and certain activities
pose a serious threat to the gains already made. The
sanctions regime will complement in a useful way the
range of tools that we have available to us collectively
to help Mali with its recovery. It also sends a very
strong and dissuasive political message capable of
changing the behaviour of actors on the ground. It will
provide credibility to the Council in its support of the
effective implementation of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali, in favour of which we have
been arguing for a number of months without, to date,
being able to achieve the desired results. It is also a
means of accompanying the work of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) on the political aspect.

Resolution 2374 (2017), which we havejust adopted,
puts in place a sanctions regime that takes the form of
a travel ban and assets freeze, under criteria that were
designated in keeping with the guidelines set out by
the Peace Agreement with respect to violations of the
ceasefire and obstruction of the implementation of the
Agreement. We have added to that attacks on various
institutions that were established by the Agreement,
the Malian armed forces, United Nations staff and
other forms of international presence, as well as
other criteria connected with all forms of trafficking,
violations of human rights, obstruction of the dispatch
of humanitarian assistance, and the use of children in
armed conflict.

In order to move forward in a gradual and
appropriate manner, France has chosen to suggest to its
partners in the Council that we take the first step of
creating a regime without attaching, at this stage, a list
of persons or entities that would be subject to sanctions.
That possibility, however, is still fully open if it turns
out to be necessary in the future to further bolster the
pressure on certain actors that do not adhere to their
obligations. We are aware that sanctions alone cannot
resolve the situation. We see them as an additional
tool to promote the implementation of the Peace
Agreement, along with the necessary mobilization
of the international community, regional actors and
MINUSMA. Today, it is vital that we make as much
progress as possible. Time is not on our side, and the
implementation of the Malian Peace Agreement is one
of the keys to the stabilization of the situation in the
Sahel, to which the Council is committed.

The establishment of this new sanctions regime
today places the actors involved in bringing about peace
in Mali before their commitments and sends a strong
political message with respect to the determination of
the Council to use every means available to it to help
Mali achieve peace and stability, and to encourage
significant progress in the implementation of the
Agreement in the weeks to come. Anyone who impedes
this process must realize that the Council will no
longer tolerate their action. What is at stake is much too
important, and we know the impact of the situation in
Mali for the stability of the entire Sahel region, and the
relevant consequences with regard to the security of the
rest of the world.

