Mr. Spatafora (Italy): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The acceding
countries Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovakia
and Slovenia, the associated countries Bulgaria,
Romania and Turkey, and the European Free Trade
Association country, member of the European
Economic Area, Iceland, declare that they align
themselves with this statement.

Since this is the first time I have taken the floor
under your Presidency, allow me to congratulate you,
Sir, on the assumption of your duties and to express my
best wishes. I also extend my congratulations to the
previous President, the Permanent Representative of
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, on his excellent job.

The European Union attaches great importance to
the work undertaken by the High Representative, Lord
Ashdown, whom we thank for his very comprehensive,
enlightening and focused report. Lord Ashdown is
right: it is relatively easy to change the hardware, the
institutions, but it is much more complicated to change
the software, the people's attitude. That is the great
challenge. We also thank President Meron for his
briefing.

The European Union, as I was saying, fully
supports the priorities that Lord Ashdown has outlined
since his arrival in Sarajevo, promoting first of all the
rule of law and then dismantling barriers to business
growth and job creation through reforms. The
European Union supports in particular the "commission
approach" to reforms. That approach was recently
launched by the High Representative and has led to the
establishment of ad hoc commissions made up of local
representatives and international chairmen, that cover
key subjects such as indirect tax policy, defence and
intelligence.

Important progress has recently been made in the
reform process, particularly in the field of the judiciary
and of defence. But much remains to be done to
reinvigorate the economy and consolidate the central
structures of the State. To that end, the responsibility
lies in the hands of the local authorities, whose
engagement in the reform process has to be clear and
unambiguous. Their full cooperation with the entire
international community is also crucial.

The European Union supports the unambiguous
message of Security Council resolution 1503 (2003) to
the countries and parties in the region on the need to
improve and intensify cooperation with the
International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia, in particular efforts to bring Karadzic,
Mladic and Gotovina to the Tribunal. In this respect,
the European Union recalls the pledge made by the
countries of the region at the European Union Western
Balkans Summit at Thessaloniki in June 2003 to
cooperate fully and unequivocally with the Tribunal.

The European Union, which has already adopted
measures against cooperation between local networks
and Tribunal indictees, reviews these measures on a
regular basis. The European Union also supports the
establishment of national special court chambers for
war crimes and, in particular, the joint efforts of High
Representative Lord Ashdown and of the Tribunal to
establish a Special Chamber in the State court of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The European Union is fully involved in the
reform process in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
European perspective of the Western Balkans countries
was reaffirmed by the European Union heads of State
and Government at the Thessaloniki Summit last June.
It represents extremely powerful leverage for Bosnian
leaders to intensify their efforts towards introducing
and implementing the necessary reforms. In that
context, the European Commission will be presenting a
feasibility study on the opening of negotiations for a
stabilization and association agreement in the near
future.

The European Union is also involved in security
through its European Union Police Mission. The role
played by the Police Mission and European Union
Special Representative Lord Ashdown to coordinate
the international community's efforts in the fight
against organized crime and illegal trafficking remains
crucial.

