Mr. Braun (Germany): A lot has already been said,
but at the outset I wish to align myself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union, as well
as fully subscribing to what the Secretary-General said
this morning at the beginning of the meeting. He set
out a historic framework for our debate and highlighted
the major challenges we face, particularly on climate
change and the Sustainable Development Goals. I
would like to be brief and make four short points.

My first point has to do with cherry-picking. Today
everybody lauded multilateralism and affirmed that
they are in favour of a rules-based international order.
At the same time, we all know that there are individual
States that say, "I feel constrained by a particular
Security Council resolution, and I just do not abide by
it. I ignore it." Or there is another State that would say
that, "I feel constrained by a ruling by an international
arbitration court, and I just ignore it." Or there is
another country that says, "There is an international
memorandum, but I feel constrained. I just ignore it."
If everybody in this Chamber does that, that is the end
of multilateralism and a rules-based order, and we will
return, as Robert Kagan just wrote, to the jungle. Of
course there are many resolutions and international
agreements that we might not like too much, but we
have to see it as a long-term investment. We all benefit
from a rules-based international order. Germany will
always defend the rules-based order. We believe that
the international rules create reliability, predictability
and acceptance. We believe that we have a collective
interest in upholding the international rules-based
order and maintaining legitimacy in the eyes of our
stakeholders 4 our people.

The second point that I would like to make concerns
accountability. If we agree on a rules-based order, we
need to ensure that the rules are observed. Uncertainties
in international law must be removed and violations
need to be sanctioned. In that connection, I want to
thank the Chinese presidency for inviting the President
of the International Court of Justice to the discussion
today to highlight this point. We are commemorating the
end of the First World War. Germany is responsible for
some of the worst crimes and violations of international
law being committed. We are also responsible for what
happened in the Second World War, for the Holocaust.
For us, and I think for humankind, it was very important
that we had the Nuremberg trials. We also think it is
very important that we have the International Criminal
Court and that we uphold the Court's rulings.

Let me come to my third point, which concerns
human rights. The dignity and worth of the human
person are at the foundation of the Charter of the United
Nations. We commemorate this year the seventieth
birthday of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
We need to take our responsibilities seriously. We are
witnessing enormous suffering today. We see children
killed, women raped. We see people dying of hunger.
Civilians are bombarded. We see people marginalized
because of their race or colour. We cannot accept that.
That must remain at the centre of our attention. We
must stay focused on the individual.

My fourth point is that we need to reform. I want
to echo what my Canadian colleague just said about
multilateralism being always a work in progress. Yes,
we have to uphold the existing rules. But we also have
to develop them further. We face new challenges that
we have to cope with. The world is changing. We also
have to reform the United Nations, its bodies and its
working methods. We fully support and commend the
Secretary-General for the reforms that he has so far
carried out. We also believe that there is an urgent need
for a reform of the Security Council so as to preserve
its legitimacy.

Germany will join Security Council starting on
1 January. For us, the overarching principle will be
to observe the rules-based international order. The
Security Council is in charge of preserving peace and
security. We want to concentrate on the prevention side
to prevent threats to peace and security from arising.
Therefore, we want to concentrate on the catalysts
and drivers of conflict, human rights, climate change
and sexual violence against women. In doing that, we
are looking forward to working with our regional and
cross-regional partners.

