The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Lebanon.

At the outset, I welcome Baroness Catherine
Ashton, High Representative for Foreign Affairs and
Security Policy of the European Union. I would also
like to express my gratitude to His Excellency the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Austria.

More than half a century ago, the framers of the
Charter of the United Nations devoted a chapter to
regional organizations: Chapter VIII enshrines their
firm commitment to the complementary role that such
organizations can play together with the United
Nations in the maintenance of international peace and
security. Today, in an era of strengthened multilateral
diplomacy and greater openness between countries,
when geographic groupings are increasingly
prominent, regional organizations such as the European
Union have demonstrated their effectiveness as full-
fledged partners of the United Nations in an array of
activities, including in the maintenance of international
peace and security. That success is due to the fact that
the purposes of those organizations are in line with
those of the United Nations: promoting peace, respect
for human rights, economic and social development
and the rule of law.

Article 10A of the Treaty of Lisbon affirms the
conviction and commitment of the European Union's
27 member States to those very noble ideals. Lebanon
welcomes past and present efforts by the European
Union to maintain and build peace. I should also like to
mention the European Union's clear impact on the
resolution of many conflicts in Africa, in Asia and in
the Balkans, through providing the United Nations with
resources it needs to carry out its mission.

Lebanon calls on the European Union to continue
to play a significant role on the international stage.
Following the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty,
Lebanon urges the European Union to prioritize in its
foreign policy the promotion of just and lasting peace
in the Middle East by putting an end to the violations
of international humanitarian law and international law
there, in particular given its membership of the Quartet
responsible for establishing peace and security in the
Middle East.

Lebanon also encourages the European Union to
continue to cooperate with other regional
organizations, to exchange experiences and
information, to share lessons learned and to strengthen
and expand human resources and capacities, including
those of the League of Arab States and the African
Union, which could contribute significantly to the
maintenance of peace and security in Africa and
throughout the Arab world.

Lebanon welcomes the ongoing cooperation and
coordination between the United Nations and regional
organizations, which are of great importance politically
and practically. Such organizations can play a role
before conflicts erupt through preventive diplomacy,
during conflicts to mitigate their impact and contain
them until they are settled peacefully, and in post-conflict
situations by contributing to reconstruction and
peacebuilding efforts.

In conclusion, Lebanon wishes every possible
success to Baroness Ashton in her new post following
the creation of an institutional framework reaffirming
the role of European policy on the global stage.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
16
I give the floor to Baroness Ashton to respond to
the questions and comments raised.

