Mr. Chavez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I wish at
the outset to commend you, Mr. President, for having
organized this debate on children and armed conflict.
Peru is pleased to participate in today's meeting and to
contribute to efforts to protect children. My delegation
welcomes the statements made by the Secretary-
General, by Mr. Edmond Mullet, Assistant Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, and by Ms. Ann
Veneman, Executive Director of UNICEF. We also
welcome the presence of Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, and we commend her for
all her work.

In addressing this issue, we must always
remember the pain and suffering of tens of thousands
of families ravaged by the many forms of violence that
arise in situations of armed conflict and that, among
other things, affect one of their key components: their
children. The physical and psychological damage that
armed conflict continues to do to thousands of children
is very difficult if not impossible to repair. For that
reason, Peru again forcefully condemns all acts of
violence against children, especially those linked to the
recruitment and use of children in armed conflict,
abduction, maiming, killing, rape and other forms of
sexual violence, as well as to the impeding of
humanitarian access and to attacks against schools,
hospitals and centres for refugees and internally
displaced persons - all of which affect children.

It is the responsibility of every State affected by
violence to prevent such suffering by children and to
endeavour to reduce the number of victims to the
lowest possible level. Peru firmly believes that States,
especially those affected by armed conflict, should
continue to adopt measures within their respective
legal systems to try those responsible for the
recruitment and use of children in conflict and other
serious crimes against children. Amnesty and impunity

are unacceptable. In that regard, the work of
international judicial bodies, in particular the
International Criminal Court and special courts such as
that created for Sierra Leone, is important.

The United Nations system and other
international and regional organizations should
cooperate with national efforts to prevent the violation
of the human rights of minors and to provide support
for victims. Significant steps have been taken in that
regard, notably through the establishment of a variety
of international mechanisms and instruments to put an
end to violations of the human rights of children
involved in armed conflict. But much remains to be
done.

For its part, the Security Council should continue
to develop and improve the ways and means at its
disposal to prevent conflict situations that affect
international peace and security from Violating the
rights of children. Here, it is important to continue
working to ensure full compliance with resolution 1612
(2005). The Council should also continue to draw on
the work of the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict and the monitoring and reporting mechanism.
We call on all parties involved to continue and, as
necessary, to enhance their cooperation with those
mechanisms.

My delegation supports the possibility of the
Security Council using targeted sanctions against those
who violate international law with respect to children
and armed conflict. In that regard, it is important to
map out the process that would lead to the imposition
of such sanctions.

My delegation reaffirms its support for the
recommendations made by the Secretary-General in his
most recent report on children and armed conflict
(S/2007/757) and calls on the Security Council and
other bodies concerned to adopt them. Specifically, we
agree with the Secretary-General that the Security
Council should give equal weight to all categories of
grave Violations arising during armed conflict, not only
the recruitment and use of child soldiers. My
delegation will support any initiative in that regard.

We have seen in practice that there are limits on
the demobilization of children in the midst of an armed
conflict. But we know that when a conflict ends the
recruitment and use of child soldiers also ends. We
should therefore focus on the cessation of hostilities
and the search for peaceful solutions as a direct way to
prevent the suffering of children in situations of armed
conflict. The will of the parties to attain a viable and
sustainable peace agreement is thus vital. The cases of
Cote d'Ivoire and Nepal provide examples in that
regard.

To guarantee sustainable peace we must tackle
the causes of conflict. In many situations, these are
closely linked to hunger, poverty and social exclusion.
Policies aimed at sustainable development must
therefore be the foundation of any process of
peacebuilding. Moreover, it is important that the donor
community provide long-term sustainable support for
national efforts to ensure the disarmament,
rehabilitation and reintegration of child soldiers, along
with the rehabilitation of children who did not
participate in the conflict but were victims of it.
Moreover, owing to their particular vulnerability and
needs, it is necessary to focus particular attention on
girls affected by armed conflict.

The future of our countries depends on our care
and handling of the safety and security of our children.
We firmly believe that, in pursuit of that objective, the
prevention and eradication of armed conflict will
guarantee lasting international peace and security
based on respect for human rights, the rule of law,
democracy, national reconciliation and sustainable
development policies that will eliminate hunger and
poverty and will address the structural causes that lie at
the root of such conflict.

