Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): First of all, let me
congratulate you, Madam President, for assuming the
presidency of the Council for this month, and thank
you for convening this meeting. Allow me also to thank
the Secretary-General, High Commissioner Pillay and
Under-Secretary-General Holmes for their briefings
today. I want to pay particular tribute to Mr. Holmes,
who is no longer in the Chamber, and to thank him for
his years of service at the United Nations and his
extraordinary efforts to protect civilians across the
world.

Only last week, we met in this Chamber to debate
the situation in my country (see S/PV.6351), and in my
statement at that meeting I emphasized the importance
of putting the Afghan people at the centre of our
common efforts and of re-engaging them in the
reconstruction and stabilization of their country. There
can be no legitimacy of efforts or sustainability of
progress without the support and partnership of the
people themselves. This awareness has led the
Government of Afghanistan, in partnership with the
international community, to focus on finding ways to
meet the needs and expectations of the people. In this
2

regard, last month, my Government convened a
Consultative Peace Jirga, which brought together all
segments of Afghan society in the search for stability
and the end of conflict. One thing was very clear - all
Afghans desire peace. This is, at heart, the only way to
truly protect the Afghan people and stabilize the
country. This is my Government's ultimate and most
fundamental goal.

In the meantime, civilians continue to pay a
staggering price. Over 6,000 Afghans, including
women, children and the elderly, were killed and
injured last year alone, and even more are being killed
this year. More than half are killed by suicide attacks
and improvised explosive devices. Mines and other
remnants of war continue to claim lives, particularly of
children. In recent years, the Taliban, Al-Qaida and
their terrorist allies have been responsible for an
increasing and overwhelming majority of civilian
casualties, and they have embraced assassinations,
executions and threats in an attempt to control the
population through terror. They show a complete
disregard for human life and a willingness to
particularly target vulnerable groups, including
schoolchildren and teachers. Last month, in a
particularly gruesome example, they hanged a seven-
year old child, accusing him of being a Government
spy. The same day, they attacked a wedding ceremony
and killed over 40 people in Kandahar. Last week, in
another province of Afghanistan, they killed another
child, with the same accusations.

In addition to the cost of this conflict to Afghans,
our international friends are also targeted for their
efforts to build a stable, prosperous Afghanistan.
Attacks on humanitarian workers, United Nations
personnel and those working in education and health
care continue to increase. The attack in October on
Bakhtar Guest House, which took the lives of five
United Nations staff members and three others, was
just one of several such incidents. In this regard, and
on behalf of my Government, let me reiterate our
gratitude to the men and women of the United Nations
and our international friends, who work in Afghanistan
under very difficult circumstances for the sake of the
Afghan people and in the pursuit of international peace
and security.

The Afghan Government and people recognize
the critical work of the Organization in supporting the
efforts of my Government and in providing basic
services to and meeting the humanitarian needs of the
10-43968

people. We fully support all United Nations efforts in
Afghanistan and at Headquarters to improve security
conditions for United Nations staff.

It is not only the terrorists who are to blame; we,
too, bear an enormous responsibility to safeguard the
security of non-combatants. We have achieved
remarkable progress on this in the past year. We
welcomed steps taken by the former commander of the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF),
General McChrystal, to change the rules of
engagement in order to better protect the lives of
civilians, and the Security Council noticed the results
in its mission last month. We expect that General
Petraeus, as the new commander of ISAF, will continue
this emphasis. However, we can and must do more to
prevent collateral damage and friendly fire, such as in
the unfortunate incident yesterday that cost the lives of
five Afghan servicemen.

Every civilian casualty undermines the belief of the
people in the good will of the international community
and emboldens the enemy. President Karzai continues to
raise this issue with our international partners at the
highest level, including in his May meetings with
President Obama, and we know that our allies share
our belief that every civilian death is unacceptable. In
addition, my Government is working to build an
efficient, effective and responsible army and police
force dedicated to the protection of Afghans and the
maintenance of security and the rule of law. The safety
of the Afghan people should be our central concern,
and we must continue to work together to be worthy of
their trust and confidence in our future efforts.

Afghanistan supports the growing trend of
including the protection of civilians in the mandates of
ISAF and other military missions. Increasingly, we
should measure our success not by abstract measures,
but by concrete improvement in the lives of the people.
It is both responsible and necessary that we continue to
search for ways to better meet our responsibilities and
to bring to Afghans and others the peace, justice and
stability that are the birthright of all humankind.

