Mr. Roman-Morey (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, allow me to welcome the initiative by your
presidency of the Security Council, Sir, to convene
a debate on the situation in Haiti. We also welcome
the presence of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Haiti, Ms. Sandra Honore, and
we are grateful for the briefing on the report of the
Secretary General (S/2013/493) on the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). We would
like to extend a special greeting and our congratulations
to the Argentine presidency of the Council and welcome
your presence at this meeting in particular, Mr. Agustin
Rossi, Minister of Defence of the Argentine Republic.

Peru is committed to achieving and consolidating
security, stability, sustainable development and
institutional strengthening in Haiti. That is why my
country has actively participated in the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti since 2004, with a
military contingent consisting of 366 troops, including
female staff in the field, and military officers among
the chiefs of staff of the Mission. Peru is also a member
of the Group of Friends of Haiti, the Economic and
Social Council's Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti,
the Group of Friends of Haiti of the Organization of
American States and the Latin American mechanism
on political coordination on Haiti.

On that basis, my delegation would like to align
itself with the statement made by the representative of
Uruguay on behalf of the Group of Friends of Haiti, in
particular the recognition that the work carried out by
MINUSTAH has been crucial to achieving significant
progress in Haiti's stabilization and security and in
terms of strengthening democratic institutions and the
rule of law in the country. We also believe that this
work continues to be essential to providing the Haitian
authorities with the security and support needed to
facilitate the process of democratic consolidation.

Peru recognizes the importance ofthe appointment
of the members of the transitional Electoral Council
as an important advance towards realizing the long-
postponed partial legislative, municipal and local
elections. However, we are concerned that the failure
to hold the elections in the short term may create a
climate of political instability and a lack of governance
in Haiti. Therefore, while recognizing the Haitian
people's democratic aspirations and emphasizing the
importance of democratic stability in the countries of
our region, my delegation calls on all political forces in
Haiti to reach the necessary agreements to enable the
timely holding of the elections, which will strengthen
the functioning of key institutions for democratic
governance in Haiti.

While the security situation in Haiti remains
relatively stable, owing mainly to the crucial work
of MINUSTAH, we must note that there have
been massive protests in Haiti, mainly related to
socioeconomic problems such as food insecurity and a
lack of basic services. That serves to remind us that
the United Nations system should promote even greater
cooperation in the three areas that have a direct impact
on the ongoing process of recovery and reconstruction
in Haiti, namely, governance, security and sustainable
development.

In reiterating our appreciation for the work
of MINUSTAH in ensuring stability and security
in Haiti, we would like to express our satisfaction
with the progress made in the institutionalization,
professionalism and strengthening of the Haitian
National Police as part of its five-year development
plan for 2012-2016. That will enable that institution to
have the troops necessary to maintain public order and
ensure the security of the population throughout the
country. In turn, that will allow for a solid institutional
framework that promotes the strengthening of the rule
of law and respect for human rights.
The progress made by MINUSTAH in stabilizing
Haiti over the past few years allows us to look towards
the future with optimism. We therefore believe that the
time is coming to start a gradual and orderly transition
to a second phase of cooperation by the United Nations
system on Haiti. In that respect, we welcome the plan for
the reconfiguration and consolidation of MINUSTAH,
which is aimed at consolidating the gains achieved
thus far and laying the foundations for a long-term
development plan. The plan contains useful parameters
and indicators to measure the progress achieved by the
Government of Haiti in areas that are crucial to safety
and the institutional and democratic strengthening of
the country.

My delegation believes that a future reduction in
MINUSTAH staff, or even a change in the nature of the
Mission, should only be decided upon after a serious
evaluation of the progress made in the field in terms of
the parameters and indicators set out in the MINUSTAH
reconfiguration and consolidation plan. We are aware
of the importance ofpeacekeeping missions having exit
strategies in the medium term. However, we believe
that such strategies should be flexible enough to reflect
the realities on the ground.

In conclusion, it is my duty to stress that
MINUSTAH's significant achievements to date should
not give us the false impression that the work of the
United Nations in Haiti is finished, or even close to
it. Experience has shown the serious consequences
suffered in some countries when the Organization
has decided to withdraw its presence from the field
too soon. We therefore call on States Members of the
Organization and the entire international community to
maintain their continued and ongoing support for the
people and Government of Haiti.

