Mr. Mbanefo (Nigeria): My delegation is
particularly delighted to see you, Sir, presiding over the
Security Council for the month of December. We have
implicit confidence in your ability and competence to
successfully guide the work of the Council during the
course of this month. Nigeria welcomes the debate
being held by the Security Council on West Africa
under your presidency. This is most apt since your
country, Mali, as the Chair of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), has
continued to work assiduously for the peace and
security of the subregion. Nigeria seizes this
opportunity to express its appreciation to your
President, Alpha Oumar Konare, for the effective
leadership he has continued to provide for our
subregion.

The West African subregion poses enormous
challenges, both in its uniqueness and the complexity
of its demography; it is home to people belonging to
over 1,000 diverse groups with differing ethnicity and
religions. The region is also unique in terms of its rich
historical and cultural diversity. Added to that is the
fact that it is endowed with some of the world's best
flora and fauna, as well as with mineral and human
resources.

It is regrettable that, despite those rich
endowments, the subregion has not been able to
achieve the economic growth necessary to attain
sustainable development. Rather, we have witnessed
ethnic conflicts and civil wars in many parts of the
subregion, which have added to the impoverishment of
many peoples, particularly in Liberia, Guinea, Sierra
Leone, Guinea-Bissau and the Casamance region of
Senegal.

The report of the inter-agency mission that visited
11 West African countries from 6 to 27 March 2001
(S/2001/434) succinctly captured the security,
humanitarian, economic and social development
problems facing the West African subregion. The
report identified problems of peace and security,
governance, national reconciliation, promotion of
political dialogue, human rights, humanitarian issues
and subregional integration and cooperation.
Additionally, the mission's report discussed the issues
of the HIV/AIDS pandemic, poverty alleviation, the
threat posed by external debt, illegal arms trafficking
and its linkages to conflict diamonds, and the problem
of child soldiers.

Country-specific issues such as the introduction
of sharia law in northern Nigeria, the socio-economic
upheavals in the delta areas of Nigeria, the conflict in
the Casamance region of Senegal, the political situation
in Cote d'Ivoire and the problems in Guinea-Bissau
and the Mano River Union countries were also
discussed in the report.

Nigeria wishes to commend Secretary-General
Kofi Annan for his initiative in dispatching the inter-
agency mission to West Africa. We also wish to put on
record our appreciation of the comprehensive work
accomplished by the mission under the chairmanship of
Mr. Ibrahima Fall, Assistant Secretary-General for
Political Affairs of the Department of Political Affairs.

The report stated that the West African
subregional economic growth rate has lagged behind,
with little indication that the situation will improve in
the near future. Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia and
Sierra Leone were identified as being among the 10
countries at the bottom of the United Nations
Development Programme's Human Development
Index. Also, the report went further to identify the
problems of high rates of youth unemployment,
persistent economic stagnation and weak institutional
capacity as major causes of political instability in West
Africa. It reiterated that many years of civil war and
political instability have resulted in widespread
destruction of social, economic and physical
infrastructures. In addition, the subregion is faced with
the problem of capital flight and the emigration of its
skilled human resources. There is also the problem of
the illegal exploitation and exportation of its natural
resources.

This truly describes the gravity of the challenges
facing the emerging democracies in West Africa today.
Despite such major difficulties, ECOWAS countries
have shown great resilience and determination to
confront some of these challenges. These countries
have organized and put in place conflict resolution
initiatives as well as economic policies and
programmes geared towards alleviating the
deteriorating economic conditions confronting them.

ECOWAS established its Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG) as a military force to monitor the conflict
in Liberia and, subsequently, enforce peace. This force
later went to Sierra Leone for a similar purpose, long
before peace was established and United Nations
peacekeepers arrived. Moreover, both ECOWAS and
the West African Economic and Monetary Union have
provided a framework for socio-economic development
of the subregion though regional integration. However,
there is a limit to the effectiveness of the existing
subregional mechanisms developed to address the
problems of security, socio-economic development and
provision of humanitarian relief to refugees and
internally displaced persons. It therefore follows that
the subregion still needs assistance through bilateral
and multilateral programmes.

While commending the efforts of United Nations
agencies, the World Bank, the International Monetary
Fund, the African Development Bank and the United
States Agency for International Development and
others to help West African countries, it is pertinent to
emphasize that there is still a lot to be done by
international financial institutions to assist our region
through debt forgiveness or cancellation, so that
resources now being used to service huge debts can be
utilized for the development of the subregion. There is
no doubt that the political instability currently
experienced in parts of Africa is a result of the parlous
state of the economies of these countries. We therefore
urge members of the Council to consider making
economic assistance to countries emerging from
conflict - assistance to rebuild their shattered
economies and infrastructures - a vital provision of
the peacekeeping mandates the Council issues.

The international community also has important
roles to play in this regard. We urge the international
community, and developed countries in particular, to
assist with the repatriation of our countries' assets that
have been illegally transferred by corrupt African
leaders to overseas banks and interests. It is our view
that the return of such assets will assist African
countries in rebuilding their economies and achieving
sustainable development.

My delegation wishes to commend the recent
decision to establish a United Nations Office for West
Africa. We remain confident that the Office will help in
facilitating the implementation of the various
recommendations of the inter-agency mission.

I would not conclude this statement without
referring to the plight of children and women caught up
in armed conflict in the West African subregion.
Although the use of child soldiers and the abuse of the
female child by combatants have already been
condemned several times by the Security Council, it is
our strong belief that there is a need to establish sound
and effective systems to guarantee the application and
implementation of the rules of law and justice to
prevent such gross human rights abuses.

We call on the Security Council to continue to
examine and monitor closely the role of non-State
actors in the conflict areas of Africa, as their
unscrupulous business practices often exacerbate those
conflicts. These private entities must be held
accountable for all the illicit activities they perpetrate.
At the same time, we commend the efforts of the
Security Council to regulate the exploitation and
exportation of natural resources such as diamonds in
certain countries. It is our belief that, with these
measures in place, the propensity of warlords to fuel
wars with the illegitimate gains derived from such
sources will diminish, and their nefarious activities will
be effectively controlled if not entirely cut off.

Finally, my delegation wishes to emphasize that
for enduring peace and stability to thrive in the West
African subregion, there is no alternative to good
governance, transparency and accountability under a
democratic dispensation. It is against this background
that we call on the Council to do all in its power to
promote and protect the emerging democratic
governments in the subregion so that peace, progress
and socio-economic development can be achieved.

