Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): Foreign Minister,
Special Representative and Chief Minister, we
welcome you to the Council. I am very grateful to you
all for the helpful, useful and constructive statements
that have been made today. I am grateful also to the
representatives of the World Bank and the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP), who have
briefed us also this morning.

Minister, I personally find it extremely gratifying
good news to be where we are in this room two years
on, as Sergio Vieira de Mello has said. I think - and I
would like to paraphrase Ambassador Mahbubani
here - that over the last two years the Council has in
fact done a very good job of shouldering both its
national and collective responsibilities. For the United
Kingdom -I cannot speak for others - the presence
of 200 Gurkhas in the International Force in East
Timor (INTERFET), the military observers and the
civilian police in the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET), and the
extensive development and reconstruction assistance
given in the early stages, are an expression both of
national commitment and of our commitment as a
permanent member of this Council to what is, I think, a
very successful United Nations operation. We are fully
committed to supporting the East Timorese people in
achieving the independence they deserve. It is
particularly good that we now have a date, and that
date will give us all a target to which we can work.

The Secretary-General's report is a particularly
well-argued, well-researched and very worthwhile
document. The establishment of an integrated mission
task force within the Secretariat, as recommended by
the Brahimi report on peace operations, has helped to
contribute to that process.

Here, too, there may be useful lessons learned in
the context of other future and current United Nations
operations and the way we prepare for them.

I hope very much that, as we refine the
recommendations about the structure of the post-
independence United Nations presence over the next
few months, the Secretariat will take advantage of
these mechanisms, these new working procedures, to
build on what is already a pretty good basis.

We are very happy to endorse the Secretary-
General's recommendations in the Presidential
Statement today. We believe that a premature
withdrawal of the international presence from East
Timor could have a destabilizing effect. We, therefore,
fully endorse the concept of a continued but reduced
United Nations presence up to, and through, the initial
independence period. We welcome the Secretary-
General's recognition that a clear exit strategy must
also be in place.

We also support the recommendation that a
number of key civilian positions to support the East
Timorese administration should be funded from
assessed contributions for a limited period after
independence. These core functions, for which local
expertise does not yet exist, will be crucial to the
stability and functioning of the new government in the
early months of independence.

It is because the move from UNTAET to post-
independence United Nations presence is so unique
that we can on this occasion accept consideration of
funding from assessed contributions for civilian
personnel working in support of the Timorese. But,
looking ahead, I am sure everyone would agree that the
key objective should be to provide some assurance to
the new nation of East Timor so that it will have the
support it needs to carry on and get through. I hope that
the use of assessed contributions for these posts in this
period will not discourage others from coming forward
with voluntary contributions to the post-independence
East Timor that will clearly be very necessary. It is
clearly in the interests of everyone, not least the East
Timorese people themselves, to move to more
conventional methods of development assistance, as
soon as is sustainable and not before.

Our agreement to the funding of a certain number
of core civil posts extends to those recommended for
the Serious Crimes Unit. During the Security Council
mission to East Timor last year, members of the
mission were extremely concerned about the serious
crimes issues, and I am very pleased to have heard
today of the action that Mr. Vieira de Mello has taken
in respect of that operation. It clearly has a very
important role, both in terms of justice and in terms of
national reconciliation, and we welcome the progress
that has been made both by UNTAET and by the
Indonesian authorities in bringing to account those
responsible for crimes in East Timor during the dark
days immediately following the referendum. We
particularly welcome the decision by President
Megawati in August to extend the jurisdiction of the
Indonesian ad hoc tribunals, and we look forward to
Indonesia setting up these courts as a matter of
urgency.

Mr. President, you have asked me to be brief, so I
will be. I would simply conclude with another
expression of compliment and satisfaction to UNTAET
and to the East Timorese people and with the best
wishes of the United Kingdom for the remaining
months ahead up until 20 May and to the people of
East Timor for beyond.

