Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Under-Secretary O'Brien for his briefing.

Conflict has recently intensified in parts of
Syria, resulting in civilian casualties, the destruction
of medical and relief facilities and the obstruction of
United Nations humanitarian relief operations. At the
same time, we have also taken note of the fact that
humanitarian assistance in Syria over the first six
months of this year has yielded some results.

China is very sympathetic to the suffering that the
Syrian people have endured over the past five years.
We urge the Syrian parties concerned to effectively
implement the relevant Security Council resolutions,
comprehensively open up humanitarian access, cease
hostilities as soon as possible and create the conditions
necessary to enable the United Nations to continue
to carry out its humanitarian relief programmes. The
international community should lend a helping hand
and provide assistance to Syria and the neighbouring
countries that are taking in refugees, so as to help
alleviate the suffering of civilians in besieged and hard-
to-reach areas and refugees located outside Syria.

A political solution is the only way out with regard
to the situation in Syria. It is also the fundamental way
out for a solution to the relevant Syrian issues, including
the Syrian humanitarian issue. The international
community should be firm and unwavering in
undertaking a political solution to the Syrian issue,
continue to allow the Syrian people determine the
future and fate of Syria, continue to have the United
Nations play its primary role in pursuing its good
offices, firmly support Special Envoy de Mistura's
work, and launch the next round of Geneva talks as
soon as possible. All Syrian parties should follow the
principle of resolving easier issues first and difficult
ones later, take a step-by-step approach, meet each
other half-way, build mutual confidence and gradually
find a solution acceptable to all.

China has been actively supporting efforts to ease
the Syrian humanitarian situation. Through multiple
channels, China has provided numerous forms of
humanitarian assistance, including food and supplies,
to Syria and other countries in the region. China wishes
to work with the international community and continue
to contribute to easing the humanitarian crisis in Syria.

