Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I commend
Chile for its initiative in convening this open debate
on inclusive development for the maintenance of
international peace and security, and welcome you,
Madam President, to New York.

I thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon;
Ambassador Patriota, Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission; and Ms. Leymah Gbowee, President ofthe
Gbowee Peace Foundation Africa, for their statements.

Today's global security environment is dominated
not only by terrorism, violent extremism and
transboundary organized crime, but also and first and
foremost by numerous ongoing armed conflicts within
State borders. This situation has a dangerous impact
on international peace and security. In that regard, the
major challenges facing the international community as
a whole are the need to settle internal conflicts before
they threaten international peace and security and to
promote stable societies free of radicalism, violence and
extremism through inclusive, harmonious development.

Quite clearly, socioeconomic factors based on
gender, clan, tribe, ethnicity or religion affiliation, as
well as exclusion, discrimination and inequality, as
noted in the concept note before us today (S/2015/6, annex), are some of the root causes of conflict.
Furthermore, just as development and inclusive
integration are necessary for peacebuilding and peace
maintenance, an inclusive society is critical to stability
and development.

As to the prevention and the settlement of conflict,
we note that the concept note distributed by the Chilean
presidency proposes inclusive strategies, such as those
contained in the Social Charter of the Americas of the
Organization of American States, studies conducted
by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development, and the Dili Declaration. Nevertheless,
it is primarily the duty of the States concerned to
seek appropriate ande suitable strategies for creating
conditions conducive to their peoples' inclusive
participation in their country's development.

Furthermore, while the primary responsibility for
conflict prevention falls first and foremost on States,
we believe that the Security Council must play an
important role on behalf of countries facing a post-
conflict situation. In that context, we note the Council's
role in establishing an inclusive Government in Iraq
and in highlighting the importance of the inclusive
transition process in Yemen, the necessity of concluding
an inclusive holistic peace agreement to end the crisis
in Mali, and the establishment of a national unity
Government in South Sudan and an inclusive process
in the Central African Republic, inter alia.

In Libya, a law was adopted to prevent all those
having collaborated with the former regime from
participating in the post-conflict process. We believe
that such exclusion cannot promote unity among all the
parties to the conflict in order to assist in its resolution.
The Council can also continue playing an important
role in the signing of inclusive political agreements that
contribute to the resolution of conflict.

The participation of women and young people
in political and development processes is critical to
post-conflict recovery. In that context, we strongly
urge increased investment in actions to strengthen the
empowerment of women and the youth. A country can
find peace and development only through inclusion.
That is why it is essential that Governments establish
institutions focused on countering exclusion in order
to build and maintain peace and thereby ensure
development.

Moreover, as underscored in presidential statement
S/PRST/2015/3 that the Council has just adopted, there
is a close correlation between security and development.
In the context of Africa, the Secretary-General - in
particular in his report of 24 July 2014 (S/20l4/542),
on the causes of conflict and the promotion of durable
peace and sustainable development in Africa - has
recommended further emphasis on that correlation. We
believe it is important to combat underdevelopment in
order to contribute to maintaining peace and security.

Asotherspeakershaveunderscored,underdevelopment
and poverty are the root causes of conflict in Africa.
Against that backdrop, Chad, like other countries of
the Sahel, eagerly awaits the swift implementation
of regional strategies on security, governance,
development, human rights and humanitarian matters,
in particular the United Nations integrated strategy
for the Sahel. It is important to stimulate growth and
eliminate poverty in the region by funding specific
projects that the States concerned have drawn up.
Those projects, inspired by the strategy, integrate no
only the link between security and development, but
also particularly highlight the role of women and youth
in the development process.

Given their natural resources and for various other
reasons, numerous States, including in Africa, find
themselves in situations of almost permanent conflict.
It is essential that foreign interference be halted so
that those States can enjoy the benefits of their natural
resources and the dividends of peace and development.
We urge United Nations entities to incorporate the
issue of foreign interference as a significant cause of
conflict in their discussions on conflict prevention,
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and development.

In conclusion, my country remains concerned about
the multiple conflicts across the world, in particular in
Africa and the Middle East. We encourage the Security
Council to continue to seek to prevent armed conflict,
even ifthis is a responsibility that falls first and foremost
on States. As prevention is better than cure, Chad urges
States, regional and subregional organizations and
the United Nations to pool their efforts to create the
conditions for inclusive and lasting development to save
the world from the scourge of conflict. In that regard,
the United Nations must better support regional efforts
in peace and security, including by making available
financing and/or human resources when necessary.

