Mr. Primakov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): We consider the discussion by the Security
Council of the current situation in Africa to be important
and timely. One can hardly expect the world to develop
harmoniously over the long term if African States - which
account for nearly one third of the international community
- continue to find themselves in a "highly seismic" zone.
The other side of the coin is that 33 out of 48 of the
world's poorest countries are in Africa, whose soil contains
an enormous wealth of mineral resources.

Moreover, the reality is that lack of security and
increased ethnic, religious and social disintegration prevent
many African countries from effecting the political and
economic changes they badly need. The toll is heavy:
hundreds of thousands of deaths and millions of refugees.

In the area of socio-economic assistance to the
African continent, the international community has
already developed a number of general and sectoral
programmes, including the United Nations System-wide
Special Initiative on Africa, which was launched by the
Secretary-General. I think that this meeting of the
Security Council serves to prove that we all realize the
urgent necessity for a similar coordinated strategy for
maintaining peace and stability there.

In this regard, we are not at all beginning from
scratch. The Security Council and the United Nations in
general have already gained a wealth of experience in
resolving disagreements between States. But we should
admit that the world community has not yet reached the
required level of effective response to the conflicts of a
new generation. These are mainly internal in character,
but they jeopardize regional peace and security in terms
of human and material casualties and cultural and
ecological losses. Moreover, in this sphere there is the
negative experience of interference on the part of the
international community.

I am referring to Somalia above all.

No doubt, Africans themselves should be the first to
act to resolve such conflicts. They are willing to do so
and, as the successful activity of African contingents in
Liberia and the Central African Republic demonstrates,
their efforts deserve support.

We suggest that we collectively reflect on how we
can strengthen the role of African regional organizations,
primarily that of the Organization of African Unity, both
in peacemaking efforts and in preventive diplomacy.
Naturally, to successfully achieve these goals we should
substantially consolidate interaction between that
Organization and the United Nations.

We also believe it is time to discuss proposals on
setting up a joint African force and other inter-State
peacekeeping structures. I would like to emphasize in this
regard that the international legal basis for peacemaking,
including on the African continent, should continue to be
the Charter of the United Nations, the decisions of the
Security Council and the relevant international, bilateral
and multilateral agreements.

No coercive actions - either in the form of
sanctions or, certainly, military force - should be taken
by regional structures unless authorized by the Security
Council. The Security Council, in its turn, could rely
 

more on the coordinated opinion of Africans themselves in
its search for approaches to solving the various problems on
the continent. This refers in particular to the documents of
the Organization of African Unity with regard to the
situation regarding Libya. We have to find the way to
resolve this issue. I believe that the proposal of the
Organization of African Unity on the Lockerbie case
deserves attention.

The Russian Federation approaches the issues of
cooperation with Africa, and within Africa, from the
position of open, equal and mutually beneficial partnership
without diktat, ideological stereotypes or national bias. We
are ready to participate in international efforts to promote
Africa's peacekeeping capability, but I would like once
again to emphasize that external assistance should
complement rather than replace the steps to be taken by
African States themselves.

Unfortunately, African tom-toms still very often sound
the alarm, but we should do all we can for them to convey
only good news.

