I thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing. I also welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Observer State of Palestine and the representative of Israel to this meeting. The Palestinian issue is the root cause of turbulence in the Middle East and must be put at the centre of the international agenda. Last month, during the general debate of the seventy-fifth session of the General Assembly, as well as during this month's deliberations of the Fourth Committee, many countries expressed their views on the Middle East situation and the Palestinian issue. The Palestinian leadership has also put forward new initiatives. It is worthwhile to earnestly study those initiatives and take corresponding action. There have been recent changes in the Middle East, including with regard to the Palestinian issue. China is pleased to see that measures are being taken to ease tensions in the Middle East and to promote regional peace and stability. At the same time, we must play close attention to the recent escalation in the Gaza Strip, to new settlement construction plans still under way and to the worsening humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian territories. In that regard, I would like to emphasize the following points. First, we must stick to the right path of the two-State solution, which is the bottom line for international fairness and justice. We should not turn back the wheels of history. International consensus is embodied in the relevant United Nations resolutions, the principle of land for peace and the Arab Peace Initiative, which provide important parameters for resolving the Palestinian issue and must be observed and implemented. The two sides should pursue peace talks as a strategic choice and find an expeditious resolution to the occupied Palestinian territories based on relevant United Nations resolutions. In addition, they must demarcate final boundaries through peaceful negotiations and refrain from taking actions that may intensify conflict, in particular by abandoning annexation plans. We call on all relevant parties to effectively abide by the agreement reached at the end of August, cease violence and avoid escalation in the Gaza Strip. The settlement issue is one of the core aspects of final-status negotiations on the question of Palestine. China agrees with the statement made by Special Coordinator Mladenov on 15 October - that settlement construction violates international law and weakens the prospect for the realization of the two-State solution. Secondly, we must steadily advance the peace process. What is lacking in attempts to resolve the Palestinian issue is not ambitious plans or lengthy documents, but the courage to deliver on promises and the conscience to uphold justice. The international community, and countries with influence vis-a-vis Palestine and Israel in particular, should be objective and fair. They should act based on the fundamental interests of the Palestinian people and the countries of the region. They should promote peace talks and sincerely endeavour to advance the Middle East peace process. Any proposed solution to the Palestinian issue should heed the opinion of the parties concerned, Palestine in particular, and the voice of the countries and organizations of the region, and should be reached through balanced dialogue and negotiation between the parties concerned. In order to avoid long-term negative consequences, efforts should be made to avoid the imposition of a solution. In his statement to the general debate of the General Assembly (see A/75/ PV.10), President Abbas called for an international conference, to be held at the beginning of next year, with the participation of all relevant parties, in order to discuss a genuine peace process. China supports that call and hopes that the international community will consider it and that all parties will work together to create favourable conditions for the settlement of the Palestinian issue. We are pleased to see intra- Palestinian reconciliation and progress in the political process. We hope that the relevant countries of the region will continue to play a constructive role. Thirdly, we must vigorously improve the economic and humanitarian situation. The coronavirus disease pandemic has exacerbated the already fragile economic, public health and humanitarian situation in Palestine. The international community should intensify its efforts to support Palestine in developing its economy, improving the livelihoods of its people and countering the pandemic in order to promote peace and stability with development. We encourage the two sides to resolve the tax withholding issue through negotiation. We call on the relevant party to completely lift the Gaza blockade in order to ensure access that all those in need in the occupied territories have access to basic services and humanitarian aid. In addition, we call for the effective implementation of resolution 2334 (2016). The demolition of Palestinian houses, the destruction of their property and the violence against innocent civilians must stop. The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) provides educational and health-care services to more than 5 million Palestinian refugees and has made a significant contribution to the improvement of their humanitarian situation in Palestine. The international community should firmly support UNRWA and oppose the use of cutting off aid as a tool to exert pressure. China has always supported the Palestinian people's aspiration to establish a fully sovereign and independent Palestinian State based on the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, and has always supported the legitimate Palestinian demands and all efforts to settle the Palestinian issue. Since the beginning of the year, China has sent Palestine several batches of supplies, as well as medical experts to help fight the pandemic. We have also donated to UNRWA and, through the Agency, provided personal protective equipment to Palestine and Palestinian refugees in Jordan, Lebanon and Syria. Shipments of such supplies are being sent to UNRWA's medical and health-care institutions to refugees within and outside the territory of Palestine. As asincere friend of the Palestinian people, China will continue to be guided by President Xi Jinping's four-point proposal on the settlement of the Palestinian issue, and will make positive contributions to the expeditious realization of a comprehensive, just and lasting settlement of the Palestinian issue.
