Mr. Barro (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate the Indonesian
presidency of convening this open debate and to
thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Peter Maurer and
Mr. Federico Borello for their very informative
briefings this morning.

The adoption ofresolution 1265 (1999) reflected the
Security Council's clear awareness of the importance of
the protection of civilians in armed conflict.

That awareness has led, inter alia, to including
explicit provisions on the protection of civilians in the
mandates of several peace operations, the deployment
of protection of civilians advisers in some peace
missions and the development of guidelines on the
implementation of civilian protection mandates for the
United Nations Police.

While there is no doubt that significant progress
has been made in the area, it is clear that, as the
latest report of the Secretary-General on this topic
(S/2019/373) shows so well, civilians continue to be
targets of armed attacks, both by non-State armed
groups and by regular armies. The increasing number
of civilians killed or wounded - more than 22,800 in
2018 alone - the destruction of civilian infrastructure,
the many obstacles to humanitarian convoys, the
indiscriminate use of weapons of mass destruction, the
use of sexual violence as a tactic ofwar, the recruitment
of child soldiers and forced displacement are, among
other things, scourges that sufficiently demonstrate the
extent of civilian vulnerability in armed conflicts.

In addition, peacekeepers are regularly called
upon to protect civilians with limited resources and in
often very large and changing security environments
where new forms of threats are emerging and where
it can be difficult to differentiate between civilians
and combatants.

On the eve of the International Day of United
Nations Peacekeepers, on which the Secretary-General
will award, for the first time, the Captain Mbaye Diagne
Medal for Exceptional Courage to Private Chaney
Chitete of Malawi, I would like to pay a warm tribute
to all those who have fallen in the service of peace.
I would particularly like to commend the work and
memory of Captain Diagne, who was killed in Rwanda
in 1994 after having saved countless human lives.

To be effective and efficient, the protection of
civilians must be part of an inclusive approach that
promotes better coordination between the Security
Council, which defines the protection-of-civilians
mandates of peace missions, the Department of Peace
Operations and the Department of Operational Support,
which are responsible for planning and managing peace
operations, and troop-contributing and host countries.
As part of that approach, efforts should also be made
to engage non-State actors in upholding humanitarian
and human rights standards and to incorporate the
obligation to protect civilians into peace and ceasefire
agreements. It is also crucial to ensure that missions
have clear and realistic mandates for the protection
of civilians, since, as the Secretary-General has said,
ensuring the safety of civilians requires clarifying what
is expected of peacekeepers and identifying situations
that may exceed their capacity to respond.

The establishment and strengthening of
protection-of-civilian training for personnel awaiting
deployment, as well as those already deployed in
operations, is another challenge. Senegal has its
own model. For example, our intervention reserve
infantry battalions in Mopti and Gao, as well as
its attack helicopter unit deployed in the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic, are trained
to maintain a permanent proactive posture. It is also
important to bear in mind the importance of providing
missions with appropriate equipment in order to
strengthen peacekeepers' operational capabilities and
thereby enable them to maintain superiority amid
negative forces.

Particular emphasis should also be placed on
information-sharing through close cooperation with
host and neighbouring countries but also, and above
all, with non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and
local communities, in order to identify threats and
develop appropriate responses. In that regard, I want
to point to the findings of the report of the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations (S/2015/446)
on the importance of working closely with NGOs and
local communities in promoting unarmed strategies
for the protection of civilians. Furthermore, the ability
to communicate in the language of the host country
certainly helps to make the protection of civilians more
effective through the interactions it facilitates with the
local population and the trust it builds between the
people and peacekeeping personnel.

Lastly, since the protection of civilians is closely
linked to security-sector reform, it is essential to fully
execute disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes for former combatants and support host
countries in consolidating their defence and security
forces' presence throughout their territory.

Accountability in cases of gross and systematic
human rights violations ensures the credibility of
mechanisms for the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. It is therefore important to focus on measures
aimed at prosecuting the perpetrators of such abuses.
Senegal fully supports that vision, which requires
strengthening international initiatives to investigate and
prosecute those who violate international humanitarian
law and human rights.

In conclusion, my delegation believes that the best
way to protect civilians is to create an environment
that promotes prevention and where special attention is
paid to the root causes of conflict and to inclusive and
lasting development.

