The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of the United States
of America.

It is noteworthy that the political mission we
are here to discuss today - the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) - enjoys
widespread support. I therefore want to thank the
Special Representative for her briefing but even more
so for her leadership. Our appreciation is with all of
UNAMI and the entire United Nations country team
for their work supporting Iraq's security, stability and
prosperity. I also thank the Permanent Observer of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) to
the United Nations, Mr. Mardini, for his briefing. The
United States strongly supports the efforts of UNAMI,
the Tripartite Commission and the ICRC to address the
unresolved issue of Kuwaiti and third-country missing
persons, property and archives from the first Gulf War.

We are also very glad that Archbishop Warda is
with us today. His presence is a poignant reminder of
the strength that Iraq draws from its diverse religious
traditions, which are central to Iraq's identity as the
cradle of civilization. The United States recognizes the
continued need to defend religious freedom in Iraq, and
we join Archbishop Warda in voicing support for the
right of all people to freely practice their faith.

It is clear that Iraq now stands at a crossroads.
In recent weeks, the world has witnessed Iraqis from
all walks of life - Sunni, Shia, Turkmen, Christian
and Yazidi - chant in unison, "We are all one Iraq".
Those chants reveal a hope for a nation that is governed
without sectarian intention, corruption or foreign
influence, and that delivers on its basic responsibilities
to all of its people, including electricity, water, health
care and education.

The United States hears the cries of hope and
firmly supports the people of Iraq as they strive to
build a country of prosperity for every citizen. That
will mean embracing electoral reform, promoting good
governance, addressing corruption and expanding
economic opportunity, but, most important, it will
require Iraq's leaders to be responsive and accountable
to all citizens. As the Special Representative said
earlier, it is the primary responsibility of the State to
protect its people.

At this critical moment, UNAMI has an indispensable
role to play. It has been tasked by the Council with
promoting inclusive political dialogue, assisting with
constitutional and electoral reform efforts, protecting
human rights and promoting judicial accountability.
Special Representative Hennis-Plasschaert and her
team have already coordinated dialogue among diverse
political, religious and community leaders. Those
conversations, held in response to legitimate public
demands echoing across Iraq, demonstrate UNAMI's
potential to shepherd the country peacefully through
the critical weeks and months ahead.

We encourage Iraq's current and future leaders to
carefully consider UNAMI's suggested road map for
addressing the legitimate grievances of citizens. From
the very start, the United States has made clear that
Iraqis have the right to the freedoms of expression
and peaceful assembly, in accordance with Iraq's own
constitutional values. We are deeply alarmed by the use
of lethal force against peaceful demonstrators by Iraqi
authorities and armed groups not under State control.
We condemn that violence and we urge others to do the
same. We mourn those who have lost their lives.

At this moment, all sides must use maximum
restraint. Acts of violence, the destruction of property
and looting only exasperate tensions and should be
avoided at all costs. Attempts to restrict free expression,
the press and Internet access should be abandoned.
Outside the country, Iraq's neighbours must not meddle
in its affairs. The Iraqi people have loudly rejected
such behaviour by Iran. The United States remains a
steadfast partner for Iraq to ensure that the sovereignty
and independence of its institutions are protected from
those who would undermine them.

In accordance with our theme for the month, I
want to conclude today by looking at where UNAMI
has been in the past year and where it should go in the
coming year. One important success of the past year
came six months ago when the Council embarked on
a historic first-ever visit to Iraq, co-sponsored by the
United States and Kuwait and facilitated by UNAMI.
The visit demonstrated the widespread goodwill in Iraq
earned by the Mission and stands as a testament to the
progress that UNAMI has made in establishing itself
as a trustworthy and honest broker in Iraq since it was
created by the Council in 2003. But in the coming year,
progress will mean building on that goodwill.

We hope that, as current events in Iraq unfold,
UNAMI will work with Iraq on further developing
electoral and constitutional reform, mediating dialogue
and promoting accountability. Those would be successes
that would genuinely contribute to international
peace and security. In the same way that the Council
continues to seek meaningful progress, we hope that
the Iraqi people and their Government will do the same.
Indeed, they have come too far to reverse course now.
The United States is confident that the Iraqi people will
chart a course that ultimately leads Iraq to stability,
sovereignty, independence and prosperity. May we do
all we can to assist them along the way.

I resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I shall now give the floor to other Council members
who wish to make statements.

