Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank the French delegation for convening
today's meeting. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General, the President of the World Bank,
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the
Sahel, the Permanent Observer of the African Union
to the United Nations and the European Union Special
Representative for the Sahel. I thank each of them for
their briefings.

On the many occasions in which we have dealt
with particularly conflicts in the region, such as in
Mali, Argentina has reiterated the importance of
maintaining our full focus on the regional issues in the
Sahel, and underscored the need and the urgency of
having a United Nations integrated strategy that would
encompass security, governance, development, human
rights, humanitarian issues and economic growth. Our
insistence arises from and is nourished by a very concrete
reality and need. Our is not just a strategic vision; it is
also a question of effectiveness and transparency, and
resulted in a whole series of overlapping, cross-cutting
national, regional and international programmes that,
despite their good intentions, have not had the expected
results.

I say that because the Sahel still presents one of
the lowest human development indices in the world.
There are 11.4 million people suffering from food
insecurity and about 5 million Children under the age
of five threatened with acute malnutrition. Despite all
of the efforts in terms of assistance, the Sahel is still
experiencing very serious and recurrent outbreaks of
infectious diseases, chronic investment shortages in the
energy and agricultural sectors, and ineffective social
protection systems, with unequal access to basic social
services, a worsening of the environment and a great
deal of discrimination.

Obviously, as revealed by the conflicts in the Sudan,
Libya and Mali, the various programmes have not been
able to address the root causes of the conflicts or the
numerous illegal networks of and threats posed by the
different extremist and terrorist groups that operate
in the region. For that reason, in raising awareness of,
sharing and supporting the United Nations integrated
strategy for the Sahel, we have demonstrated our belief
in its proper implementation and our trust that it can
resolve the root causes of the conflict. That would be
the best response that we could make for peace and
security in the Sahel.

Since our meeting in June, when we were presented
with the integrated strategy (S/PV.6988), a great deal of
progress has been made, thanks to the impetus given to
it by the Secretary-General and Mr. Prodi. We welcome
the meetings that took place at Headquarters, the
special meeting on enhancing cooperation and technical
assistance in the global fight against terrorism, and
the high-level meeting in September, as well as the
meetings that took place recently in Bamako and Rabat.
Obviously, we also highlight the importance of the joint
visit made by the Secretary-General and the President
of the World Bank. Furthermore, we would like to
thank the delegation of Morocco for having placed and
kept this topic among the priorities on our agenda and
for drafting important documents such as that we have
just adopted (S/PRST/2013/20).

During his mandate as Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Prodi has not only highlighted
the complex reality of the Sahel region; he has
also educated the international community and the
Security Council by conveying his understanding
of a complex situation and by listening to the voices
of the different communities, understanding their
cultures and respecting their priorities. However,
we must acknowledge that it is crucial that this
awareness - which has forced the international
community to look comprehensively at the situation
in the Sahel region - not prevent us from considering
whatever may be required.

Very briefly, I would like to recall that the main
responsibilty for peace, security and development in
the Sahel falls to the countries of the region, which
must address the root causes of their problems and
conflicts. However, we believe in the importance of
the support that must be provided by the international
community and the United Nations, taking into account
in particular the challenges that arise as a result of
climate change and the economic and financial crisis
that originated in the richest countries.

Secondly, I underscore the fact that many of the
problems that we see, in our opinion, are the results of
root causes that must be dealt with through substantive
change and not with palliative measures. For example,
given the challenging and necessary changes that are
needed to address the crisis, Argentina highlights
the importance of focusing on and changing the
modalities and structures of the work of the World
Trade Organization, the International Monetary Fund
and the international financial system so that they can
be instruments for sustainable development and not
the reverse. Only a global economic system based on
cooperation and equity will be able to respond to the
root causes of conflicts related to poverty, hunger and
inequality.

Thirdly and to conclude, I welcome the substantial
progress that has been made in the countries of
the region and the continent based on the conflict
prevention, peacekeeping, peacebuilding, development,
human rights, democracy and rule of law initiatives
of regional and subregional organizations. Argentina
firmly believes that this is the path that the countries
of the region and the African continent in general must
take.

The Minister ofthe Interior ofMorocco, at the second
regional ministerial conference on border security in
North Africa and the Sahel, held last month in Rabat,
said that a mechanism for the exchange of information
must be created, an early warning system set up, and
our legal border control instruments harmonized. He
stressed that borders are areas of human, commercial
and cultural exchange, and that they cannot be seen
as areas of distrust, closure or exclusion. Argentina,
along with the countries of Latin America that share
this vision of the Minister of Morocco, hopes that the
United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel will
lead to the establishment of a homeland in the Sahel.

