Brazil commends South Africa for the pertinent topic chosen for this open debate and for its exceptional concept note (S/2020/1194, annex). In times of increasing challenges to international law, we must pay tribute to the institution that has been upholding it for 75 years. The International Court of Justice has been a beacon of stability and justice, and it continues to play an instrumental role in advancing the goals of the United Nations. The International Court of Justice and the Security Council have different, albeit complementary, functions in pursuing the purposes of the United Nations. As the Court highlighted in the past, there is no competition or hierarchy between itself and the Security Council, each exercising its own competence. In situations simultaneously dealt with by both organs, the world court was able to resolve legal questions and thereby contribute to a peaceful outcome. The world court contributes to the maintenance of international peace and security by providing a reliable venue for the peaceful settlement of disputes. It has promoted and encouraged respect for human rights throughout its case law and facilitated cooperation among nations in resolving disputes related to a variety of topics, including those of an economic, social, cultural and humanitarian character. The Charter of the United Nations envisages a plethora of means for cooperation between the Council and the Court, which should be further explored. Brazil wishes to emphasize four such ways. The first potential area for increased cooperation is the advisory jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice. To date, the Security Council has seldom taken advantage of the Court's expertise in clarifying legal issues related to both country- specific situations and thematic agenda items. In exercising its power to request advisory opinions, the Council would not only signal its commitment to working within the parameters of international law but also pre-empt potential questions as to the legality of its decisions, including by regional and domestic courts. Until now, the Namibia advisory opinion is regarded as a landmark in clarifying core legal issues related to the working methods of the Council. Should the need arise for additional legal guidance, including on tackling conflicting obligations and adapting to new rules, the International Court of Justice would be well placed to assist through its advisory functions. The second potential avenue of cooperation is the continued dialogue and mutual consideration of each organ's views on issues of common interest. The Court often refers to Security Council resolutions in its decisions. Judges rely on the outcome of the Council's discussions in developing their reasoning. Likewise, when drafting a resolution or deciding on matters related to peace and security, the Council should also take into account the views of the International Court of Justice, which has already developed a solid foundation with regard to issues such as the definition of armed attack, the scope and limits of self-defence and the law of armed conflict, including aspects of the protection of civilians. The third aspect of a revitalized relationship regards the possibility to recommend that conflicting States submit their dispute to the International Court of Justice. We have often heard in the Council that prevention is generally better than reaction. Promoting the peaceful settlement of a dispute through institutionalized and reliable means goes to the core of prevention, and should therefore be considered more often. The fourth area where more could be done lies in the enforcement of the Court's decisions. It is no secret that there have been only a few instances when States in dispute attempted to resort to the Council to address instances of non-compliance. On the one hand, that is evidence of the high level of implementation of the Court's decisions. On the other hand, the scarce results of past attempts to bring such matters to the attention of the Council might suggest the existence of institutional difficulties in giving practical effect to Article 94 of the United Nations Charter. One should reflect, for instance, on whether issues of non-compliance fall under Chapter VI, thus requiring that a party to a dispute abstain from voting on that matter. In conclusion, Brazil welcomes the fact that important international issues are increasingly being brought before the International Court of Justice. That is an acknowledgement of the commendable work of the Court in responding to the requests of Member States for legal advice on difficult questions. The willingness of the Court to tackle challenging international matters and shed light on their legal aspects is one of the factors that make it so relevant today and reinforce the argument for increased cooperation between the Security Council and the International Court of Justice.
