Mr. Thomson (United Kingdom): I begin by
associating my delegation with your remarks, Mr.
President, and those of the Secretary-General,
condemning the attacks that took place yesterday in
Baghdad, including those against the offices of the
International Committee of the Red Cross. Such
terrorist attacks will not deflect the international
community from its determination to assist the people
of Iraq in the reconstruction of their country.

I also want to express my warm appreciation for
the briefing that Mr. Benon Sevan has given us today.
The detail, the complexity and the many challenges
that that account revealed provides further evidence of
the commitment that Mr. Sevan and his colleagues in
the Office of the Iraq Programme, as well as other
collaborators in other United Nations agencies, have
brought to their task - in challenging circumstances -
of ensuring a successful transition consistent with the
objectives that the Council set in resolution 1483
(2003). They all deserve the Council's gratitude.

I want to focus on a limited number of aspects of
the coalition's work under resolution 1483 (2003), in
particular questions to do with contracts, questions to
do with the three northern governorates, and issues
surrounding transparency and continuity. The coalition
has approached these questions with the sense of
pragmatism, realism, flexibility and focus on the needs
of the Iraqi people that Mr. Sevan emphasized in his
briefing. That has been our approach from the
beginning of this process, and it will continue past 21
November, when all operational responsibility for the
oil-for-food programme is transferred to the Coalition
Provisional Authority.

Since the adoption of resolution 1483 (2003), a
significant amount of work has been done - not just
by the Authority, not just by United Nations staff, but
also by Iraqi officials, to ensure that successful
arrangements are in place for the termination of the oil-
for-food programme. That tripartite process, which is
spelt out in resolution 1483 (2003), has produced real
progress. We acknowledge that there is still significant
work to be done between now and 21 November, and
we recognize that there have been difficulties along the
way. But we are confident that the oil-for-food
transition will, as Mr. Benon Sevan expected, be
completed on time and in an effective manner.

I wish to make some comments about the
contracts process. As we have heard from Mr. Sevan,
the tripartite review process has prioritized more than
3,100 contracts worth over $6.3 billion. We are
concentrating on these contracts, working closely with
our Iraqi counterparts to ensure the timely delivery of
these contracts in Iraq. In doing this, we have been
guided by the advice of Iraqis on the ground, not the
more remote processes of the past of decision-making
in New York. The prioritization process has been based
solely on the assessment of whether the goods were of
relative utility - the criterion contained in resolution
1483 (2003).

Coalition and Iraqi Ministry officials are
currently engaged in developing an effective transition
strategy to ensure the efficient delivery of goods as
well as adequate warehousing and inventory
management. We want to confirm that the Authority
will continue to honour its existing commitment to
support the fulfilment of all prioritized contracts. We
continue to rely on the United Nations agencies
involved to retain their focus and stay on track to
complete the renegotiation of all prioritized oil-for-
food contracts by 21 November. Delays in doing so
would simply undermine the reconstruction effort in
Iraq.

I should like to say a few words on the three
northern governorates. A similar tripartite process has
looked at oil-for-food projects destined for those three
northern governorates. Approximately $800 million in
projects - projects such as electricity plants and the
construction of schools and hospitals - will continue
to be overseen after the 21 November deadline until
their completion. A project oversight board, led by
Iraqi officials and linked to a central Iraqi authority in
Baghdad, will take over programme management
functions that were previously held by United Nations
agencies.

In that context, it is worth noting that the local
authorities in the north have this month been handling
the distribution of food, supervised by the World Food
Programme, and they are on schedule to take over full
responsibility by 21 November.

Vital to the Coalition's work in developing
transitional arrangements for the three northern
governorates is the provision by United Nations
agencies of dossiers for the oil-for-food projects that
will continue after 21 November. Those dossiers are
essential from the perspective of programme
administration, for rewriting contracts and providing
the Authority with financial data essential for
budgeting purposes. I am bound to note that dossiers
from the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF),
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization (UNESCO) and the World Health
Organization are still outstanding, despite repeated
requests from the Coalition. We very much hope that
those agencies will transmit those dossiers to the
Coalition as rapidly as possible.

We intend to continue consulting United Nations
colleagues and drawing on their expertise in key areas
to ensure that the transition of oil-for-food projects in
the three northern governorates is effective and orderly.

Finally, I should like to say a few words on
transparency and continuity, including the question of
authentication of oil-for-food supplies once the oil-for-
food programme is terminated.

We understand the concerns expressed by a
number of Member States about the lack of clarity on
future arrangements and the need to know more about
how the Authority will manage this process after 21
November. The Authority also recognizes the need for
continuity in the authentication of oil-for-food
supplies. We realize that suppliers prefer a familiar
system. So, in response to Ambassador Pleuger's
questions, I want to say that the Coalition is focused on
designing a sustainable and predictable goods-
authentication system that will pose no problem to
suppliers. Measures are in hand for the uninterrupted
authentication of deliveries after 21 November. Full
details will be available very soon and will be
circulated to the Security Council.

The issue of transparency is of vital importance to
the Authority itself. To that end, we support the regular
informal meetings of the Iraq sanctions Committee that
have been hosted by the German delegation, which
have helped focus Council members on the many
important issues related to the transition. We would
like to continue to make use of these meetings to
update Council members on the various strands of our
work as we move towards the 21 November deadline.

We intend, during a forthcoming meeting of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 661 (1990), to distribute a detailed summary
of the Coalition's overall approach to arrangements
after 21 November. This will be posted on the
Authority's web site and will be accessible to suppliers.
We hope that this document will address many of the
concerns expressed by the German and Russian
ambassadors today. We will continue to ensure that
Security Council and non-Council members are kept
informed as these plans evolve.

A point was raised by Ambassador Pleuger about
giving timely notice to suppliers whose contracts are
not prioritized. Perhaps I could just note that a number
of contracts were recently received by the Office of
Iraq Programme for processing just in the last couple
of days. It is not easy for the Authority to produce a
definitive final list of contracts that are deemed to have
no utility, but we would hope to be in a position in the
near future to provide the Office with such a list, which
should inform suppliers of the status of their contracts.

Throughout this process of transition, starting
with the adoption of resolution 1483 (2003), the
Coalition has had one objective firmly in mind, and
that has been to ensure that the needs of the people of
Iraq are addressed through the efficient and effective
mobilization of oil-for-food supplies. That will
continue to be our primary objective, now and through
21 November and beyond.

Finally, I should just like to note that, while
security in Iraq is indeed a limiting factor at present on
the role of the United Nations, we look forward to a
continuing productive and cooperative working
relationship with relevant United Nations agencies.
Following the end of the oil-for-food programme,
capacity-building in areas such as procurement,
inventory management and transition to private-sector
provision will be crucial. In each area, as
circumstances permit, the outside expertise and
resources of United Nations agencies, as well as of
donor Governments, will greatly assist the people of
Iraq as we help them move their country towards
economic self-sufficiency and prosperity.

