At the outset, let me express Costa Rica's appreciation to the Russian Federation for organizing this open debate and to Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing. Costa Rica welcomes the signing of the Abraham accords between Israel and the United Arab Emirates and between Israel and Bahrain. We also welcome the recent announcements made by Israel and the Sudan on the normalization of relations and by Hamas and Fatah regarding the agreement to hold legislative and presidential elections in Palestine - the first elections in almost 15 years. Furthermore, Costa Rica commends Israel and Lebanon for convening their first negotiations in 30 years on non-security issues. In Libya, my delegation recognizes the significance of the permanent ceasefire agreement between the Government of National Accord and the Libyan Arab Armed Forces. We commend the mediation efforts within the framework of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission with talks facilitated by Mrs. Stephanie Turco Williams, Acting Special Representative and Head of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya. We urge the parties to fully implement the agreement, disengage from outside influences, curb incitement to violence, open transportation routes and build on other areas of mutual interest in order to achieve a better and more peaceful future for all Libyans. Despite those positive developments, my delegation would like to reiterate three concerns. First, Costa Rica expresses its deep concern over the recent announcement by Israel regarding the continued expansion of settlements in the occupied West Bank and in areas in and around Jerusalem. Costa Rica reiterates its strong opposition to Israel's settlement policies and continued demolitions, seizures, evictions, dispossession and confiscation of Palestinian homes and structures in the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem. We reiterate that those settlements are illegal under international law and also undermine the viability of the two-State solution and the prospect of lasting peace in the region. We also call on the parties to fully comply with resolution 2334 (2016). Secondly, Costa Rica also reiterates its concern about the ongoing humanitarian crisis faced by Palestinians in Gaza and the West Bank, where more than 38 per cent of Gazans live in poverty and 50 per cent are unemployed. In that vein, Costa Rica would like to highlight the remarkable work carried out by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) despite the pandemic caused by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and the economic constraints that the Agency faces. We reiterate our commitment to and support for UNWRA's mission, which provides services of the highest quality and supports nearly 5.6 million Palestinian refugees so that they can live more secure and productive lives. Costa Rica is also extremely concerned about the increase in violent incidents against civilians throughout the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem. Adequate steps must be taken to prevent acts of violence against civilians, including acts of terror, incitement, hate speech and property destruction, especially the excessive use of force by Israeli forces against Palestinian civilians. We also condemn the firing of rockets, drones and missiles into Israel and reiterate our strong support for Israel's security. Let us be clear - civilians are not a target, and they must never be a target. We therefore encourage the Council to work together with the relevant United Nations bodies to uphold the principle of the protection of civilians in situations of armed conflict. Thirdly, Costa Rica believes that the Security Council should not continue with its routine of convening briefings and debates without sufficient follow-up. We again call on the Council to assert its mandate under the Charter of the United Nations and act as a matter of urgency to bring an end to the Israeli occupation. Setting timelines and parameters to make the two-State solution a reality is critical. Moreover, we strongly believe that the Security Council must look at ways in which to build mutual confidence between the parties. In that regard, we must not ignore the huge potential of women and young people to contribute to the resolution of this conflict, and we greatly appreciate that women's involvement in political and peace processes will be reaffirmed by the Council later this month when it marks the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). Costa Rica hopes that the recent agreements signed between Israel, the United Arab Emirates, Bahrain and the Sudan will open the door for a new chapter of peace talks in the region, in which the parties will have an opportunity to re-engage in serious, meaningful and direct negotiations, based on international law and agreed parameters, and in close collaboration with the Middle East Quartet. The success of such negotiations goes hand in hand with a definitive commitment by Israel to taking the annexation of Palestinian territories off the table and ending its settlement policy. A just and lasting solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is long overdue. We will continue to spare no effort to turn our ambition, namely, the creation of a sovereign, contiguous and viable Palestinian State, living in peace and security side by side with Israel, into a reality. The Security Council has a key role to play in that endeavour. Indeed, if the Council had been responsible all along in implementing its own resolutions, peace in the region would likely already be a reality.
