Mr. Rowe (Sierra Leone): May I, through you, Sir,
thank the Council for giving us the opportunity to speak
in this meeting of the Council on the situation in Sierra
Leone. It is a pleasure to see you, Sir. I would like to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
this month and to thank you for your initiative in
convening this open briefing. We believe that these
meetings serve as useful barometres of the interest which
the Council and the whole international community attach
to the plight of the people of Sierra Leone and their
fervent hope for lasting peace.

Please allow me also to pay a tribute to your
predecessor, the representative of Argentina, for directing
the affairs of the Council last month.

 

My delegation would also like to say a word of
welcome to Ambassador Greenstock, who has just returned
from Sierra Leone. I should like to thank him sincerely for
giving members of the Council a lucid and candid
assessment of the current situation in our country. His
remarks were an unofficial but credible addendum to the
report of the Secretary-General. On behalf of my
delegation, I would like to commend the United Kingdom
for sending such a high-level delegation to assess the
situation on the spot. This latest initiative by the
Government of the United Kingdom is exemplary and
timely, especially in the context of what needs to be done
in facilitating the peace process.

Allow me to say a few words to Sir Jeremy about a
compatriot of his. A few weeks ago I had the opportunity
to travel with High Commissioner Penfold, who is fondly
called "Chief Komrabai" by the people of Sierra Leone. We
went to B0, Pujehun and Kenema. Allow me to express our
thanks to him. We understand that he is leaving. He has
done a fantastic job, and we wish him well in his new
assignment.

We have taken note of the Secretary-General's latest
report, and the update provided orally to the Council by Mr.
Annabi this morning, and we thank him for his
clarification. We also acknowledge the general conclusion
that the peace process as a whole has been slow and that
there has been little progress in disarmament in the northern
and eastern parts of the country. For its part, the
Government of Sierra Leone has consistently demonstrated
its commitment to all aspects of the peace process.
Regrettably, as Ambassador Greenstock stated this morning,
we cannot say the same for the other party to the Lorne
Peace Agreement. Indeed, the finger should be directed at
the main stumbling block, the main obstacle that stands in
the way of the peace process.

That is why we welcome the Secretary-General's
assessment that serious doubts remain about the
commitment of the Revolutionary United Front (RUF) to
the peace process. Events on the ground - as we have
heard from Sir Jeremy - and certain utterances by the
RUF leader, in our View, justify the observation - indeed,
the conclusion - in the report that the RUF should
immediately take convincing measures to dispel these
doubts. In this connection, we welcome the statement which
you, Mr. President, made to the press last week on behalf
of the Council. In our View, it was a forthright message to
Mr. Foday Sankoh to take disarmament seriously - and it
is about time. The people of Sierra Leone are encouraged
by this approach, which obviously complements the
activities of UNAMSIL on the ground.

I should like to add that the people of Sierra Leone
also welcome the firm stand which the Secretary-
General's Special Representative in Sierra Leone,
Ambassador Olu Adeniji, has been taking in Mr.
Sankoh's encounters with the United Nations.

As part of the Government's confidence-building
measures, President Kabbah recently undertook the first
in a series of disarmament campaign visits to several parts
of the country. He visited Bo, Pujehun and Kenema. He
wanted to help break the cycle of distrust, suspicion and
misconception. I want to emphasize the word
"misconception", because there are certain misconceptions
about the whole disarmament process. He also explained
the benefits of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of ex-combatants. In the areas he visited,
and in response to his appeal, there was an impressive
disarmament exercise by the Civil Defence Forces (CDF)
which was not merely symbolic. The CDF told us of, and
demonstrated, their willingness to disarm completely and
speedily in the interests of peace in our country. We had
hoped that the RUF and others would not merely
reciprocate but would fulfil their obligations under the
Lome Peace Agreement.

President Kabbah has challenged all ex-combatants,
wherever they are, to disarm for the good of the nation.
He has challenged all the commanders to urge their men
and women in arms to join in the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR). The President
challenged all those who say "There is no more war in
Sierra Leone" but who refuse to disarm, to remove the
threat of war, namely the weapons. We hope that Mr.
Sankoh and others have heard the message and will take
immediate steps to accept the challenge. We also hope
that he and others will heed the message which is
emerging in this Council today. Mr. Sankoh should not
hold the entire nation hostage. We know that thousands of
former RUF fighters are ready and willing to disarm.

Disarmament and demobilization remain the highest-
priority issues on the peace agenda. Disarmament and
demobilization are closely linked to the question of
security in Sierra Leone, the protection of human rights,
the unimpeded flow of humanitarian relief to victims of
the rebel war and, of course, to the capacity of the nation
to concentrate on rehabilitation and reconstruction of the
economy and other aspects of the life and livelihood of
the nation.

 

The planting season is rapidly approaching. The
farmers want to go back to their farms to grow food to feed
the people. How can we speak of national reconciliation
when the combatants are still holding on to their weapons?
How can we expect the victims of atrocities to forgive,
when the perpetrators are still equipped with the weapons
of war? In this regard, we fully endorse the Secretary-
General's View that there is a general, clear need for all the
stakeholders to agree on a realistic target date for the
completion of the disarmament and demobilization of all
combatants. We agree that as a first step, the RUF should
provide, as a matter or urgency, full and complete
information on the number of RUF combatants under its
command and ensure that they comply with the DDR
process. We urgently need a target date for disarmament
and demobilization. The process cannot and should not be
prolonged indefinitely.

