Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the outset, I thank Prosecutor Fatou
Bensouda for her report presented to the Council
and the exceptionally informative briefing that she
just delivered.

In 2005, following the report of the International
Commission of Inquiry on violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law in Darfur (see S/2005/60), the Security Council, acting under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations, adopted the
historic resolution 1593 (2005) by referring a situation
for the first time to the International Criminal Court
(ICC). In doing so, the Council sent a strong message
not only to the victims ofthose horrible crimes, but also
to their perpetrators, to whom it must be clear that they
will not escape justice, wherever they may be.

Last December, despite the significant progress
made in the investigation, the situation, as presented
by the Prosecutor to the Council, remained unchanged
from that with which we had been familiar for several
years. Due to the lack of cooperation of States, including
the Sudan, none of the five suspects in the situation in
Darfur had been arrested or surrendered to the Court.

Following developments in the Sudan in recent
months, the transitional Government has an opportunity
to finally bring justice to the victims. The political
transition process, which began following the arrest
of former President Al-Bashir on 11 April, makes it
possible to envisage a new chapter in the history of
relations between the International Criminal Court and
the Sudan.

The legal framework underpinning the cooperation
that the Court must receive from the Sudanese
authorities is very clear. As the Prosecutor recalled,
in its judgment of 6 May the ICC Appeals Chamber
unequivocally confirmed that the Sudan is required, in
accordance with resolution 1593 (2005), to cooperate
fully with the Court and the Prosecutor. It is therefore
the responsibility of the Sudanese authorities, now and
in the future, to carry out the arrest warrants issued by
the ICC against persons wanted in connection with the
situation in Darfur.

However, that situation is unprecedented. For
the first time since the issuance of the various arrest
warrants, several of the suspects are now in detention.
In addition to Mr. Al-Bashir, it appears that two of the
four other suspects wanted by the Court, Mr. Harun
and Mr. Hussein, were also arrested on 11 April. As the
Office of the Prosecutor rightly points out in her report,
the principle of complementarity - the cornerstone of
the Rome Statute, which established the ICC - entails
that suspects could perfectly well be prosecuted in
the Sudan, provided that the principles set out in the
Statute are upheld. In such circumstances, Belgium
strongly encourages the Sudanese authorities to set an
example by respecting their international obligations
and responding positively to the Prosecutor's invitation
to engage in a dialogue to ensure that persons subject
to an arrest warrant are brought to justice, either before
the ICC or in the Sudan.

For Belgium, the situation in Darfur cannot be
isolated from the situation in the rest of the Sudan. The
ongoing violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law, in particular sexual and gender-
based violence, in the region are unacceptable. In the
current context, the Security Council's support for the
Court, which remains competent to prosecute all the
most serious crimes committed in Darfur since 1 July
2002, is therefore paramount.

The fight against impunity is rightly at the heart
of the aspirations of the Sudanese people. Indeed, it
is clear that justice will be an indispensable part of
any lasting solution to achieve peace in Darfur, as in
the rest of the Sudan. Even today, victims of crimes
committed in Darfur are attending this briefing with
the Prosecutor from the public area of the Chamber.
Let us not disappoint them. It is our duty to do our
all to ensure that when the Prosecutor's next report is
presented in six months, significant progress will have
been made andjustice can at last be delivered to them.

