Mr. Alyemany (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
for this month as it draws to a close. I commend your
wise stewardship of the Council's proceedings and
thank you kindly for giving us the opportunity to speak
before the Council. Moreover, I would be remiss ifI
did not convey our most heartfelt congratulations and
salutations to the brotherly people of Kuwait on the
occasion of their national day.

I would like to express our sincere thanks to the
Secretary-General and his Special Envoy for Yemen,
Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed. We thank him for
the great efforts he has made throughout his tenure of
almost three years with a view to resolving the Yemeni
crisis that was created by the Houthi coup in Yemen.
The coup has destroyed Yemen's capacities and has set
it back hundreds of years.

I also take this opportunity, on behalf of the
Government of Yemen, to welcome the Secretary-
General's decision to appoint Mr. Martin Griffiths as
the new Special Envoy for Yemen. We look forward to
working with him in the same constructive spirit and
flexibility that we have shown thus far, in order to reach
a lasting peace in my country, Yemen, that would put an
end to the state of absolute annihilation and to the war
that the Houthis have been waging against our people
since September 2014.

On 16 February, and upon the instructions of my
Government, I sent a letter to the Secretary-General
in which I noted the important and sensitive historic
moment that coincides with his appointment of a new
Envoy. In that letter, I expressed the readiness of our
Government to work with him in accordance with the
terms of reference agreed upon by the Yemeni people,
which have enjoyed the support of the international
community. Those terms of reference are the Gulf
Cooperation Council initiative and its implementation
mechanism, the outcome of the comprehensive national
dialogue that was supervised by the United Nations
throughout 2013 and resulted in a reconciliation
document reflecting the aspirations of all factions of
Yemeni society. It is also in line with the relevant Council
resolutions pertaining to Yemen, especially resolution
2216 (2015), which lays the necessary groundwork for
resolving the conflict in Yemen and is a reflection of
the Council's understanding of the fundamentals of the
problem in Yemen.

As the members of the Council understand, no
sovereign State can accept the presence of armed
militias like the Iranian Hizbullah within its territory,
controlling part of it and using violence and heavy
weaponry to hijack the State and forcefully impose their
own agenda. Moreover, they are attacking neighbouring
States by firing Iranian-made ballistic missiles,
recruiting children, destroying cities and displacing
their population, in clear violation of international,
humanitarian and human rights law.

We beseech the Security Council - which has
been unified and clear-sighted in its position since
the beginning of its engagement in the Yemeni crisis
in 2011 - and Mr. Martin Griffiths to make it their
mission to ensure the Houthis' compliance with
Council resolutions in order to prevent them from
benefitting from their crimes against humanity. If the
Council and Mr. Griffiths succeed in that effort, armed
militias would no longer be encouraged to continue
their attacks on legitimate entities, and from spreading
terrorism and chaos.

Peace cannot be achieved in my country without
the exit of the Houthi militias from the cities and State
institutions that they have occupied and pillaged.
They must return the weaponry that they stole from
the military and security State institutions, especially
the ballistic missiles that have been provided to them
by Iran. They must end their aggression against
neighbouring States and stop carrying out the functions
of the State. They must stop committing the gravest
violations of international law - the recruitment of
children. That is the only way to ensure lasting peace.

I have repeatedly underscored in the Council that
the Houthis cannot be reasoned with. They will not
abide by international law, humanitarian law or human
rights law. Like the gangs of Da'esh and AlQaida,
their mentality is not bound by legal or historical
frameworks. They will not accept any sustainable
peace that would restore State authority to Yemen.
The Houthis are working - and this is publicly
stated by their masters in Tehran - to destabilize not
just Yemen, but the entire region in order to uphold
Iran's expansionist agenda. They only understand the
language of violence and they see, in the hesitation and
leniency of the international position, an opportunity to
pursue their expansionist aggressive plot. The Special
Envoy has just said that the Houthis are not willing at
this stage - and I say at any stage - to offer security
concessions or to engage in formulating the details ofa
comprehensive security plan. This is the basic dilemma
for a comprehensive solution. In Kuwait, they refused
to sign a full and comprehensive proposal based on
Tehran's instructions.

Yesterday, the Council failed to send a clear
message to Iran, which will serve only to encourage
that country and its terrorists in the region, including
Houthi militias in Yemen, to continue along their path.
The ambiguous messages conveyed by the Council
yesterday will lead to increased levels of violence,
ballistic missiles and further tragedy on the ground. I
would like to thank the States that voted in favour of
yesterday's draft resolution S/2018/156, submitted by
the United Kingdom. The fact that Iran is in a state of
non-compliance with paragraph 14 of resolution 2216
(2015), as concluded by the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014), is simply clear proof
of its policy to destabilize the entire region. Moreover,
the launch of 95 Iranian-made ballistic missiles
carried out by Houthi militias against the territories
of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, as mentioned in the
report published by the Panel of Experts on Yemen
(S/2018/68), are proof of an international terrorist plot
masterminded by Iran - a rogue State that sponsors
international terrorism and continues to spend billions
of dollars to support terrorist organizations in the
region, including the Houthis in Yemen, while its own
people suffer a shortage of basic supplies.

The unprecedented humanitarian suffering in
Yemen continues and worsens day by day in the
twenty-first century. The systematic destruction
of all official State institutions, private and public
property and houses of worship; and the intimidation,
terrorization and humiliation of unarmed civilians; and
the recruitment of children sent to die on the front lines
have occurred in all parts onemen territories controlled
by coup forces. Citizens starve while the black market
thrives. Our people's capabilities being eroded in broad
daylight. These are all violations of international law,
values and human norms. In his briefing, Mr. John
Ging mentioned that the Houthis disrupt the delivery of
humanitarian aid every day.
The 2017 annual report submitted by the Panel of
Experts cites staggering statistics of the theft of public
funds and the illegal accumulation of wealth by Houthi
militias, which have stolen more than $5 billion since
they occupied the Yemeni capital of Sana'a. They
continue to plunder the revenue of local industries,
including tax revenue and that of the Al-Hudaydah and
Salif seaports, not to mention the funds derived from
dual taxation imposed on the citizens, and the sale of
oil products on the black market. The report indicates
that all Yemeni companies that import oil products are
newly established and associated with Houthi militias.
Moreover, the Panel estimates that $6.75 billion has been
stolen over the past three years. Coup forces continue to
starve our people in areas under their control and refuse
to pay civil servants or cooperate with the international
community and the Office of the Special Envoy. They
have stated that if the international community wants
civil servants to be paid, it should provide the funds.

Humanitarian suffering has reached appalling
levels. This year the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs has estimated its humanitarian
response plan for Yemen will require nearly $3 billion.
Coalition States led by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
have pledged and donated $1.5 billion, for which we
are very grateful. We commend the comprehensive
humanitarian plan launched by the King Salman
Humanitarian Aid and Relief Centre, which includes all
relief sectors, economic relief and recovery efforts on
the road to reconstruction. I call on all members of the
Council and the States Members of the United Nations
to quickly make pledges to cover the requirements of
this year's humanitarian response plan for Yemen.

The Houthi militias use the humanitarian crisis
of the Yemeni people as a shield, and to advance their
own political agenda. They pretend to be victims
and blackmail the international community. I have
repeatedly warned that some in the Security Council
view the Yemeni issue simply as a matter of providing
humanitarian reliefin the absence ofa political solution.
The international community's inability to pressure the
Houthis to come to the negotiating table and implement

the requirements of resolution 2216 (2015) will prolong
the war and the crisis in Yemen. The money that
countries may donate will not be enough to save the
27 million Yemenis facing disaster in the diaspora or
in their own country, which is being destroyed by the
Houthis in a vengeful and vindictive manner. Yemen
is one of the wealthiest and most beautiful lands in the
world. Anyone who has visited can attest to that. I call
upon the Council to put pressure on the coup forces that
reject peace efforts, and hold them accountable before
the entire world.

In conclusion, the people of Yemen beseech the
members of the Council to stand by them at this historic
and crucial time, as they have done since the start of
the political transition crisis in 2011. Our people, with
their glorious past and generous spirit, stand before
the Council and call on its humanity to stop this war
and end the coup. Our people cannot be left begging
for crumbs at the table. Millions of Yemeni youth
cannot be left to drown in a sea of despair or wander in
foreign lands in an attempt to escape the clutches of the
Houthis, Al-Qaida and Da'esh terrorist gangs.

