Mr. Al Bayati (Iraq): Allow me at the outset to
congratulate you, Madame, and your country on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. I am sure that your leadership skills and
talents will help to achieve the objectives of the
Security Council this month. I would like to also
extend my thanks to the previous Security Council
President, the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom, for his efforts during the month of March. I
would also like to thank Mr. Martin Kobler, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq, and
his team in Baghdad and New York for their sincere
efforts in helping the people and Government of Iraq.

Having reviewed the report of the Secretary-
General on UNAMI's work in Iraq (S/2012/185), I
would like to present the following comments.

On the political level, the convening of the
twenty-third regular session of the Arab summit in
Baghdad on 29 March 2012 was a milestone for Iraq's
return to its positive regional role and its integration
into the Arab world after long years of isolation
imposed on it following Saddam's invasion of Kuwait
in 1990. The summit was attended by presidents and
leaders of Arab countries and Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon. Iraq asked the Arab States to agree on a new
vision for the relationships among Arab States in light
of the great transformations in the region on the
political, social, cultural and security levels. The
absence of such a vision shall put us in complex
situations that no country would be able to deal with
alone. The summit adopted the Baghdad Declaration,
which includes the positions of the Arab leaders
regarding important regional and international issues.

The completion of the withdrawal of United
States forces from all Iraqi territory, in accordance with
the schedules agreed upon between Iraq and the United
States in the status-of-forces agreement, is a historic
victory for the option of negotiations, adopted by Iraq
during a difficult and sensitive period of its modern
history as it dealt with the issue of the presence of
foreign troops. The withdrawal helped to establish a
new era in the relationship between Iraq and the United
States, where the Strategic Framework Agreement is
the cornerstone of bilateral relations between the two
countries. That agreement deals with political,

economic, commercial, cultural, scientific and other
fields in order to drive bilateral relations to greater
cooperation and understanding in the next phase, which
we firmly believe will be balanced between two
sovereign nations on the basis of common interests.

The withdrawal of United States forces helped
Iraq to host the Arab summit in Baghdad as some Arab
countries that severed diplomatic relations with Iraq
after Saddam's invasion of Kuwait in 1990 refused to
restore diplomatic relations with Iraq after 2003 or to
open their embassies in Baghdad so long as there were
foreign forces in the country. Following the withdrawal
of foreign troops, Iraq is moving now to a new stage in
the democratic political process, based on the
Constitution and the rule of law in resolving all
problems, and focusing on building and developing the
economy and on strengthening efforts to establish
better relationships with other countries based on
mutual respect, common interests and non-interference
in internal affairs. Iraqis today have a new Iraq that
enjoys complete sovereignty, independence and free
will, which have been achieved by the awareness and
determination of the Iraqi people.

Under the auspices of Mr. Jalal Talabani,
President of the Republic of Iraq, the Iraqi political
groups agreed on 6 February 2012 to achieve a national
consensus to fulfil the aspirations of all the Iraqi
people. They agreed on four guiding principles to
continue the political process under the framework of
the Iraqi Constitution, which are, first, standing as one
bloc against terrorism and armed groups; secondly, the
Constitution is the basis for the settlement of disputes
and that all shall abide by it; thirdly, all components of
the Iraqi people should be fully represented in the
political process; fourthly and finally, the Iraqi
judiciary is an independent authority and it is on an
equal level with other authorities and must remain free
from political interference.

The Vice-President of the Republic of Iraq,
Mr. Khodair Al-Khozaei, met with the members of
preparatory committee of the national conference on
12 February 2012. Yhey agreed on the general
framework of the agenda of the conference and the
formation of subcommittees to study all the issues
discussed in preparation for the national conference. I
can assure the States members of the Security Council
that Iraqis never fail to settle their disputes through
peaceful means and negotiations. They learn in the new
democracy to shout at each other instead of shooting at
each other and to resort to ballot boxes rather than
bullet boxes.

In the framework of the tireless efforts made by
the Iraqi Government to grant more powers to
provincial councils, the Council of Ministers headed by
Mr. Nuri Kamel Al-Maliki, Prime Minister of Iraq,
held a session in the province of Basra for the first time
in the history of that province. During that session, a
series of decisions were made to strengthen the powers
of the provinces. In the conference on decentralization
in Iraq, which was held on 27 February 2012, the
Prime Minister stressed the need to give local
Governments more power in the reconstruction field,
which is the demand of many provinces in Iraq.

The achievement of security and stability was and
remains a central priority in the work programme of
the national partnership Government. That was clearly
embodied in the Iraqi security forces' ability to take
full responsibility for the security of the country before
and after the withdrawal of foreign forces, which is
reflected clearly in the lower level of violence across
the country. The Prime Minister, during his meeting
with senior security chiefs on 1 February, stressed the
need to work to ensure measures to control the security
situation and fill all possible gaps that terrorists are
trying to use to destabilize the country. He also called
for more coordination and cooperation between local
governments, the military and security forces.

On the social and economic levels, on 8 March
the Council of Representatives ratified the federal
budget for 2012, with a total value of about
$100 billion, which reflects an increase of
approximately 20 per cent from the federal budget for
2011. At the same time, the Iraqi economy has been
witnessing notable improvement in its basic indicators
since 2003, such as the unemployment rate, which fell
from 51 per cent to 15 per cent; the poverty rate, which
fell from 54 per cent to 23 per cent; and the inflation
rate, which fell from 65 per cent to 6 per cent.

With the backing of Prime Minister Al-Maliki,
the Supreme National Committee for the agricultural
initiative in Iraq held a meeting on 4 January 2012 in
which the ways to achieve further development in the
agricultural sector in Iraq were discussed in the light of
the phenomena of drought and climate change. In that
context, the federal budget for 2012 allocated
approximately $500 million to support for agricultural
12-28745
projects and for the advancement of the agricultural
sector in Iraq.

On 1 March, the Prime Minister of Iraq visited
the Ministry of Electricity to follow up on the
Ministry's efforts to provide electric power to citizens.
During his meeting with officials in the Ministry, he
called for more cooperation and coordination between
the Ministries of Oil and Electricity in order to provide
fuel to power stations and facilitate the entry into Iraq
of materials for the electricity sector. It should be noted
that electricity production has seen a noticeable
increase from 3,500 megawatts in 2003 to around
7,500 megawatts in 2012. However, the sharp rise in
living standards and the salaries of Iraqi citizens has
caused a huge increase of electricity consumption and
demand, and the Government is trying to solve the
problem.

Under the auspices of Prime Minister Al-Maliki,
the first floating port in the province of Basra has been
inaugurated, with an export capacity amounting to
850,000 barrels per day. The port represents one of the
five ports to be constructed with a capacity of 850,000
barrels a day each. In a related matter, the rate of Iraqi
oil production has continued to increase and amounted
to 2.358 million barrels per day in 2010 and
2.653 million barrels per day in 2011. The Iraqi
Government is planning to further increase production
in 2012.

The Iraqi Government has allocated $85 million
from the federal budget for 2012 to fund programmes
in partnership with the international community,
including the specialized agencies of the United
Nations, in order to implement a range of projects
related to the United Nations development framework
for Iraq.

On the human rights level, the Council of
Representatives ratified the creation of the Independent
High Commission for Human Rights in Iraq on 9 April.
That step is a milestone in improving human rights
situation in the new Iraq and was designed to improve
Iraq's human rights record and its ongoing programmes
to promote respect for and the protection and
advancement of human rights, to ensure people's
enjoyment of those rights, to establish democratic life
and to support human development.

In the framework of the efforts made by the Iraqi
Government to determine the fate of missing persons
who were victims of Saddam's brutal regime, the

Ministry of Human Rights signed on 12 March a
memorandum of understanding with the International
Commission on Missing Persons. The agreement was
signed in order to enable Iraqis to carry out DNA tests
on the remains of victims buried in mass graves,
identify those remains and return them to their families
after years of suffering from not knowing the fate of
their loved ones.

On 5 March, the presidency of the Republic of
Iraq ratified Law No. 16 of 2012 concerning the formal
accession of Iraq to the Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities, adopted by the General
Assembly in 2006. The Convention was ratified to
ensure and promote the right of persons with
disabilities to enjoy fundamental rights in a way that
preserves their human dignity.

In the framework of the efforts made by the Iraqi
Government in the empowerment of Iraqi women, Iraq
has withdrawn its reservation on article 9 of the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, in accordance with the
provisions of article 8, part II of the Iraqi Constitution.
The latter article grants a child born to an Iraqi woman
the same right to obtain Iraqi citizenship as a child
born to an Iraqi man. In the era of the Saddam regime,
only children born to Iraqi men could obtain Iraqi
citizenship.

Within the framework of the efforts made by Iraqi
Government to develop the education sector in Iraq,
the Prime Minister announced the near launch of a
national strategy for education aimed at creating the
right foundation for a road map for the improvement of
education in the country and at strengthening
cooperation with international institutions and
organizations concerned with education.

On the regional and international levels, Saudi
Arabia and Oman have appointed non-resident
ambassadors to Iraq, while Palestine has appointed a
resident ambassador, each of whose credential letters
were received by President Jalal Talabani on 27 March.
Iraq welcomes those appointments and emphasizes the
Iraqi Government's intention to strengthen relations
with Arab countries and fortify joint Arab cooperation
and solidarity.

On 11 March, Mr. Hoshyar Zebari, Minister for
Foreign Affairs, and Egyptian Foreign Minister
Mohamed Amr signed an agreement at the Egyptian
Foreign Ministry to immediately pay the money owed
to Egyptians who had worked in Iraq in the past but
had not been paid by the former regime.

On 16 February, the Council of Representatives
ratified the Iraqi National Monitoring Directorate to
prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. That step fulfilled Iraq's obligation arising
from resolution 1957 (2010).

Iraq, which endured and suffered from Al-Qaida
and its affiliated terrorist groups before other countries,
warns the entire international community to remain
vigilant that the wave of Arab revolutions not be
hijacked by Al-Qaida or other terrorist groups.
Otherwise, people who are struggling for freedom,
pluralism and justice will discover that extremist
groups have stolen their spring, dreams and aspirations,
distorted the great principles for which they fought,
and tarnished the image of Islam and the values and
principles of patriotism.

A great deal of blood has been shed under the
banner of resisting the occupation in Iraq, and
thousands of civilians have been killed, although those
civilian were not part of any occupying force. Car
bombs and suicide attacks continued even after the
withdrawal of all foreign forces from Iraq, which
proves that fighting the occupation was simply a
pretext used by terrorists to shed the blood of Iraqi
citizens.

Since the outbreak of the crisis in Syria, Iraq has
upheld its rejection of the military option in dealing
with the Syrian people's demands for freedom,
democracy and political pluralism. We have called on
the Syrian Government and the opposition to shun the
military option in order to avoid seeing convoys of
Syrian victims, civilian and military alike, because it
will ultimately exacerbate the conflict and throw the
country into civil war. History and a sense of moral
responsibility urge all of us to work to contain the
violence and the fire raging in Syria. We must exert
pressure on both sides of the conflict to engage in a
national dialogue, which we believe is the best option
for resolving the crisis in Syria. Iraq strongly supports
the efforts made by the Joint Special Envoy of the
United Nations and the League of Arab States,
Mr. Kofi Annan, to contain the crisis and resolve it
peacefully within a national framework.
With the help of UNAMI, and in particular the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Martin Kobler, 1,200 members of the People's
Mujahedin Organization of Iran have been transferred
from Camp Ashraf to Camp Liberty. The Iraqi
Government urges the Security Council to help relocate
those persons to other countries as the Iraqi
Government cannot allow them to stay in Iraq, in
accordance with the Iraqi Constitution.

On the situation between Iraq and Kuwait, Prime
Minister Nuri Al-Maliki visited the State of Kuwait on
14 February and met His Highness Sheikh Sabah
Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, the Emir of Kuwait. I
am pleased to inform the estimated members of the
Security Council that that visit brought about the final
and comprehensive settlement of many issues,
including the claims against Iraqi Airways by the
Government of Kuwait. The visit also emphasized
Iraq's fulfilment of its obligations under relevant
Security Council resolutions, including the payment of
Iraq's share of $600,000 to the United Nations to cover
the expenses of the border pillar maintenance project
and find a just solution to the problems of Iraqi
farmers. The visit also witnessed an agreement to
secure free navigation in Khawr Abdallah, through
cooperation and coordination between the two
countries. I am also pleased to inform Council
members that Iraq and Kuwait have agreed to hold the
second session of the Joint Ministerial Committee on
12-28745

29 April of this year in Baghdad to consider all
outstanding issues, particularly the issues of
compensation, missing persons and Kuwaiti properties.

My Government believes that that historic
visit - which was described by the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, during his visit to Kuwait on
28 March 2012, as an important step - and the results
achieved mark the beginning of a new stage of bilateral
relations between Iraq and Kuwait based on mutual
trust and will contribute to strengthening cooperation
between the two countries.

In conclusion, I would like to stress my
Government's gratitude to the members of the Security
Council and for the role of UNAMI in Iraq, as well as
for the efforts made by Mr. Martin Kobler and the
UNAMI team in Iraq and the United Nations to provide
the support requested by the Iraqi Government, in
accordance with the mechanisms agreed upon between
the two sides.

