Mr. Zhang Dianbin (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Mr. Jean Arnault, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Colombia, for his briefing.

On behalf of China, I would like to express our
sincere condolences to Colombia with regard to the
landslide that resulted in major casualties and loss of
property. China immediately provided humanitarian
assistance to the Government of Colombia, and we
believe that the Colombian Government and its people
will overcome this disaster and rebuild their homes.

With the joint efforts of the Government of
Colombia and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia (FARC), the implementation of the Peace
Agreement has been proceeding smoothly in general.

First, about 7,000 FARC members have reached the
transitory normalization zones smoothly and they are
beginning to lay down their arms.
Secondly, the Government of Colombia and FARC
are firmly committed to the ceasefire and no violations
have been observed.

Thirdly, both parties have committed to completing
the process of surrendering their weapons in the next
three months. Once again, that demonstrates the
determination of the Government of Colombia and the
FARC to jointly take forward the peace process. That
has a lot to do with the robust assistance provided
by the United Nations Mission in Colombia, led by
Special Representative Arnault. China appreciates
the efforts by the Government of Colombia and all
the other parties concerned. The internal domestic
war in Colombia lasted for half a century. Healing
the traumas of war is not an easy task. The leaders of
the FARC have committed to transforming the FARC
into a political party and to laying down arms within a
specific timeline. At the same time, FARC hopes that
the Government will provide concrete assurances in
terms ofjustice, security, logistics and reintegration.

We hope that the Government of Colombia and the
FARC will strengthen their cooperation to ensure the
comprehensive implementation of the Peace Agreement.
China hopes that the international community,
especially countries in the region, will continue to
provide support to the peace process in Colombia, help
increase mutual trust between the Government and the
FARC, strengthen their coordination and accelerate the
early completion of the surrender of weapons. We hope
that the United Nations Mission in Colombia and other
United Nations agencies will, on the basis of respect for
the sovereignty and the independent territorial integrity
of Colombia, exhibit impartiality - the principle of
equity - to enhance cooperation with the Government
of Colombia and the FARC and to facilitate the peace
process. China supports the efforts of the Government
of Colombia in taking forward the peace process and
supports the United Nations Mission in Colombia in the
continued implementation of its mandate.

The Security Council is to visit Colombia in early
May, which China welcomes. We expect to learn about
the situation there through this field visit. We believe
it will help take forward the peace process towards
greater development and the achievement an lasting
peace in Colombia at an early date.

