Ms. Zerrougui (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to start by expressing my gratitude to Malaysia for
organizing this open debate and to thanking all
participants for attending.

The Secretary-General has just outlined how
children remain the primary victims of armed
conflict. This was Graca Machel's most troubling
conclusion in her report of 20 years ago (see A/51/306).
Unfortunately, despite concerted efforts and significant
progress, we have yet to change this fact. The report
before the Council (S/2016/360) notes that a multitude
of prolonged and increasingly complex conflicts are
having a devastating impact on children. In a number
of situations, a shocking disregard for international law
is in evidence and impunity prevails.

(Spoke in English)

In 2015, armed groups and Government forces
killed, maimed, recruited and used, and inflicted
sexual violence upon tens of thousands of boys and
girls. There were over 2,000 attacks on schools and
hospitals documented in 19 out of 20 situations in the
report. Abduction remained a widespread concern,
with over 4,000 incidents in 2015. Conflict also impacts
children in ways that are not captured by the report's
statistics. Children lose their parents, they are disabled
due to easily curable illnesses and they suffer long-term
psychological trauma.

As the Council is well aware, children have been
significantly affected by violent extremism. Many
groups operating today defy the norm that attacks must
not be directed against civilians, and commit routine
and brutal acts. To give an example, in April in Iraq the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant publicly executed a
15 year-old boy who they accused ofbeing a disbeliever.
The boy was tied between two cars that were driven in
opposite directions. It was terrible. While the challenges
faced by Member States to address these groups and
protect civilians are evident, security responses that do
not comply with international law inflict further harm;
they even risk aiding the very groups Governments
seek to combat.

The besiegement of civilians by Government forces
is unconscionable. Airstrikes and the use of explosive
weapons in populated areas by international coalitions
or individual Member States are an acute concern.
They have contributed to some of the highest numbers
of documented child casualties. Extrajudicial killings
and torture of civilians have also been reported in
territory liberated from armed groups. Governments
are increasingly using militias to fight in support of
their forces. These groups frequently lack respect for
or even understanding of international humanitarian
law. The ongoing reports of the recruitment and use of
children by this group of actors are another concern.

Counter-terrorism legislation is being broadly
applied in many situations without appropriate checks
and balances. Children are being apprehended on
the basis of alleged links to non-State armed groups
or of expansive interpretations of protecting national
security. Civilian courts are being marginalized and
juvenile justice is non-existent. Children can be held for
months or even years by military or intelligence actors.
Ifa child goes before ajudge, it is often in a military or
special court where due process and fair trial standards
are sorely lacking.

Children have even been sentenced to death. Just
two weeks ago in Somalia, I met boys condemned to
death for their alleged association with Al-Shabaab.
This cannot be an acceptable outcome for children
when they are rescued from armed groups. Many
have been abducted and forcibly recruited and are
primarily victims. Detention is also employed in some
situations as a tactic to recruit and use children for
intelligence-gathering purposes. I cannot emphasize
enough the danger they are put in when they are used in
this way. Reports of children being executed by armed
groups for suspicion of collaboration with Government
forces are all too common.

The lack of respect for international humanitarian
law is also having ramifications beyond conflict zones.
As the Secretary-General noted, children are being
displaced in ever-increasing numbers. Unfortunately,
the response of some Member States has not always
been in the best interests of children. We must do more,
including by supporting the small number of conflict-
affected Member States that host 90 per cent of the
refugee population in providing basic services.

While the overall picture today is not positive,
we cannot forget that progress has been achieved and
continues in many places. I would like to seize the
opportunity of briefing the Council in the twentieth
year since the creation of the mandate to briefly reflect
on some key accomplishments. Since the Secretary-
General's first report to this body (S/2000/7l2), more
than 115,000 children associated with parties to conflict
have been released as a result of dialogue and action
plans. To date, 25 action plans have been signed with
parties to conflict; nine parties have fully complied and
were delisted in Chad, Cote d'Ivoire, Nepal, Sri Lanka,
and Uganda.

The Children, Not Soldiers campaign has also
helped to consolidate the emerging global consensus
that child soldiers should not be used in conflict. With
the Government of the Sudan signing an action plan
earlier this year, the United Nations is now engaged in
implementing a written commitment with all Member
States listed for recruitment and use of children. Since
the launch of the campaign, there has been a significant
reduction in verified cases of the recruitment and use
of children by national security forces, especially in
Afghanistan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Myanmar. I call on all concerned Governments and
on all those who can provide support to do their utmost
to fully implement these action plans.

Peace processes continue to represent a vital
opportunity to engage with parties to conflict on child
protection. Most recently, in Colombia, the Government
and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia - Ejercito del Pueblo concluded an historic
agreement to separate and reintegrate all children
associated with the armed group. The agreement's
successful implementation will be an important signal
to parties to other protracted conflicts that committed
dialogue can lead to results.

The United Nations is also engaged in dialogue with
listed armed groups in the Central African Republic,
Mali, Myanmar, the Philippines, the Sudan and South
Sudan. Years of work with Governments to improve
legislative frameworks, build institutional capacity
and address challenges, such as birth registrations, are
bearing fruit. I am pleased to say that this engagement
has helped thousands of children in the past 18 months,
as mentioned by the Secretary-General in his statement.
I urge national authorities to support ongoing and future
discussions with armed groups on action plans so that
many more can benefit.

The coordinated action generated by this mandate
is at the heart of these achievements. The dedication
and tireless efforts of Member States, United Nations
colleagues, civil society and many more have and
continue to bring about positive change for boys and
girls living in communities ravaged by war. This
shows that when parties to conflict faithfully engage
and where there is political space to act on behalf of
children, we are able to achieve results.

We are mandated to work and to achieve results
with Governments and non-State armed groups,
operating in the world's most difficult environments.
As the Secretary-General noted, the goal of the report
before the Council today is not to cause discomfort,
but rather to bring about change for boys and girls
confronted by violations the international community
considers abhorrent. Our work often involves a difficult
balancing act, but the tools developed by the Council to
address grave violations against children are invaluable.
The progress I have just outlined demonstrates that they
are pragmatic, constructive and powerful enough to
convince parties to conflict of the urgent need to protect
children. Our success will depend on our impartiality,
on the credibility of the tools at our disposal, and on the
international community's support for our work. I want
to reiterate my support for our dedicated colleagues on
the ground who work tirelessly to achieve results.

Despite successes over the years, there is no denying
that the overall picture of violations in situations of
armed conflict is extremely worrisome. Concerned
Governments bear the primary responsibility for the
protection of civilians. The United Nations stands
ready to support Governments in their efforts to
protect children and help address violations outlined
in the report, but we cannot make up for the lack of
political will.

Others in this Chamber have a critical role to
support these efforts. As members of the Security
Council and the international community, they can and
must do more to address the root causes of the suffering
of children. Greater efforts must be made to prioritize
conflict prevention and support peace processes,
ensure respect for international humanitarian, human
rights and refugee law, and seek accountability when
violations are committed. Impunity remains in times
of war; this organ has a crucial role to play in ending it.

The number of crises we are faced with today will
test our capacity in 2016 and for many years into the
future. We face a considerable challenge and we need
creative ways to support initiatives and programmes
to protect children. I call on Member States to ensure
adequate resources for education and health services
in emergencies and to provide financial and technical
support to effective reintegration programmes for
former child soldiers. These initiatives are vital if we
are to build long-term sustainable peace and security.

This mandate and the action it continues to generate
represent a beacon of hope for millions of children
affected by war. Our capacity to work together, to
generate will to untangle the most difficult situations,
will have a decisive impact on the present and future of
millions of children.
