Mr. Ubalijoro (Rwanda): My delegation is more than
pleased with the positive ongoing operations of the United
Nations Mission in Haiti (UNMIH), especially at a time
when we are all thirsty for United Nations success stories.

My delegation attributes the present success of
UNMIH in part to the transparency exercised by UNMIH
personnel in keeping the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General informed about the state of Haitian
public opinion as reflected in the local press and radio
network. We believe that this approach somewhat
encourages a climate of trust and cooperation between the
United Nations system and the Haitian people, due to the
fact that both sides work within a framework in which
their respective responsibilities and competences are well
defined.

My delegation is also pleased by the fact that, since
the transition from the multinational force to UNMIH, the
security situation in Haiti has greatly improved,
particulary in Port-au-Prince. My delegation would also
like to pay tribute to the Haitian national security forces
for having contributed to the relative security currently
enjoyed by all Haitians.

However, my delegation would like to stress the
imperative need for the new members of the Haitian
National Police to take up their duties in the country's
cities and villages, as the present interim public security
force becomes more assertive. For my delegation, it is of
paramount importance for Haitians to regain their full
sovereignty over all their territory as they assume the
responsibility for law and order in their country.

My delegation welcomes the United Nations project
for the training of prosecutors in coordination with a
USAID project to train Haitian lawyers at the Bordeaux
Justice Academy in France. We believe indeed that
personnel training and retraining are crucial to making the
changes that are needed, such as a break with the cycle of
impunity, in order to allow improvement in the
performance of the judiciary.

As members know, we welcomed the Security
Council's decision to coordinate UNMIH's peace-keeping
mission with development activities, a proposal to which
my delegation attaches the utmost importance. As the
restoration of constitutional order, dialogue and
cooperation takes its course, my delegation looks forward
to the establishment of a climate based on frank, concrete
and constructive collaboration between the international
community and the Government of Haiti.
On this matter, my delegation strongly hopes that
cooperation activities in Haiti will move from emergency
and ad hoc interventions to strategically planned,
programmed and coordinated development interventions
with a long-term perspective. In this connection, we call
upon the moral authority of all international and non-
governmental organizations and key multilateral

 

institutions to work in close coordination with the local
Haitian authorities in order to achieve these objectives,
which will demonstrate their dedication, goodwill and
commitment to helping a people that is desperately in need.

My delegation would also like to commend the Paris
Club creditors for having agreed to renegotiate Haiti's
bilateral debt. The debt reduction that has been made in
favour of Haiti will stimulate the economic growth of Haiti
because it will partially decrease Haiti's reliance on
international financial assistance intended for post-conflict
relief, which is unfortunately often slow, thus accelerating
Haiti's movement towards economic recovery. Such
assistance is indeed ideal and it should be applied to all
countries in post-conflict situations, because of the specific
necessity for a longer process in the reinvigoration of their
economies.

Finally, we agree with the Secretary-General's
observation on the need to sustain a secure and stable
environment in order to promote the economic, social and
institutional development necessary for a lasting restoration
of democracy in Haiti. It is in for this reason that my
delegation has voted to extend UNMIH's mandate for a
period of seven months in order to enable a new,
constitutionally elected Government fully to assume power
in Haiti.

