Mr. Munyambo: I thank the members of the
Security Council for their appreciation of the efforts of
United Nations police (UNPOL).

I would like to respond to the question from the
representative of Malaysia on the role of UNPOL in the
United Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan
during the crisis. UNPOL did indeed play a very big
role during and even after the crisis, including in such
areas as search operations, crowd control and access
control at gates and the deployment of robust patrols,
even outside the civilian protection camps. I would
also like to emphasize the importance of understanding
the fear about what was happening at the beginning
of the crisis. In Malakal in particular, we deployed
additional formed police units (FPUs) to reinforce the
city, while during the crisis in Wau we also deployed
FPUs transferred from Bentiu. During the crisis in Juba
we were protecting four categories of people - those in
the protection-of-civilian sites fleeing the bullets; other
internally displaced persons; and Dinka and Nuer,
whom we had to separate, since they could not be mixed
owing to their perceived threats to one another. We also
had other categories of people, including non-citizens
doing business outside, including Eritreans, Ethiopians,
Ugandans and some Kenyans, who also ran for
protection to the protection-of-civilians sites. So I can
say that we played a major role in the protection of all
of those categories of people during the crisis. After
the crisis, we continued to draw the lessons learned and
training and working with other components to ensure
the protection of civilians.

To respond quickly to the question posed by the
Ambassador of Egypt on what we are doing with regard
to building the capacity of the South Sudanese national
police, I want to recall that while we do not have the
mandate of capacity-building, there is a window of
opportunity with respect to the joint integrated police.
Indeed, in this regard, we have tried to develop a
training curriculum and also provide the instructor who
will be conducting the training of the joint integrated
police. So far 500 have assembled, and we will continue
engagements with them.

