Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Our delegation is grateful to our colleagues
in the Security Council for the support they gave to the
Russian initiative to organize a Council mission on the
Kosovo issue. We are fully convinced that the outcome
of this trip to the Balkans is reflected in its report and
that this initiative was timely and necessary.

For us, the idea of the mission was that in order
to resolve the Kosovo issue, the Security Council
needed full information on the current situation of the
settlement process. It is difficult to overestimate the
importance of Council members having the opportunity
to form their own objective View, on the ground, of the
situation with regard to the implementation of
resolution 1244 (1999), including achievement of the
standards that have been approved by the international
community for Kosovo, particularly with regard to
ensuring equal rights and security for ethnic minorities
in the province.

I would like to express our thanks to the
Permanent Representative of Belgium, Ambassador
Verbeke, for the high professional leadership he
provided to the Council mission. We are also grateful
for the leadership of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and of
07-33839

the Kosovo Force (KFOR) and also to the staff of the
Secretariat here in New York for providing assistance
in the conduct of the mission.

The mission's programme was wide-ranging and
multifaceted. The central elements in its intense
working meetings were the substantive talks between
the members of the Security Council and President
Tadic, Prime Minister Kostunica and other Serb
politicians in Belgrade, as well as the exchange of
views with leaders in the province of Pristina. Also
important were the meetings with representatives of
Albanian and Serbian communities, the Serbian
Orthodox Church hierarchy and other faiths in Kosovo
and delegates of Kosovo minorities, as well as with the
leaders of UNMIK and KFOR. The mission's contacts
with representatives of NATO and the European Union
in Brussels and with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in Vienna were informative.

What the Security Council members saw and
heard during the trip to the Balkans is reflected in the
mission's report. It gives in general a complete and
balanced picture of the current situation in Kosovo, and
it shows what has been achieved and what still needs to
be done in terms of filling the gaps in implementing
resolution 1244 (1999) and the standards.

Council members saw some progress in terms of
legislation and in the process of establishing functional
provincial institutions. However, the results that have
been achieved in Kosovo in terms of establishing
normal and dignified living conditions for all the
population and establishing the basis for a multi-ethnic
community in which all members of all communities
could live together in equal conditions of security can
in no way be called satisfactory.

No peripheral positive elements can compensate
for the shortcomings in implementing the key elements
of resolution 1244 (1999) and the international
standards, particularly with regard to the return of non-
Albanian internally displaced persons. We cannot
accept the situation where, of more than 220,000 Serbs
who previously lived in the province, eight years later
no more than five per cent have returned; where, of a
Serb community once 40,000 strong in Pristina, today
there are only 87; and where, in Pec, there were
formerly 18,000 Serbs, there are now fewer than 10.

The efforts by the international presence clearly
have not brought the necessary results. It seems that
the structures have been set up and the mechanisms
have been provided, but the people are not returning to
the province. We have seen the situation in Svinjara,
where there are still empty houses for internally
displaced persons. Mission members could see for
themselves that the Kosovo Serbs, with all their heart,
want to return to their homes in Kosovo.

All this clearly demonstrates the continuing
serious obstacles in the return process. As stated in the
report of the mission, the most important of these were
the concerns of Kosovo Serbs regarding security and
freedom of movement, the lack of economic prospects
and the problems and lack of coordination in the
structures intended to assist the return of refugees and
internally displaced persons. The return of refugees
would not be facilitated by early decisions
predetermining Kosovo's status.

During the mission on the Kosovo issue, Security
Council members could see for themselves the
miserable situation of isolation still experienced by the
majority of Kosovo Serbs, particularly in village
enclaves. A clear example of that is the situation of
Serbs in Orahovac. I should mention that this situation
is very different from the one in northern Mitrovica,
where a significant number of Albanians live alongside
Serbs.

Meeting with representatives of the Serbian
communities, members of the Security Council mission
could see for themselves that the situation that existed
in March 2004 - when there was large-scale anti-Serb
violence - has not been overcome, which has
undermined Serbs' confidence in their future. The
wounds of the 1999 conflict have not healed. The
continuation of these trends in the effort to achieve a
multi-ethnic Kosovo may be seen through the lack of
success achieved in the international community's
efforts to establish multi-ethnic reconciliation in the
province.

Resolving that situation will require considerable
time and effort. The Security Council mission received
promises from the Pristina authorities that they would
implement the standards. However, as we have stressed
many times in the Council, we must consider the
concrete measures actually being taken to reassure
non-Albanians. The efforts being made are clearly not
sufficient, as shown by the lack of Kosovo Serbs in the
province's institutions of self-government. Measures
must be taken to ensure that there are no obstacles to
the return of refugees and that the multi-ethnic fabric
of Kosovo society is restored.

We believe it is extremely important that the
Security Council received confirmations from NATO
authorities, the international presence in Kosovo and
the provincial authorities that no ethnically motivated
violence would be tolerated and that violence would
not be allowed to define the political process.

We note that the international presence is
prepared to continue providing reliable protection for
Kosovo religious sites. With regard to Serbian
Orthodox churches in Kosovo, we must express our
regret that, during our meeting with Bishop Artemije,
we noted that no progress has been made in rebuilding
the churches destroyed during the anti-Serb
demonstrations in 2004.

The Russian Federation continues to believe that
imposing any decision on the status of Kosovo would
be counterproductive. We noted a consensus regarding
that point not only among the authorities in Serbia and
Belgrade, but also among the representatives of Serb
communities with whom the mission was unable to
meet. In accordance with norms and principles that are
internationally recognized, including in Europe,
concerning the rights and status of minorities, any
decision on status must be supported by all the major
ethnic communities in Kosovo, including, of course,
Kosovo Serbs. The Security Council has emphasized
on many occasions that any future decision on status
must be acceptable to the entire population of the
province.

The Council has clearly established that political
progress in defining Kosovo's future status requires
continued implementation of the standards. Those two
tracks, of course, are closely interlinked.
Unfortunately, the talks on status were hastily and
prematurely suspended, and, as the Security Council
has seen, standards implementation is far from
attaining its intended objectives. Both factors confirm
the need to give both parties the time needed to achieve
a negotiated settlement.

Once again, we reiterate our View that the
proposal by the Special Envoy, Mr. Ahtisaari, cannot
provide the basis for a final settlement on Kosovo from
the Security Council. Adopting a plan based on that
proposal would not only clearly set a negative
precedent for international practice, but would also
have dangerous consequences for regional and
international stability: by rewarding separatism it
would encourage that phenomenon in other regions,
and could spark a chain reaction that would eventually
affect regions throughout the world.

We have a constructive alternative to the ideas set
out in Mr. Ahtisaari's proposal. It includes continued
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999), taking the
ongoing talks into account. But the elements in the
Special Envoy's proposal that can be considered as
enjoying the support of both parties should be
implemented without waiting for the negotiating
process to conclude. The status situation must be
resolved on the basis of a compromise between both
parties. We must patiently continue the negotiation
process while the standards are being implemented.

We note in particular that, as the Security
Council's visit to Belgrade showed, the Serbian party is
open to continued dialogue with Pristina and is
prepared to demonstrate flexibility in the future
negotiation process. We hope that the Kosovo Albanian
side will also find a way to make compromises and
continue this process.

