Allow me to express our sincere appreciation to Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo for her insightful briefing. The Americas, our region, is one of peace. We have a rich and successful history of democratic transitions that have ultimately translated into sustainable development, despite the many challenges. At the outset, let us be clear about the position of the Dominican Republic, not only in the particular case of Venezuela, but with respect to any other matter involving accusations of this magnitude. We reiterate our full respect and commitment to the principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations for the collective benefit of safeguarding international peace and security. The Dominican Republic rejects any use of force or threat thereof against the sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence of any country. Our demonstrated interest in the resolution of the Venezuelan crisis was evident when we facilitated a dialogue between the Government and the opposition in Venezuela in order to clear the path for a democratic process in the country. All these efforts were made in solidarity and based on our clear conviction that it is only through dialogue and peaceful means that a solution to the crisis in Venezuela can be achieved. Likewise, we vehemently reject and condemn any act of terrorism as unjustifiable under any circumstances, recognizing the need to combat this scourge. We also reject the illicit trafficking by international criminal organizations of drugs, money, small arms and light weapons, and persons. The regional implications of this crisis are great, but they are greatest for the Venezuelans themselves. Either as refugees or as persons enduring a harsh years- long economic crisis, they are the ones paying the highest price. In this context, we continue to have serious concerns about the dire humanitarian situation in the country, particularly with the advent of the coronavirus disease pandemic, and sincerely hope that priorities are established to provide and facilitate assistance to those in need and that the necessary measures to contain the spread of the virus are undertaken. Allowing for a democratic transition to take place without further delay through the holding of free, fair and credible elections needs to be at the centre of all international efforts, in full respect of the United Nations Charter and the legitimate aspirations of the Venezuelan population, including those living outside their country. In the light of the accusations presented and the discussions held thus far, we also call for an independent investigation of the facts before jumping prematurely to conclusions. We long for a path to open for Venezuelans where the fulfilment of their inherited individual and collective rights and aspirations are guaranteed and where a prosperous Venezuela regains its rightful place in the orchestra of democracies of the Americas.
