Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We believe that today's Security Council
meeting on the subject of the Council's working
methods is very significant. This is now the sixth
year in a row that the Council has discussed the issue
in an open format with the participation of the wider
membership of the United Nations, and it is testament
to our continued attention to Member States' proposals
on how to improve the procedural aspects of our
work - in the understanding that those very working
methods and decisions on how they might be modified
belong to the Council itself, that the issues relating to
them are by nature highly sensitive in the context of
Council reform, and that no populist attitudes should be
tolerated in their discussion.

By definition, the purpose of reforms and
improvements in the work of the Security Council should
be to make it function more effectively and efficiently
in the interests of more completely accomplishing its
tasks in the business of maintaining peace and security,
which is the primary responsibility of the Council.
Much has been said about transparency in the Council,
and it is of course important if the members of the
United Nations and the international community are
to achieve the broadest possible understanding of the
Council's actions and the thinking behind its decisions.
We believe that transparency, in its good form, is
exemplified in the Security Council's interactive
briefings for United Nations members at the beginning
and end of each month, along with the corresponding
press conferences. But transparency cannot and should
not cross the line beyond which it would interfere with
Council members' frank, substantive discussions.

Discussions ofthe working methods ofthe Security
Council often raise issues relating to the broader topic
of how successfully the Council handles its fulfilment
of the tasks entrusted to it under the Charter of the
United Nations. But this is more a question of politics.
Measuring its success by the number of decisions taken
or not taken would be a simplistic approach. We have
heard the critique that the Council sometimes usurps the
prerogatives of other organs of the United Nations. We
share those concerns. In that regard, our colleagues on
the Council are well aware that we maintain a reserved
attitude to initiatives that seek the consideration of
generic subjects in the Council. When practically the
entire membership of the General Assembly is in the
Chamber, the Assembly - or other relevant United
Nations bodies - is where such problems should be
discussed. We believe that the Council should focus on
country-level subjects and issues on which it can and
should make concrete decisions.

I would like to emphasize that all of these are
important topics, but in our opinion they do not belong
under the heading of the working methods of the
Security Council. And, of course, such fundamental
positions as the right ofveto have nothing to do with the
working methods of the Council. The suggestion that
weakening the right of veto would help to improve the
Security Council's effectiveness is deeply deluded and
would in fact have the opposite effect. The result would
be the rubber-stamping of points of view reflecting the
opinions of only one group of States. That is not why
the United Nations was created. In order to make the
Security Council more effective and responsive to the
realities of our time, it is essential that a thoroughjob be
done of improving its working methods. That is the aim
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions. We note that the work of
the Informal Working Group runs, with characteristic
precision, in harmony with the substantive and
constructive action of all interested Member delegations
of the Organization.

In our opinion, an example of a key area of
improvement in the Council's working methods would
be its interaction with other United Nations bodies on
matters that lie beyond its remit. A current challenge
is to further improve effective forms and methods of
dialogue with the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council, other United Nations entities, regional
organizations and international partners.

We must develop the practice of operational
consultations among the Security Council membership,
troop-contributing countries and peacekeeping
operations. We favour a reasonable increase in the
number of open debates, in the understanding that
closed consultations are highly important. In that
context, the Arria Formula is helpful.

With respect to so-called horizon-scanning, we
must not confuse it with the Council's consideration of
topical questions not on its agenda that concern specific
members. The Russian delegation continues to do so,
as do others. The Secretariat is capable of the same.
In sum, the methodology could be used more often.
As has been shown in practice, the horizon-scanning
sessions have evolved into provisional discussions of
issues that Council members themselves plan to discuss
at a later time, or that are beyond the Council's purview
but are being discussed for the sole purpose of using
a modern format. When the Council's programme of
work is extremely busy, as it is, and international life is
replete with unpleasant issues, such conduct becomes
unnecessary.

The Council's working methods are subject to
ongoing improvements and adaptation to contemporary
life. Only a few years ago, we launched the practice of
holding video-teleconferencing briefings, which have
become very popular. Further such examples include the
use of information and communications technologies in
the context of the Council's consideration and adoption
of documents and decisions. These have accelerated
the Council's response timing, which is very important
in view of the fact that the Council is extremely busy
and holds 10 meetings per week, such technology is
helpful. We can also intensify international relations
and increase the number of items on the agenda.

The Russian delegation is convinced that the
Council would gain from democratizing its work, which
could lead to a better distribution of the responsibilities
of so-called penholder institutions. Individual Council
members should not view specific countries or regions
as their own purview. We believe that the prevailing
view that penholders on topical matters have the right
to speak first is not correct. In our view, that is justified
only in the case of draft decisions and when delegations
introduce those to the Council.

With respect to other situations, discussions should
benefit from greater flexibility and be free ofdogma. The
draft version of presidential note S/2013/630 was before
the Council yesterday, seeking to provide increased
democratization in the Council's working methods and
increased discipline in terms of participation in the

Council's meetings. We do not consider it normal when
some Council members participate in consultations or
even official meetings only at the expert-level, rather
than at the level of Permanent Representative or Deputy
Permanent Representative. Such conduct lowers the
political significance of the discussion.

My delegation is prepared to participate in
constructive discussions on this and other initiatives
under the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions with a view to further
improving the working methods of the Security Council,
the ultimate goal of which is to support maximum
effectiveness and efficiency of the Council's work.

