Mr. Laher (South Africa): We join others in
congratulating you, Mr. President, on Lebanon's
assumption of the presidency for September, and
express our gratitude to India for its able stewardship
of the Council in August. We would also like to thank
Ambassador Nestor Osorio of Colombia for his
briefing on the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006).

South Africa reiterates its concern regarding the
threat posed by weapons of mass destruction. We
believe that the ongoing possession of nuclear
weapons, irrespective of where they are, continues to
pose a threat and a danger to international peace and
security. We therefore pledge our support to the Chair
of the Committee, with the understanding that South
Africa would neither accept a nuclear-weaponized Iran
nor the denial of the right of any signatory to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons to
exploit peaceful applications of nuclear technology,
with appropriate safeguards.

South Africa, however, remains deeply concerned
about the fact that it continues to be impossible for the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) to
provide credible assurances regarding the peaceful
nature of Iran's nuclear programme, and strongly urges
Iran to cooperate fully with the IAEA to resolve this
outstanding issue. The IAEA is the only international
authority that can verify and provide the necessary
assurances as to the peaceful nature of Iran's nuclear
programme.

South Africa is pleased that the 1737 Committee
has been able to engage in a constructive dialogue on
the matters before us. The revised guidelines for the
conduct of our work have provided us with a good way
forward on the implementation of the current sanctions
regime. We trust that the discussions of the programme
of work will continue in the same constructive manner.
We also believe that the implementation assistance
notices provided by the Panel of Experts are a good
basis and a work-in-progress at this stage. We trust that
constructive political dialogue will continue, with the
goal of peaceful resolution of this dispute.

