Mr. Heusgen (Germany): The fact that Peru has put
the issue of transition at the top of the Council's agenda
and that you, Minister, are here suggest that, for Peru,
today's meeting is the flagship event if its presidency.
You put the issue of transition on the agenda and
Germany fully supports it because we deeply believe
that the Security Council has to look at that issue.

The Council must not limit its work to addressing
the origin of a conflict through to the silencing of
weapons; it must look at the overall picture. It is very
important that the issue of transition be considered. As
the Secretary-General said in his briefing, very often,
when peacekeepers leave and the conflict has ended,
the international community no longer considers the
situation in the country and therefore does not see if
the root causes of the conflict have disappeared. It is
therefore very important that we consider the issue
of transition and that the relevant instruments be
developed. Such instruments also contribute to conflict
prevention, which is something we consider extremely
important. We must therefore address the root causes:
poverty, exclusion, the lack of respect for human rights
and the effects of climate change, inter alia.
Nevertheless, we must of course ensure that we
implement transition correctly. As has been underlined
by our Russian colleague, national sovereignty and
national ownership of the process are vital. There is
sometimes a tendency - and I feel that this might be
happening in current cases - for countries on the path
to peacebuilding and from which the Blue Helmets are
withdrawing to say that they want to take ownership,
that they want the United Nations to leave and that
they want to regain sovereignty. However, we believe
that they will regain sovereignty much more swiftly if
they accept the help of the international community.
Sovereignty is strengthened with the help of the
international community in addressing the root causes
of conflict. In this context, I would like to thank the
Ambassador of Colombia and through him President
Ivan Duque Marquez who said, when the Security
Council visited Colombia, that he wanted the United
Nations special political mission to continue to work in
the country owing to the added value that it recognizes
in the engagement of the United Nations.

When addressing the root causes that I mentioned
earlier, the international community is instrumental in
coping with the challenges. I would once again like to
reiterate my support for the Secretary-General's words
and the reform measures that have been undertaken
to achieve a coherent One United Nations approach,
which, through the resident-coordinator system, is able
to assist in country situations with all of the relevant
instruments. The Security Council has recently
visited a number of places - from Mali, to Bogota, to
Baghdad - where the One United Nations approach
has been applied.

The Peacebuilding Commission is extremely
important, and I wish to thank Colombia for having
sent its Minister for Foreign Affairs to attend today's
meeting, thereby underscoring, through his presence,
the importance of the Peacebuilding Commission. Also
mentioned was the Peacebuilding Fund whose ability
to disperse funds rapidly supports the quick impact
projects that are extremely helpful during transition
periods. Germany, together with our friends from
the United Kingdom, with whom I believe we are
competing again for distinction as the largest donor to
the Peacebuilding Fund, encourage others to support
the Fund.

With regard to the help being provided to countries,
we now have many examples of good cooperation
with other stakeholders and regional organizations.
There are so many cases now - for example, the
Central African Republic, as has been mentioned,
and Colombia - in which the United Nations, with
the support of the African Union and/or the European
Union, is working coherently to improve country
situations, for which we are extremely grateful. I do
not know how frequently the World Bank has been
involved, but representatives of the World Bank and
the African Development Bank are here among us, and
they are very important partners.

I would like to pick up on what the representative
from the African Development Bank said with regard
to the regional crisis in the Sahel: that we must move
away from simply looking at one country. I fully agree
with him in that we must adopt a regional outlook in
the Sahel. The Council should be more proactive and
do more to support the States of the Group of Five for
the Sahel because we will not be able to stabilize one
country without first stabilizing the entire region. I
also believe in the importance of the involvement of
the private sector, as has already been mentioned. We
will not be able to stabilize countries and attain the
Sustainable Development Goals, which essentially
tackle the root causes, if we do not have the involvement
of the private sector.

To briefly return to the issue of local ownership,
our Russian colleague mentioned the importance of
national reconciliation in resolving conflicts. We must
seek national reconciliation, inclusiveness, including
the involvement of women and youth - both Minister
Carlos Holmes Trujillo Garcia of Colombia and
Minister Nestor Popolizio Bardales of Peru mentioned
the importance of including women and youth and civil
society in the political dialogue. We must ensure the
participation of all stakeholders in order to achieve
national reconciliation. We will only be able to stabilize
a situation through good governance, respect for the rule
of law and accountability, and by tackling corruption.

In conclusion, I wish to thank Peru once again
for having put this topic on the agenda. I believe the
Council has to look much more systematically at
transition - even though we already do so to some
extent - from the first to the final mandate that we draw
up for a mission. We must think about transition and, as
a body, continue to assess country situations, even after
United Nations peacekeepers have been withdrawn.

