Mr. Ahsan (Bangladesh): Madam President, I
welcome you to the presidency this month. We wish to
thank Ambassador Richard Ryan and his very able
team for their excellent work in the presidency last
month. We also wish to recognize the presence of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Liberia at this important
meeting. The Bangladesh delegation commends
Ambassador Mahbubani for his detailed briefing on
Friday to the Security Council and also for today's
introductory remarks. We thank the Panel of Experts
for the very detailed and substantive report, and
Ambassador Ayafor of the Panel for today's
presentation. We appreciate their efforts to maintain
such a high standard of work. Mr. Ed Tsui of the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, has
presented a very useful account of the humanitarian
situation in Liberia, and we thank him for this.

Sanctions on Liberia are having the intended
results in advancing the peace process in Sierra Leone.
We believe that the Security Council's focus on Liberia
is useful for sustaining the momentum towards peace in
Sierra Leone and the region. We shall continue to
support measures taken by the Council to attain that
objective. Nothing short of full compliance with
resolution 1343 (2001) is acceptable.

We agree that all the recommendations made in
the report merit careful consideration by the Security
Council. Therefore, it may be useful to have an in-
depth consideration of these recommendations by the
Liberia committee after today's open debate.

The work of the Panel of Experts proves the
effectiveness of continuing the monitoring of the
situation by independent and credible mechanisms. We
support the recommendation concerning a short
extension of the mandate of the Panel of Experts by
next April to May.

Regarding the specific recommendations on the
various issues, let me briefly mention four points.

First, we are not very sure whether an extension
of the arms embargo to the three Mano River Union
countries will produce the result that the Council seeks.
We value the recommendations concerning
development of a standard, universal End User
Certificate that addresses the demand side of the
problem. However, we noted the lack of attention in
the report of the need to have regulatory frameworks
addressing the arms producing and exporting countries,
which would look into the supply side of the problem
as well.

Secondly, on civil aviation, there are useful
recommendations in the report. However, in the
absence of an effective air traffic control system in the
region and of primary, or even secondary, radar, much
of the airspace of West Africa remains unmonitored.
Planes can easily fly in and out without being detected.
We can shut down the companies that are involved in
arms trafficking at a given time; recommendations
have been made in this regard. However, the traffickers
will only have to open new front companies to be back
in business. We have to find ways to help the countries
of the region develop an effective air traffic control
system to monitor their airspace so that the sanctions
are not undermined.

Thirdly, we are looking carefully at the
recommendations concerning timber and the maritime
registry. We have noted that the Panel gave a lot of
consideration to coming up with recommendations that
avoid hurting the Liberian economy in the long run,
which we believe is not the objective of the Council.
This matter has to be given further careful
consideration by the Council and the Liberia
committee.

Finally, I wish to mention a more general point on
the impact of sanctions on the Liberian population. We
have been confronted with various statistics regarding
the gravity of the impact. Putting aside the issue of
their authenticity, it is clear that there will be a
humanitarian impact. The Security Council should not
only continue to monitor the impact of sanctions on
Liberia; it must also come up with ways to mitigate the
suffering of the Liberian population. Otherwise, the
Council will not only lose the propaganda battle on the
ground, but it will very soon also be seen to be hurting
the innocent rather than those at whom sanctions are
targeted. If the humanitarian situation is aggravated, it
can definitely undermine international support for
sanctions. We have already seen that humanitarian
assistance to Liberia has dropped in recent months. It is
important that humanitarian assistance be de-linked
from the sanctions, and we call upon all donors to
come forward in assisting the Liberian population in
mitigating their suffering.

