Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I
would like to welcome Foreign Minister Jeremie back
to the Security Council. I would also like to welcome
Foreign Minister Hoxhaj to the Council today and to
congratulate him on assuming his new position. I also
thank Special Representative Zannier for his briefing
and for his service on behalf of the international
community.

Let me begin by congratulating the people of
Kosovo on the election of President Jahjaga, the first
woman to hold Kosovo's presidency and the first
female head of State in the Balkan region. Her election
is historic and heartening.

I will focus on three key points today. First,
Kosovo has once again demonstrated the resilience of
its young, multi-ethnic democratic institutions, even in
the face of political challenges. The new Kosovo
Government was constituted shortly after our last
Security Council meeting on this subject (see S/PV.6483). It has the most robust, top-level, multi-
ethnic representation the country has ever known. We
are hopeful that the new Government will refocus
Kosovo's energies on political and economic reforms
to improve citizens' lives and further integrate Kosovo
into the international community. We also welcome the
agreement between the governing coalition and leading
opposition parties that followed the 30 March
Constitutional Court ruling, which led to a peaceful
transition of power from President Pacolli to President
Jahjaga. We look forward to working with her and the
new Government as they complete the important
electoral reforms that were central to that agreement.

Secondly, Kosovo's institutions deserve the
strong support of the Council and all parties present
today as they work to extend the rule of law throughout
Kosovo, including the north. The European Union Rule
of Law Mission (EULEX) plays an important role in
assisting Kosovo institutions develop a professional
police force and judiciary, in line with European Union
(EU) standards. NATO's Kosovo Force (KFOR) and
EULEX continue to work with Kosovo border police to
prepare Kosovo for full control of its southern border,
and the Kosovo border police have assumed
responsibility for additional controls along the
Macedonia border. In recognition of the Kosovo
police's professional standards, KFOR has continued to
transfer responsibility for protecting Serbian Orthodox
Church sites to them without incident.

The overall security situation in Kosovo has been
relatively calm. We are encouraged by reports of
increased engagement with Kosovo institutions by
minority communities, including Kosovo Serbs. But
we remain deeply concerned by the actions of the so-
called parallel structures in northern Kosovo, which
answer to the Government of Serbia. These parallel
structures obstruct progress and freeze the
unacceptable conditions in the north.

The international community, along with the
Government of Kosovo, must ensure that Kosovo has a
country-wide police and judicial system that serves and
protects all communities and defends their members'
rights to lead safe, secure and productive lives. We still
witness threats of violence and acts of intimidation
directed at ordinary citizens and at the Kosovo
Government and international authorities. We have also
witnessed the obstruction of the census in northern
Kosovo and repeated efforts to block international
assistance projects. All of these actions come at the
expense of the people in the north, and none of these
actions should be tolerated.

Thirdly, we welcome EULEX'S decision to
investigate the serious allegations in the report by the
Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe.
EULEX has the jurisdiction and mandate to investigate
and prosecute the types of criminal activity alleged in
the report. We welcome Kosovo and Albania pledges to
cooperate fully with the EULEX investigation.

The United States, as a EULEX-participating
State, supports the Mission's activities. We are
evaluating how we can best support the investigation.
EULEX has already begun a follow-on investigation to
those conducted earlier by the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo and the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia. As others have said, nothing in relation to
the report's allegations would prevent EULEX from
undertaking this task. Kosovo law and the EU joint
action on EULEX explicitly provide for EULEX to
investigate and prosecute serious crimes, and to do so
independently.

Some assert that all investigations into war
crimes in the ex-Yugoslav realm have taken place
under Security Council auspices. That is incorrect.
Many cases have been and still are being handled in
domestic courts in the region, in Bosnia, Croatia and
Serbia.

In conclusion, I hope we will all take heart from
the great promise shown by this young country in its
three years of independence. We have been particularly
struck by the dynamic and engaged youth, who will
forge so much of Kosovo's future - young men and
women of all backgrounds who are working to deepen
civil society, build up democratic institutions, expand
economic opportunity and promote the rule of law.

The United States remains committed to a stable,
prosperous, multi-ethnic and democratic Kosovo that is
at peace with its neighbours. We continue to fully
support the EU-facilitated dialogue between Belgrade
and Pristina. We hope that it will lead to practical
solutions to the continuing challenges of daily life for
the people of Kosovo.

Seventy-five countries have now recognized
Kosovo. We call on all remaining countries to
contribute to stability in the region by welcoming
Kosovo into the international community through
formal recognition.

