Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We welcome the
Chief Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
(ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda, to the Council and thank
her for her briefing. We have taken careful note of the
sixteenth report of the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court, submitted to the Security Council
pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005). We also heard
the statement of the Permanent Representative of the
Sudan.

Like several other members of the Council, Pakistan
is not a signatory to the statue of the International
Criminal Court. However, Pakistan acknowledges the
rights and obligations of the States parties to the ICC.

Darfur remains one of the most complicated and
intractable issues on the agenda of the Security Council.
Darfur and other parts of the Sudan are suffering the
tragic consequences ofthat dispute. Pakistan supports a
durable and peaceful resolution of the situation in Darfur
through an inclusive political process that respects and
upholds the unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of the Sudan. The people of the Sudan will benefit from
conditions of peace and stability in Darfur. Creation
of such conditions is also vital for the security and
stability of the entire region.

The goal of durable peace in Darfur can be realized
only through a comprehensive, multipronged strategy.
Such a strategy should provide impetus to the political
process, promote a peaceful solution through dialogue,
justice and reconciliation, establish a conducive
security situation and address the human rights and
humanitarian aspects of the conflict in Darfur.

We reiterate our support for the efforts of the United
Nations, as well as the African Union, particularly its
High-level Implementation Panel, to achieve peace,
stability, justice and reconciliation in Darfur. The role
and positions of the regional organizations, especially
the African Union and the League of Arab States, as
well as the Organization ofIslamic Cooperation, should
be taken into account in our pursuit of justice in the
Darfur region.

Pakistan expresses concern at violations of
international human rights law and international
humanitarian law in the Darfur region. It is the
obligation of all States to guarantee and protect the
right to life of all their citizens. It is also the primary
responsibility of the Government of the Sudan, which
must take all necessary measures to investigate human
rights violations in Darfur and bring perpetrators to
justice.

At the same time, the actions of all parties in
Darfur need to be scrutinized and investigated.
The destabilizing activities of the Darfuri armed
rebel movements and attacks against civilians and
humanitarian workers should be strongly condemned
and thoroughly investigated. The perpetrators of such
attacks should be brought to justice. Sanctions should be
imposed against all armed movements that continue to
obstruct the peace process in Darfur and against those
involved in the violations of international humanitarian
and human rights law.

I conclude by reiterating that the overall objective
of the international community and the Council is the
attainment of durable peace, stability and justice in
the Sudan. We should harmonize and consolidate our
efforts for the early achievement of that objective.

