President Stephen: I would like to begin by
thanking Germany for hosting this important debate on
climate change and its implication for the maintenance
of international peace and security.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
Pacific small island developing States - the region
most vulnerable to climate change - namely, Fiji, the
Marshall Islands, Micronesia, Palau, Papua New
Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tuvalu, Tonga,
Vanuatu and my country, the Republic of Nauru - as
well as the countries of Maldives, Seychelles and
Timor-Leste.

Last month, the International Energy Agency
announced that in 2010 carbon dioxide emissions
reached their highest level in history. Last year also
tied as the hottest year on record, and the volume of
Arctic sea ice dropped to its lowest level since
measurements began, while catastrophic droughts,
forest fires and floods wreaked havoc on countries
around the world. Scientists now project that seas will
rise by a metre or more by the end of the century - a
level that could wipe out many small islands in the
Pacific and elsewhere. All this happened despite 20
years of negotiations to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions to a safe level.

We must now come to terms with an unsettling
reality: there is so much carbon dioxide in the
atmosphere that serious impacts are now unavoidable,
and we must prepare.

In my frustration, I often wonder where we would
be if the roles were reversed. What if the pollution
coming from our island nations was threatening the
very existence of the major emitters? What would be
the nature of today's debate be under those
circumstances? But that is not the world that we live
in, and this is not a hypothetical exercise for us. Many
of our countries face the single greatest security
challenge of all, that is, our survival. For that reason,
we have come to the Security Council today.

Because of climate change, our islands face
dangerous and potentially catastrophic impacts that
threaten to destabilize our societies and political
institutions. Our food security, water security and
public safety are already being undermined. Sea-level
rise is eroding our coastlines and in some cases is
damaging critical infrastructure. Loss of territory could
disrupt traditional systems of land ownership and spark
conflicts over land and other increasingly scarce
resources. Eventually, some islands may disappear
altogether, and with them thousands of years of
cultural heritage. That would force large numbers of
our citizens to relocate, first internally, then across
borders. Even with an ambitious new agreement to
address climate change, many of these impacts are now
unavoidable.

The Security Council has recognized that it has a
role in preventing conflict before it occurs, not just in
facilitating its resolution afterwards. For that reason, it
has recognized the necessity of addressing the root
causes of conflict, unconventional security threats that
can give rise to social tension and civil unrest, such as
poverty, underdevelopment, competition over natural
resources and HIV/AIDS. For such issues and others,
the Security Council has evaluated the problems and,
in concert with other organs of the United Nations, has
deployed a variety of tools to address them.

Today, we ask no less of the Council. The
international response to climate change must be
comprehensive, particularly given its global nature and
implications for every aspect of society.

Make no mistake: the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change - the UNFCCC - is
and must remain the primary forum for developing an
international strategy to mitigate climate change,
mobilize financial resources, and facilitate adaptation,
planning and project implementation. The General
Assembly must continue to address the links between
climate change and sustainable development.

Likewise, the Security Council has a clear role in
coordinating a response to the security implications of
climate change. In the 2009 General Assembly
resolution on climate change and its possible security
implications (resolution 63/281), we agreed that all
relevant organs of the United Nations, within their
respective mandates, should intensify their efforts to
address climate change, including its possible security
implication. An effective international response
requires disaster planning and preparedness, detailed
assessments of vulnerability and risk, more effective
multilateral coordination and preventive diplomacy.

In our conversations with Security Council
members, we have heard loud and clear that they
understand the security challenges faced by the Pacific
and other island nations and that they stand in
solidarity with us. However, solidarity demands more
than sympathetic words demonstrated by formally
recognizing that climate change is a threat to
international peace and security. It is a threat as great
as nuclear proliferation or terrorism, and it carries the
potential to destabilize Governments and ignite
conflict. Neither nuclear proliferation nor terrorism has
ever led to the disappearance of an entire nation,
though that is what we are confronted with today.

The Security Council has also asked us what
concrete steps it can take to address the issue. Allow
me to tell it.

The Council should start by requesting the
immediate appointment of a special representative on
climate and security. That individual's primary
responsibility should be to analyse the projected
security impacts of climate change so that the Council
and all Member States can understand what lies ahead.
The Council should also request an assessment of the
capacity of the United Nations system to respond to
such impacts so that vulnerable countries can be
assured that it is up to the task.

These proposals are the absolute minimum
required to move the international community from a
culture of reaction to one of preparedness. As the
Secretary-General concluded in his report on climate
change and its possible security implications, "the
international community must anticipate and prepare
itself to address a number of largely unprecedented
challenges posed by climate change for which existing
mechanisms may prove inadequate" (see A/64/350, p28).

Many countries have expressed concerns about
the Security Council encroaching on the mandate of the
General Assembly and the UNFCCC. We understand
and share this concern, which is why our proposals
have been narrowly tailored to address the security
implications of climate change. However, we are more
concerned about the physical encroachment of the
rising seas on our island nations.

We are deeply disappointed that there will be no
formal outcome to this debate. Let history recall that
once again we have sounded the alarm and the world
chose not to act. The Security Council must reflect
current geopolitical realities if it is to remain relevant,
both in its membership and in the substance of its
work. We applaud its recent decision to explore the
security implications of such divergent topics as
development; cultural and religious tolerance;
HIV/AIDS; and women, peace and security. Yet the
Council would render itself irrelevant if it chose to
ignore the biggest security threat of our time.

Let me be absolutely clear: The security risks of
climate change are all the more reason to urgently
reach a legally binding agreement under the UNFCCC.
The international community must work towards more
ambitious emissions reductions from all major
emitters. The current pledges are grossly inadequate
and would condemn many small Pacific States,
Members of the United Nations that belong to the
Alliance of Small Island States, and the world to a
future marked by widespread conflict and unrest.

The Security Council is entrusted with the
maintenance of international peace and security under
the United Nations Charter. Representative of many of
the world's current and aspiring Powers sit before me
today. I urge them not to bury their heads in the sand
and to seize this opportunity to lead. I implore them to
fulfil their mandate by dealing responsibly with the
security implications of climate change.

