Ms. Power (United States of America): I would
like to say a couple of words in response.

First of all, I think that it would be very useful if
the Russian Federation could circulate the results of its
investigation to the Council. Personally, having been
very concerned about Russian strikes - particularly
on hospitals in Aleppo and other areas that the Syrian
regime has decided to pursue during the cessation of
hostilities - we would welcome those investigations
but would also be curious about whether Russia, in
those investigations, has ever acknowledged harming
civilians in its strikes in the Syrian theatre. It would
be very useful to have that information shared with us.

The second point is, I think, more fundamental, as
one of the things that has created such division over the
Syria conflict. Fundamentally, if the like and the unlike
are lumped together, if the parties to the cessation of
hostilities are lumped together with those who have
rejected the cessation of hostilities, if civilians are
lumped together with the Al-Nusra Front and the
Islamic State in the Iraq and the Sham, and if those
who have been lumped together are targeted along with
terrorist groups, not only will innocents just minding
their own business who do not deserve to be targeted
be killed - something that has happened in spades and
that the Syrian regime has done from the beginning of
the conflict - but the seeds for more conflict will be
sown, more terrorists will be created and a conflict that
has gone on and caused too much heartbreak already
will be prolonged. Therefore, from a peace and security
standpoint, a core reason to distinguish between parties
to the cessation of hostilities and terrorist groups,
between terrorist fighters and civilians who find
themselves stuck in their vicinity is to save innocent
lives and to promote peace and security.

Thirdly, as I said in my earlier remarks, we are
deeply invested in the United States-Russian effort to
bring peace to Syria. I think it is fair to say that in the
early days of that effort we saw a material return and
significant benefit for some people in Syria. We saw
more access to besieged areas than we had ever seen
before. Every one of the besieged areas, as I also noted
my remarks, has now been reached, albeit some places
with only one convoy. We saw a reduction in violence,
which was a huge relief to people in those parts of
Syria who got to experience that reduction in horrific
violence.

But let us be real: the description at the outset of the
Russian Ambassador's remarks was not a description
of Syria. It might be a description of some kind of
Potemkin village in Syria, but Aleppo is burning.
Aleppo is being besieged. The single lifeline to the city,
and to nearly 300,000 people, has been cut off by this
regime, backed by that regime. We are deeply invested
in trying to make this work, but we have got to see the
siege of Aleppo end and access restored - or all of
our good intentions are going to be for naught and this
conflict is going to continue, along with the terrorist
threat and the refugee flow that emanate from it, with
all that has meant for the neighbouring countries and
for Europe, and all that it will mean for the global order.

Letus start with Aleppo. Let us get Aleppo right. Let
us save people. And let us continue to invest - again,
in the kind of cooperation that is needed to bring this
conflict to an end. Part of that cooperation means
distinguishing between terrorist actors and those who
would deliberately target civilians - as the regime
does - and those who do not.

