Ms. Gasri (France) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank the Prosecutor, Ms. Bensouda, for her report
and for her briefing to the Council. We also renew our
pledge of support for the Prosecutor, her teams and the
International Criminal Court (ICC).

It has now been more than 12 years since the
Security Council adopted resolution 1593 (2005). This
decision had very clear objectives - to render justice
to the victims of the most serious crimes, to prevent
the recurrence of atrocities in Darfur, and to promote
reconciliation and stability in the Sudan. Now, 12 years
after the adoption of the resolution, we see once again
that none of those objectives has been achieved and
that impunity prevails. Only legal action will put an
end to that situation. That is why France calls on all
Member States, most notably the Sudan, to implement
the arrest warrants issued by the International Criminal
Court and to honour their remaining obligations under
resolution 1593 (2005).

Without decisive Council action against impunity,
instability will continue to prevail in Darfur and civilians
will continue to be its primary victims. Admittedly, the
Secretary-General's recent reports on the situation in
Darfur have reported some encouraging developments
on the ground, such as improving conditions in
certain areas and unilateral declarations of cessation
of hostilities. The access restrictions imposed by the
Sudanese Government on the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) have
also eased. However, as the Prosecutor pointed out
in both her report and her briefing, civilians can be
protected only if those changes are sustained. To that
end, it is essential that the Sudanese authorities allow
UNAMID to implement its mandate in accordance with
the decisions of the Council and the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union.

Moreover, sources of violence and instability
persist and intercommunal violence remains one of
the main sources of violence in Darfur. Due to the of
the weak rule of law, banditry and crime continue. The
resumption of fighting between Government forces and
armed groups in May is indiscriminately affecting the
population. Militias, including those incorporated into
the Sudanese armed forces, such as the Rapid Support
Forces, are carrying out intolerable attacks on civilians
and sowing fear among the population. Their attacks
force civilians to leave their villages and, too often,
prevent them from returning home.

Let us not forget that today 2.7 million people
of Darfur - almost one-third of the region's
population - are still displaced. Ensuring their return
requires putting an end to all forms of violence and
addressing the root causes of the conflict. Breaking
the spiral of violence requires holding accountable
those who have fueled it. On the one hand, we owe
it to the victims, but on the other, it is essential for
moving forward.

France and its partners reaffirm the importance
of the obligation of all United Nations Member States
to cooperate with the Court, in accordance with the
resolutions adopted by the Council. That obligation
falls primarily to the Sudan, as it must enforce the
arrest warrants issued against its nationals for acts
committed within its territory and cooperate with the
Court, as required by resolution 1593 (2005).

States parties to the Rome Statute also have a special
role to play in honouring their statutory obligations to
cooperate with the ICC and to execute arrest warrants
for individuals found within their territory. In that
respect, we regret that this obligation has not yet been
kept by some of those States in recent months, and we
are grateful to the Prosecutor for following up on that
major issue.

In its bilateral relations with those countries, with
the Sudan and with its European partners, France will
continue to stress the importance it attaches to the fight
against impunity and its support for the ICC, and to call
on them to honour their international commitment to
cooperating with the Court. In that regard, the Council's
responsibility is clear. We must ensure effective
cooperation with the Court and, as the Prosecutor notes,
take action in cases of non-cooperation with the Court.

We are determined to examine the working methods
of the Council on the basis of the proposals made by
New Zealand last December. In that spirit, France
proposes that the States that the Court has deemed to
be in breach of their obligations to cooperate should
be called upon to answer to the Security Council. On
the basis of that meeting, it would then be up to the
Council to decide on next steps. In any case, there must
be a follow-up. All United Nations Member States and
international organizations must be mobilized. In that
respect, we stress the importance of limiting contact
with persons with outstanding arrest warrants to
essential communication only.

