Mr. Adi (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me at the outset to congratulate you,
Sir, on behalf of my country on your accession to the
presidency of the Security Council for May. I should
also like to thank your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of South Africa, for his excellent
guidance of the Council last month.

Moreover, I thank Ambassadors Verbeke, Urbina
and Jurica, Chairmen of the sanctions Committees, for
their briefings to the Council on the work of their
Committees.

The millennia-Iong history of Syria is replete
with examples of the authenticity and deep-rooted
nature of its Arab traditions and of the Islamic and
Christian influences on its rejection of extremism and
fanaticism. Syria's history reflects its reliance on
home-grown traditions and its acceptance of all
cultures and civilizations and the religious and
intellectual beliefs of others. My country has always
been devoted to its ethical position of principle, despite
the extreme changes that have occurred in the
international situation and in the language used to
describe those constant changes.

What has not changed is Syria's ongoing
condemnation of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, regardless of the source or the
perpetrators, be they individuals, groups or States. That
is because terrorism is manifested in criminal acts of
aggression that target innocent people, their lives and
their property, in violation of the sovereignty, political
independence, territorial integrity and regional security
of States. Terrorism knows neither nationality nor
religion. It strikes indiscriminately, and no one can
escape its horrors.

Terrorism is thus the very antithesis of all
religions, races, nationalities and civilizations. It must
be fought in the framework of international legitimacy,
under the United Nations Charter and in accordance
with the relevant resolutions of the Security Council
and the provisions of international law.
The crimes that Israel has daily perpetrated for
decades against the Arab people in the occupied Arab
territories and the occupied Syrian Golan are an
egregious example of State terrorism. They have been
denounced by the international community through
hundreds of resolutions adopted by this international
Organization. They are undeniably crimes of war.

Regrettably, however, acts of terrorism are
subject to varying standards. In that respect, we
reiterate that the most serious threat faced in the global
war on terrorism in which we are engaged is posed by
Israel's changeable, unilateral interpretations of the
counter-terrorism struggle and of the resolutions of
international legitimacy. Indeed, according to Israeli
logic and views - which, unfortunately, enjoy the
sponsorship and support of some States - Israel's
practice of organized and systematic State terrorism
against the Palestinian people, and its pursuit of
policies based on murder, destruction, the infliction of
hunger, tyranny, injustice, the imposition of collective
punishment and the violation of human rights and
international humanitarian law, are all justified by
claims of self-defence against air, electricity, water and
food - in other words, against humankind - under
the pretext of combating so-called Palestinian
terrorism. What kind of legitimate self-defence can
authorize acts that flout international resolutions and
the provisions of international law?

Syria joined the consensus on the adoption of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy on
the basis of its support for all international efforts in
that field. Syria knows that the Strategy provides
important support for international cooperation on
counter-terrorism. However, as it did in the debates
preceding the Strategy's adoption, Syria reaffirms the
need to adopt a coherent and comprehensive national,
regional and international approach to counter
terrorism and deplete its sources. To that end, Syria
calls for a comprehensive analysis of all aspects of
terrorism and of the circumstances that promote the
spread of that scourge in order to build a common
international understanding of the best way to address
it and combat it.

Syria reiterates that terrorism poses an ongoing
threat to international peace and security. It also
reaffirms its respect for the relevant international
counter-terrorism resolutions. Syria is convinced in
that respect that the United Nations plays a pivotal role
in building international consensus in the struggle

against terrorism. Security Council resolutions 1373
(2001), 1267 (1999), 1526 (2004), 1540 (2004) and
1566 (2004) have created a cohesive legal framework
for fighting terrorism at the international level.

On that basis, Syria is cooperating fully with the
United Nations and with the Security Council's
sanctions Committees through the consideration by the
relevant Syrian parties of the observations set down by
the Counter-Terrorism Committee in its Preliminary
Implementation Assessment. Syria is now amending
legislative decree No. 33 of 2005, as noted in its fifth
report to the Committee.

The Syrian Arab Republic is sparing no effort in
the struggle against money-laundering and the
financing of terrorism. To that end, Syria has acceded
to the United Nations Convention against Corruption
and has joined the Edgemont Group, whose
membership includes financial investigation units from
106 States and which is designed to receive and
address notifications of financial transactions
suspected of being operations to launder money or
finance terrorism. Syria's efforts have been
acknowledged internationally in the joint report, which
underscored Syria's success in recent years in adopting
measures and enacting important legislation to that
end, in accordance with relevant international
recommendations. The report has thus greatly
contributed to strengthening the confidence of a
number of international financial institutions interested
in the subject.

Syria supports the efforts of the Security Council
Committee mandated to monitor the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), which Syria considers a
positive step towards ensuring the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and guaranteeing
international peace and security. Syria does not possess
such weapons and it has no intention of possessing
them. Moreover, it has declared this in numerous
public statements in the United Nations, including
before the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva and
the First Committee of the General Assembly.

