Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Fernandez-Taranco for
his briefing on the situation in the Middle East. We
also listened carefully to the statements of the
representatives of Israel and Palestine spelling out their
views regarding the Middle East settlement.

We view the launch of the Israeli-Palestinian
dialogue as an important outcome of the joint efforts
undertaken under the aegis of the Quartet of
international mediators, with very active Russian
participation. We wish to express our deep concern
regarding the decision of the Israeli authorities not to
extend the moratorium on construction activity and to
resume construction in East Jerusalem. We believe that
the resolution adopted on 9 October at the League of
Arab States summit in Sirte will allow for continued
contact with the aim of preserving direct talks between
Israel and Palestine.

We again affirm our position, formulated in
particular in the statements of the Middle East Quartet
in Moscow on 19 March and in New York on
21 September, regarding the fact that Palestinians and
Israelis should strive to find compromise solutions and
refrain from unilateral steps that would prejudice the
outcome of negotiations and are not recognized by the
international community.

It is essential that the Palestinians and Israelis
adopt a serious attitude and achieve compromise
solutions on all aspects of final status, which will
enable the settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
on the well-known international legal bases: the
relevant Security Council resolutions, the Madrid
principles and the Arab Peace Initiative.
We understand that achieving this will not be
easy. Differences of principle exist between Israelis
and Palestinians regarding approaches to many issues
on the agenda. Even though close United States
involvement in the discussions is important, it is also
necessary to provide collective assistance for an
Israeli-Palestinian settlement. Particularly important in
that respect is the mechanism for assisting the Arab-
Israeli settlement embodied by the Quartet of
international mediators, which is recognized by all
interested parties, as well as the development of
cooperation between the Quartet and the League of
Arab States Contact Group.

The situation in the region remains complex, with
surges of tension around Gaza and activity by various
extremist forces working to undermine the negotiations
process. If a detailed, unbiased investigation is to be
undertaken of the tragic events occurring around the
freedom flotilla, it is important that an international
commission under the aegis of the United Nations be
set up and that Israel and Turkey agree to participate in
it. We hope that the work of such a commission would
promote a general improvement of the situation in the
region and that its recommendations would prevent the
recurrence of such dramatic events in the future.

One pressing issue still pending is that of
Palestinian unity. Solutions should continue to be
sought in order to achieve reconciliation. We support
Egypt's efforts to that end and send a clear message to
Hamas in that regard.

Our proposal to convene a conference on the
Middle East in Moscow remains timely. It enjoys the
well-known support of all interested parties. If direct
and substantive political dialogue between the
Palestinians and Israel becomes sustainable, it will
create the conditions necessary for the preparation and
holding of the conference - of course, following
consultations with all interested parties.

In our view, the situation in Lebanon is radically
different from that which prevailed in 2008. President
Sleiman, the Government led by Mr. Hariri and the
Lebanese Parliament have been able to create some
stability and to ensure the effective operation of force
structures and other State institutions. At the same
time, the success that has been achieved needs to be
bolstered. Against the backdrop of the complex
regional situation, it is important for the Lebanese to
pursue the processes of strengthening State institutions
and domestic stability, which must continue without
outside interference. Lebanon cannot be allowed to
become the theatre of score-settling between external
forces.

In that regard, we are concerned over attempts to
entangle the issue of the future verdict of the Special
Tribunal through leaks regarding accusations against
individual Hizbullah officials. Our position concerning
the Special Tribunal remains unchanged. We believe
that the proceedings should be fair, unbiased and free
of all politicization.
We welcome the positive momentum in relations
between Lebanon and Syria. We view normal good-
neighbourly relations between those countries, with
which Russia has traditionally enjoyed relations of
friendship, to be a substantial contribution to regional

stability.

