The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement briefly in my national capacity.

Spain voted in favour of resolution 2336 (2016)
and welcomes its unanimous adoption. We express our
sincere gratitude to Turkey and the Russian Federation
for their efforts in achieving this consensus, having
reached an agreement on the cessation of hostilities,
and moving forward towards a political solution to the
crisis in Syria.

We voted in favour of the resolution while bearing
in mind the unspeakable suffering of the Syrian people
and the fact that the monitoring of the ceasefire must
be conducted transparently and impartially and that
information must be provided to the Security Council
in a timely manner. We are also aware that the next
steps in the political process must be carried out under
the auspices of the United Nations. We want to be very
clear on this point. It is not enough for the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General to simply be associated with
the Astana talks; he must play a central role and ensure
that we do not lose sight of the provisions of resolution
2254 (2015). In that regard, we once again welcome the
changes that have been made to the text of the resolution,
which was submitted by the Russian Federation.

Finally, the European Union and its 28 member
States have much to contribute to Syrian initiatives. The
European Union is not only the country's main financial
donor, but it will also be a key player in rebuilding the
country when the necessary political conditions are in
place. Only a united, democratic and peaceful Syria
will be able to put a lasting end to the terrorism wrought
by Da'esh. Spain is bidding farewell to the Security
Council in the hope that the resolution that we adopted
today will be a first step in that direction.

I honestly do not see a better way to conclude
Spain's presidency of the Security Council. I already
bid farewell to Council members on 21 December and,
at that time, I said that ifwe were to meet again, it would
only be in order to receive good news, and that is indeed
the case - a resolution adopted unanimously by all 15
members. I would like to thank Council members once
again for the kind words I heard in the Chamber today.
This effort would not have been successful without the
help of all Council members.

There are only 10 hours left in the Spanish
presidency. I believe that we will not have any further
meetings in the next 10 hours, so I will take this
opportunity to definitively wish all Council members
a very happy New Year. I strongly hope that the people
of Syria will achieve peace. As a continuing member of
the General Assembly, Spain will remain very attentive
to the work carried out in this Chamber. I also wish our
dear friends from Sweden, who are seated here in the
Chamber, every success during their presidency, which
promises to be very favourable.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are no further speakers on my list.

The meeting rose at1.45p.m.
