Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Vuk Jeremie, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Serbia, and thank him for his statement. I
also thank Special Representative Lamberto Zannier
for his briefing and Mr. Enver Hoxhaj for his remarks.

Stability in the Balkans remains an important
goal. We continue to believe that resolution 1244
(1999) offers an adequate framework for a negotiated
settlement that can address tensions in the region.
Brazil reiterates its support for the work carried out by
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) in implementing the Security
Council mandate. UNMIK's presence remains essential
for stability in Kosovo.

We welcome the launch of the dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina and the willingness of both sides
to find solutions that can have a positive impact on the
daily lives of the population. We concur that the
process of dialogue can pave the way for peace,
security and stability in the region. This is important
progress, which must be strengthened with the
intensification of meetings and the support of UNMIK
and regional organizations. We expect the dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina to ultimately lead to the
solution of the political differences between both
parties.

It is encouraging that the security situation since
mid-January has been relatively calm, as reported by
the Secretary-General, despite underlying political
tensions. Nevertheless, the situation in northern
Kosovo is particularly delicate. All sides must exercise
caution and restrain and avoid actions that may
undermine the situation on the ground.

As we stated last February (see S/PV.6483),
Brazil is concerned at the allegations of inhuman
treatment of people and illicit trafficking in human
organs in Kosovo. The gravity of such allegations
cannot be overlooked. A thorough, independent and
credible investigation must be carried out. In this
regard, it would be interesting to explore possible
options that take into account the need to involve
various jurisdictions and the importance of ensuring
consistency with resolution 1244 (1999).
The Council should continue to keep political
developments in Kosovo under close review and
encourage the auspicious beginning of dialogue
between Pristina and Belgrade. We are confident that a
fair and legitimate solution to the outstanding political
issues in the region can be reached under the auspices
of the Security Council, consistent with its authority
and primary responsibility in matters pertaining to
international peace and security.

