I would like to thank today's speakers for their insightful briefings. The sixtieth anniversary of United Nations police (UNPOL) and the growing importance of the role of United Nations police within United Nations peacekeeping operations underscore the usefulness of these regular briefings. Allow me to seize this opportunity to make three points. First, Belgium would like to stress UNPOL's essential role in the context of the protection of civilians. In the past, UNPOL's protective role was generally undervalued and regularly overlooked. Missions have indeed tended to overly rely on militarized approaches to the protection of civilians. Although we have come a long way since UNPOL was first deployed in the Republic of the Congo in the 1960s, today's briefings clearly demonstrate the potential for further improving UNPOL's protection of civilians. On the other hand, it is also critical to preserve UNPOL's gains, especially in the context of the current pandemic, which serves as an additional obstacle to the fulfilment of our objectives. With regard to the future, we would like to plead for a threefold approach. First, all UNPOL should be fully involved in the protection of civilians and be given a voice in decision-making and planning in whole-of-mission efforts to protect civilians. That is especially so in transition contexts, in which military components gradually withdraw. Secondly, while partnerships between UNPOL, host States and other mission components should be enhanced to enable more comprehensive approaches to the protection of civilians, partnerships with other international stakeholders that are active in this field should also be taken into account. Thirdly, more appropriate and flexible capabilities, capacities and tools should be provided to address existing critical capabilities gaps. I have two questions regarding the protection of civilians for Police Commissioner Unaisi Vuniwagqa, of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan. Taking into account that United Nations protection-of-civilian sites are beginning to transition into conventional displacement camps, how does she see the role of UNPOL in future, as it relates to the protection of civilians? And does she have the ability to fully execute the mandated protection-of-civilian tasks? Secondly, UNPOL has an essential role to play with regard to the administration of justice and the rendering of transitional justice. A breakdown in the rule of law is often a major factor in the decision to deploy a United Nations peace operation. Accordingly, the rehabilitation of the justice architecture - including the potential set-up of transitional justice projects - has become a prerequisite for mission transitions and a cornerstone for their exit strategies. In that regard, allow me to stress that UNPOL always has an essential role to play in terms of accountability; evidence has to be gathered and culprits have to be brought to justice. Moreover, as the successful implementation of peacekeeping mandates has become contingent on reformed and strengthened police institutions, the role of UNPOL has become increasingly mission critical. More generally, security sector reform should not be handled exclusively by the military component. UNPOL also has an essential role to play in that regard. In that connection, I have two questions for Police Commissioner Issoufou Yacouba, of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali. Could he elaborate more on UNPOL's security sector reform efforts in Mali? And how does coordination with other stakeholders like the European Union Capacity Building Mission in Mali evolve? Finally, we welcome UNPOL's efforts towards gender mainstreaming, as well as those to increase the participation of uniformed women in peacekeeping. Greater meaningful participation of uniformed women in UNPOL will enhance community engagement, particularly in contexts where cultural norms make it difficult for women to talk to men. Moreover, it can generate more opportunities for empowering women, as well as for gathering information to enhance situational awareness. In addition, gender-sensitive training and conflict analysis should be intensified. Fully fledged gender mainstreaming is and should remain our overall goal. I also have a question for Police Commissioner Pascal Champion, of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic. As Belgium believes that greater meaningful participation of uniformed women in United Nations peacekeeping operations contributes to the enhancement of the performance of such operations, can he give some concrete examples of the essential role of uniformed women?
