I thank Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu for her briefing. Seven years have elapsed since the regime's chemical attacks on Ghouta and the adoption of resolution 2118 (2013). France therefore deplores the lack of progress on the Syria chemical weapons dossier. To this day, several questions remain unanswered with regard to the Syrian regime's stocks. It is imperative that the Syrian regime shed full light on its initial declaration and cooperate actively with all the teams of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). If the regime has nothing to hide and the chemical weapons file is closed, as some claim, why does it not cooperate fully with the OPCW Technical Secretariat? The security of civilians, already heavily affected by repeated attacks, is at stake. There is no doubt about the Syrian regime's responsibility for the use of chemical weapons against its own population. The conclusions of international investigation mechanisms are undeniable. The first report of the OPCW's Investigation and Identification Team independently and impartially established, in April, that sarin and chlorine had been used by the Syrian regime's air force units in chemical attacks in Ltamenah in March 2017, resulting in dozens of casualties. Those findings complement those of the OPC W-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism, which was established by the members of the Council. In the face of this unprecedented challenge to the chemical weapons non-proliferation regime, it is our collective responsibility to reaffirm the founding principles of collective security. That is why, in July, France welcomed the adoption by the OPCW Executive Council of a decision proposed on behalf of 40 sponsors. That decision condemned the violations of the Chemical Weapons Convention and enjoined Syria to comply with its obligations or expose itself to collective measures. The next Conference of the States Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention, in November, will consider the report of the OPCW Director General on the responses provided by the Syrian regime to the Technical Secretariat and may take action accordingly. France has full confidence in the unassailable professionalism, integrity and impartiality of the OPCW teams. Finally, France will continue to support the accountability mechanisms that we have put in place to combat impunity, such as the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011. The fight against impunity is an essential element of preserving international peace and security and creating the necessary conditions for a just and lasting peace in Syria, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015). The use of chemical weapons by anyone, anywhere and under any circumstance is unacceptable. It constitutes a threat to international peace and security, as affirmed by the Security Council in presidential statement S/PRST/2019/14, adopted on 22 November 2019. That is France's consistent position against the use of chemical weapons and for the perpetrators of chemical attacks to be punished. There can be no exception in Syria or elsewhere. France will continue to work actively, in close cooperation with its partners, to that end, particularly through the International Partnership against Impunity for the Use of Chemical Weapons.
