Mr. Mahmadaminov (Tajikistan): At the outset,
I would like to thank the Permanent Mission of C6te
d'Ivoire to the United Nations for convening today's
debate on the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA). I would also like to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Afghanistan, Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, for his
valuable observations and the important work being
carried out by UNAMA in Afghanistan under his
leadership. I would also like to express my gratitude to
Under-Secretary-General Fedotov, Ambassador Kairat
Umarov and Ms. Haress for their briefings, as well as
the Ambassador of Afghanistan for his statement.

Of all the Central Asian countries, Tajikistan shares
the longest border - around 1,400 kilometres - with
Afghanistan. We have very close cultural, historic
and linguistic ties with that brotherly country, and
that very fact makes it difficult for us to watch, from
the other side of the Amu Darya, our Afghan brothers
and sisters suffer because of the instability of the past
several decades.

I think that there is general consensus in the
Chamber on the following three main messages: first,
terrorism and extremism cannot be eliminated by the
use of military force alone; secondly, the Afghan peace
process should be Afghan-led and Afghan-owned; and
thirdly, without stability in Afghanistan there will be
no stability in the Central Asian region, nor will it
be possible to achieve progress on social, economic
and environmental issues. My delegation also fully
subscribes to those points.

In spite of some progress, many challenges
continue to exist in Afghanistan, the resolution of
which requires additional efforts from the international
community. In my statement, I would like to share
some of our perspectives on how to address those
challenges by utilizing the capacities and opportunities
of neighbouring countries.

Terrorism, transnational organized crime and
drug trafficking could undermine the commitment
of the region, as well as that of Afghanistan, to bring
about sustainable development. If not addressed, they
will become major obstacles on our way to the timely
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. We express our great concern about the
recent strengthening and activation of terrorist groups
and their activities in the northern part of Afghanistan.
In our View, to effectively counter threats emanating
from terrorist groups, strengthening international and
regional security cooperation is therefore crucial.

In that regard, Tajikistan's law enforcement agencies
have been actively engaged with their colleagues
from other Central Asian countries and Afghanistan
in information-sharing, law enforcement and border
control, in the frameworks of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime Office on Drugs and Crime, the
United Nations Development Programme, UNAMA,
the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia, the Collective Security
Treaty Organization, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and other organizations.

We welcome the outcome of the recent Geneva
Ministerial Conference on Afghanistan, which led
to renewed partnership and cooperation between the
Government of Afghanistan and the international
community with regard to Afghanistan's peace,
prosperity and self-reliance midway through the
transformation decade from 2015 to 2024.

As the host of the High-level International
Conference on Countering Terrorism and Preventing
Violent Extremism in Dushanbe, on 3 and
4 May, we believe that particular emphasis should
be placed on the importance of intensifying counter-
terrorism cooperation and coordination, as well as
information-sharing, border security, legal cooperation
and the exchange of best practices. The Conference
was particularly timely in the current context of
strengthening regional cooperation in Central Asia, and
we firmly believe that, based on our experience and the
successful outcomes of the Dushanbe Conference, such
dialogue should be continued. To that end, Tajikistan
intends to host yet another high-level event on this issue
next year and invites all stakeholders, in particular the
United Nations and its relevant bodies, to join us in
order to take joint and effective measures to counter
terrorism and extremism.

In our opinion, developing comprehensive
agricultural programmes and irrigation systems and
providing electricity supplies in rural areas will ensure
decent living conditions for the population and could
significantly contribute to the decline of drug production
in Afghanistan, as well as to solving the drought and
food insecurity problems. Tajikistan, with its vast
hydropower potential, could be very helpful in that
sense by meeting the industrial demand of Afghanistan
by providing it with stable and affordable electricity.

In that regard, enhancing cooperation to implement
regional hydropower projects is critical. It should be
mentioned that Tajikistan exported approximately
1.4 billion kilowatt hours of electricity to Afghanistan
in 2017 and plans to increase its export to over 1.5 billion
kilowatt hours in the future. The construction of the
Central Asia South Asia Electricity Transmission and
Trade Project, the Turkmenistan-Uzbekistan-Tajikistan-
Afghanistan-Pakistan electricity transmission line
project and various hydropower plants, in particular the
Sebzor hydroelectric power plant in the Badakhshan
region of Tajikistan, as well as the construction of
gas pipelines and transport corridors, would further
contribute to the improvement of the living standards
and well-being of the Afghan population.

For many years, the President of Tajikistan,
Emomali Rahmon, has been actively advocating in
different forums for more coordinated action and
regional approaches to bring about prosperity and
development in Afghanistan. To that end, we consider
the Regional Economic Cooperation Conference on
Afghanistan and the Istanbul Process, the chairmanship
ofwhich Tajikistan will assume in 2019, to be important
platforms for establishing regional cooperation.

To facilitate trade with Afghanistan, my country,
with the assistance of the international community, has
built five bridges and established two free economic
zones along its border with Afghanistan, which
has significantly increased trade between the two
countries. Our cooperation with Afghanistan in the
spheres of education and the training of personnel
are both effective and fruitful. Hundreds of Afghan
students are currently studying at the universities of
Tajikistan. My Government has also decided to grant up
to 1,000 educational quotas to citizens of Afghanistan
by 2025. We will continue to render assistance by
training Afghan military and border guards, doctors
and other specialists.

To conclude, let me reiterate the readiness of my
Government to further assist our brotherly country,
Afghanistan, in overcoming the aforementioned
challenges in order to ensure well-deserved peace,
stability and development in the country. Moreover, I
wish them every success in holding a peaceful, inclusive
and transparent presidential election. They may rest
assured that Tajikistan will continue to support the
Government of Afghanistan as it implements its reform
agenda to gain peace, development and self-reliance
during the transformation decade.
