Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I
welcome the unanimous adoption of this resolution
on humanitarian acccess in Syria resolution 2139
(2014). Given the tragedy taking place, which has been
escalating daily for three years, the contrary would have
been incomprehensible. How could the Council have
remained silent in the face of 140,000 people losing
their lives or 3 million Syrians without humanitarian
assistance and the desperate flight of nearly half the
population, who are now refugees or displaced?

The resolution was urgent and necessary. That is
why from the beginning France supported the draft
text initiated by Australia, Jordan and Luxembourg, to
whom we express our gratitude. This urgent resolution
demands that the Government of Syria, carried away
by its own violence, respect international humanitarian
law and stop bombing civilians, starving its people and
torturing prisoners. It demands the immediate lifting
of sieges. It demands that the Government authorize
humanitarian organizations to help all those in need
across the front lines and borders. It demands an end
to attacks on United Nations personnel, humanitarian
actors and journalists.

This crucial resolution must put an end to the
deafness of the Syrian Government to the appeal
by humanitarian actors and the Council, which on
2 October made specific demands for the provision of
humanitarian access. We must all admit - and that is
the reason for the resolution - that the presidential
statement (S/PRST/2013/15) did not produce tangible
results. Far from reaching all those in need throughout
Syria, humanitarian assistance remains inaccessible in
besieged areas and sporadic in areas that are difficult
to reach.

The Syrian regime is trying to make us believe
that it is a reliable and responsible partner in the
humanitarian sphere. The examples of evacuations
from Moadamiya and Homs a few weeks ago show us
the opposite. Far from being ideal, they were slow in
implementation, limited in effect and tragic in their
follow-up. Many of those evacuated were arrested and
are still missing. For some days, the Government has
stepped up media reports of local ceasefires. Let us not
be deceived: such ceasefires are imposed on scared,
exhausted and starving people as part of a deliberate
policy pursued by the Government for people to starve
to death or surrender.

At the same time, the Syrian Government is using
increasingly barbarian and deadly bombs against the
civilian population. After the cluster bombs, ballistic
missiles and chemical weapons, the authorities are
now launching barrel bombs against civilians - the
ultimate weapon of terror. The use of such weapons is
not a detail, as some people have said. They have no
military justification. They seek only to kill civilians
and combatants indiscriminately. For the thousands of
civilians who die as a result of those bombs and for the
hundreds of thousands of civilians who flee terrorized,
it is not a detail. France welcomes the courage and
determination of the Syrian people. We cannot abandon
them in the hands of those torturers.

With the adoption of this resolution, the Security
Council avoids the dishonour of silence. It is now up to
us collectively to ensure that the parties to the conflict,
in particular the regime, heed the strong and urgent
message conveyed to it and translate the Council's
requests into specific actions.

I wish to underscore the intention expressed by the
Council to adopt additional measures if the resolution
is not implemented. We will therefore return to the
Chamber in 30 days to hear the report of the Secretary-
General and, if the Syrian Government remains deaf to
our demands, we should take the necessary measures.
France will not forget about the meeting.

The humanitarian suffering can be resolved only
by means of a political transition. We cannot accept an
end without follow-up to the discussions in Geneva.
There again, it is the Syrian regime that bears the
responsibility for the failure by refusing the agenda
for the talks proposed by Mr. Brahimi and accepted
by the opposition. It is up to us to show collectively
the same urgency and resolve. France will continue to
stand beside the Syrian people. Criminals should pay
for their crimes.

Ms. Power (United States of America); At long
last, the Security Council has spoken clearly and
unanimously about the devastating humanitarian
catastrophe unfolding in Syria. For a body that has long
been too divided to acknowledge even the basic facts of
the horror in Syria, today's resolution (resolution 2139 (2014)) is a long overdue and altogether necessary step
towards reality.

Whatever has or has not transpired in the Security
Council for the past three years, the Syrian people have
had the grave misfortune of living in the real world.
That real world is what was captured in this week's
report from the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights - that more than 173,000 people are
believed to be trapped in Ghouta, including several
thousands who have hardly any food and have been
given permission by the religious authorities to eat
cats and dogs. That real world is what was recounted
recently by the Secretary-General, when he informed
the Council ofthe unspeakable abuses being committed
against children, including kidnapping, sexual violence,
beatings with whips, electric shocks and imprisonment
without cause.

The real world in Syria today is amedical system that
has collapsed; a school system that barely functions; a
city of Aleppo that once had 5,000 doctors and now has
some 36; a country where a quarter ofa million people
are trying to survive in neighbourhoods under siege,
2.5 million are refugees and 6.5 million are displaced;
a country with countless hungry children, untreated
infections, shrapnel wounds and lost limbs; a country
where some mothers are denied the nourishment they
require to sustain the infants that they hold in their
arms; and a country where the bombs continue to fall,
the shelling goes on and the agony deepens.

Some say that all of that is the inevitable consequence

of war. I say it is the result of actions intentionally and
wilfully taken by specific individuals, and what those
individuals have the power to do, they have the power
and responsibility to stop. I refer to the Syrian regime,
led by Bashar Al-Assad, who has put his devotion to
preserving power above the welfare of tens of millions
of people. I refer to him and his security forces, who
pummel civilian neighbourhoods with barrel bombs,
his snipers who delight in picking off children who are
walking with their parents so as to watch both suffer
unbearably, and I refer to terrorist groups like Al-Nusra
and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, who in
the name of revolution have, in parts of Syria, imposed
a new terror on Syrians, supplementing Al-Assad's
dictatorial fanaticism with religious fanaticism.

The resolution adopted today and the day-to-day
reality in Syria are not about politics or ideology. We
came here as representatives from around the world
to do what we could to try to help people who are in
desperate need of help to live and breathe as we do.
That is all.

It is remarkable to the world that it has taken
three years for the Security Council to recognize
basic facts and to call for such basic principles of
humanity 4 simply that Syrians in need should not be
held under siege, that they should not be bombed by
barrel bombs and that they should not be starved. It is
a gross understatement to say it should not have taken
this long.

The resolution is important for two reasons. It has
a clear demand for specific and concrete actions, and it
is a commitment to act in the event of non-compliance.
It was a difficult resolution to agree on, but it should
not have been. Many of the issues that come before this
body are complicated. This is not.

It is because the United States believes that civilians
should not be starved, should not be bombed and should
not be denied access to the most basic things required
to sustain life that we welcome today's action by the
Security Council. It is now our fervent hope that the
Council will show similar courage to ensure that our
unanimous demands result in changes to ease suffering,
especially for the hundreds of thousands of civilians
who have been encircled by snipers and trapped in
besieged communities. Our goal here today is to ensure
that help is received by people who will die without it
and that innocent civilians are not killed while waiting
for that assistance to arrive.

It remains to be seen whether our action today will
have the beneficial results we intend. Given its track
record to date, the Syrian regime can be trusted only
to deny what it has done and lie about what it will do.
Accordingly, I call upon all Council members and
all members of the international community to join
in pressing Damascus - and any actor who fails to
comply - to fulfil the terms of the resolution on a
comprehensive and urgent basis. There should be no
more broken promises, no more delays and no more
coupling minor concessions with crimes that are so
horrific, so systematic and so recurrent that they have
lost some of their power to shock the conscience.

Today, the Council has achieved consensus. Now
we must insist upon action. Our common security,
our common humanity and our collective conscience
demand nothing less.

