Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): I should
like to begin by thanking Under-Secretary-General
Pascoe and Mr. Boyd for their briefings. Let me also
welcome the Permanent Representative of Somalia to
the Council today.

The United States continues to watch events in
Somalia with concern. We believe that the key to long-
term peace and stability lies in the establishment of
effective governance based on the process of inclusive
political dialogue and reconciliation among those
committed to peace. As such, the United States
applauds the Transitional Federal Government (TFG)
for its recent efforts, including new Cabinet
appointments that bring greater experience and
expertise into key ministries. We see the TFG's
continuing work to reach out to armed elements in
order to bring them into the Djibouti peace process as

another sign of progress. We also welcome other recent
developments, including the creation of a commission
for security and pacification to reform the TFG's
security forces and law enforcement agencies, and the
designation of the Minister of Women's Development
as the TFG's focal point for human rights.

Unfortunately, this is only part of the picture. As
the Secretary-General's report (S/2009/503) shows,
Somalia still endures persistent insecurity. The United
States, along with others, condemns in the strongest
terms the continuing military offensives against the
TFG and the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), including the 17 September attacks by
Al-Shabaab against AMISOM. headquarters that killed
21 people. We express our sincere condolences to the
Ugandan and Burundian people for those who were
lost, and our hopes for a full and swift recovery for
those who were wounded.

AI-Shabaab and other extremist groups fuelled by
outside actors have caused numerous deaths and
violated the rights of Somali citizens with impunity,
including by assaulting, detaining and illegally
arresting civilians. The issue of outside actors is a
serious one. The Somalia sanctions Committee's
Monitoring Group has reported that Eritrea has
provided political, financial and military support to
armed opposition groups in Somalia. The efforts of the
international community to engage the Eritrean
Government on its regional relations have been
rebuffed. It is time for the international community to
consider ways to address Eritrea's destabilizing impact
on Somalia and the region.

Against that backdrop, support for the TFG and
AMISOM. should be central to our support for the
Somali peace process. AMISOM. has demonstrated an
impressive ability to protect strategic positions under
sustained attack by insurgents, and we commend its
personnel for their heroism. The United States strongly
supports funding a logistical support package for
AMISOM, and my Government will continue to
provide equipment and training to AMISOM. troop-
contributing countries.

At the same time, we must work to improve
Somalia's domestic security sector. The Secretary-
General's report highlights the need to harmonize the
content and duration of training for TFG troops. With
this in mind, we recommend greater coordination of
international efforts to train and equip the TFG's
security and police forces in order to ensure stronger,
more effective forces.

The devastating humanitarian situation in
Somalia caused by violence is now being worsened by
the deepening drought in the country's central and
northern regions. Ongoing fighting endangers the
delivery of food and other humanitarian aid to some
3.7 million Somalis in need of assistance. With dismay,
we note that in July supplies to treat and prevent
malnutrition in 85,000 children Somali children were
delayed due to security concerns. Aid workers have
also found themselves in danger. The United States
denounces the violence against humanitarian agencies
and their staff. We call for the immediate and
unconditional release of those aid workers still held by
armed groups in Somalia.

Piracy continues to be an obstacle to the delivery
of assistance. International efforts to prosecute
suspected pirates should be strengthened and
broadened to ensure an environment in which aid and
supplies can be transported safely.

The United States remains the largest bilateral
donor of humanitarian assistance to Somalia, having
provided more than $150 million in food and non-food
emergency assistance in the past fiscal year. We are
concerned, however, about reports of diversions of
humanitarian assistance by Al-Shabaab - diversions
that hurt the people of Somalia but strengthen
Al-Shabaab in its war against the TFG. We have
therefore reviewed our emergency programmes to
ensure that we are doing all that we can to help the
people of Somalia, and have asked our implementing
partners to exercise increased diligence to avoid such
diversions.

The United States looks forward to continuing to
work with the United Nations and all Member States to
forge a stable, secure and more prosperous Somalia.

