Mr. Amieyeofori (Nigeria): I join others in
thanking the Presidents and Prosecutors of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) for their very useful briefings on the
work of the Tribunals.

Nigeria welcomes the further progress made by
the ICTY and the ICTR in implementing their
completion strategies during the past six months. We
note with satisfaction the measures taken by the
Tribunals to expedite the conduct of their proceedings,
including reforms, while ensuring compliance with due
process standards. We believe that more tangible steps
towards enhancing the current staffing levels in both
the ICTY and the ICTR will help to reinforce those
improvements. We recognize that resolutions 1954
(2010) and 1955 (2010) call upon the Secretariat and
other relevant United Nations bodies to continue to
work with the Registrars of the Tribunals to find
practical solutions to address the issue. We therefore
urge that intensified efforts be undertaken to find more
pragmatic measures to address this issue more
decisively. That becomes more critical as both
Tribunals approach the completion of their work.

Nigeria underscores the importance of sustained
and close cooperation between Member States and the
Tribunals in enabling them to achieve their set goals.
Those goals include the arrest of fugitives, the
preparation of referrals to national jurisdictions, the
relocation of acquitted persons and assistance to
national prosecution authorities.

It is encouraging that both Tribunals have
continued to assist in strengthening the capacity of
States to try alleged violators of international
humanitarian law in their own courts. Those efforts are
helpful in building the legacy of the Tribunals and the
institutions of international humanitarian law.

The Tribunals' continued efforts at tracking the
remaining fugitives deserve our strong support. We
applaud the outstanding efforts of the Serbian
authorities in arresting Ratko Mladie and hope that it
will help to bring reconciliation to the Western Balkans
region. We also commend the authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo for arresting
Bernard Munyagishari. We call on all relevant States to
intensify efforts towards ensuring that the remaining
fugitives are apprehended and brought to justice. There
is also a need to intensify cooperation with the
Tribunals with respect to the referral of cases to
national jurisdictions and the resettlement of persons
acquitted by the Tribunals.

The Tribunals have made commendable progress
in raising awareness of their work through their
outreach programmes. More of these activities will be
needed as they gradually move towards the completion
of their work. We call for sustained donor support for
these activities, more particularly in funding the
reference centres of information.

It is edifying to note the measures being taken by
the Tribunals to implement resolution 1966 (2010). In
our view, every effort should be geared towards
ensuring a smooth transition to the Residual
Mechanism. We therefore support the establishment of
a joint action plan by the Tribunals and their
Prosecutors in order to coordinate the activities and the
many stakeholders that have been involved in the
setting up of the Mechanism. We also commend the
progress on the drafting of the rules of procedure and
evidence of the Residual Mechanism and on the access
and security policy for the records of the Tribunals and
the Residual Mechanism.

Allow me to put on the record our deep
appreciation for the diligent and valuable efforts of the
Presidents and Prosecutors of the ICTY and ICTR in
support of the global fight against impunity amidst
very challenging circumstances.

