Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): I would first like to
thank you, Mr. President, for honouring us by presiding
over this important debate today and also to thank you
and the Nigerian presidency of the Security Council for
having organized this important meeting. We were
grateful for the statement by Deputy Secretary-General
Asha Rose Migiro and for the interesting presentation
by Ms. Cliffe.

Austria associates itself with the statement to be
delivered by the European Union delegation later in the
course of this meeting.

In today's world, we are confronted by a large
number of crises and new global challenges that can
potentially develop into fully fledged conflicts and that
can pose a threat to international peace and security.
The peaceful settlement of conflicts should be the first
instrument that we always try to resort to. It is
indisputable that, in terms of cost effectiveness,
conflict prevention and resolution benefit from a
substantial comparative advantage over other forms of
engagement, such as large-scale conflict intervention
and post-conflict reconstruction.

Preventing the escalation of disputes into armed
conflict or relapse into armed conflict needs to go hand
in hand with other crisis management activities, such
as mediation, peacekeeping and peacebuilding. All
those activities must ensure respect for the rule of law
and human rights, as well as the need to fight impunity
and address the root causes of conflict.

The settlement of conflicts by peaceful means
remains one of the biggest challenges the African
continent is facing today. Instability in Africa also has
global implications which require the continued
attention, action and commitment of the Security
Council, as well as of all other relevant actors.

Austria fully supports efforts aimed at
intensifying cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations, in particular the African Union (AU) and
its regional economic commissions, the Economic
Community of West African States and the Southern
African Development Community. African
involvement and experience in conflict prevention and
resolution, early warning and mediation are vital. It is
also an issue of ownership, and existing African
capacities should be used and further developed in line
with the AU-United Nations Ten-Year Capacity-
Building Programme. These enhanced capacities will
in turn also foster the implementation of Security
Council resolutions with regard to the protection of
civilians, women and peace and security and children
in armed conflict.
The development of a strategic partnership
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations is therefore of particular
importance to the maintenance of international peace
and security. We further believe that all options for
funding conflict prevention efforts should be
thoroughly considered.

In that context, we believe that there is also a
need to further strengthen and efficiently use the
capacities of the United Nations Secretariat or other
actors, such as the European Union (EU). The
European Union cooperates closely with the African
Union in the framework of the Africa-EU Strategic
Partnership, including through regular high-level
consultations in the framework of the EU Political and
Security Committee and the AU Peace and Security
Council, and in the field of human rights through the
AU-EU human rights dialogue. The AU-EU road map
of the peace and security partnership, as agreed in
October 2009, further underlines the commitment of
both organizations to deepen their cooperation. In
doing so, it is important to bear in mind a clear
division of labour, as well as the comparative
advantages that each organization may have.

Austria is convinced that the good offices of the
Secretary-General and his special envoys make a
significant contribution to the prevention of armed
conflict and to mediation in Africa. In particular, we
wish, as others have already done today, to commend
the valuable contribution of the United Nations Office
for West Africa in successfully preventing conflicts, as
was seen in the recent cases of Guinea and Niger. In
addition, I wish to highlight the important role of
integrated peacebuilding offices in addressing the root
causes of conflict and enhancing resilience by
supporting security sector reform and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes, as well
as activities aimed at strengthening the rule of law and
human rights. We believe that the Security Council
could examine the merit of expanding the network of
such offices.

Moreover, the potential of the various United
Nations field presences in Africa in the area of conflict
prevention and early warning should be fully utilized
to improve and sustain the ability of the United Nations
in cooperation with regional partners and national
Governments to respond to emerging conflict situations
in a timely and decisive manner. In addition, we would
also like to stress the crucial role that the Secretary-
General's Special Adviser on the Prevention of
Genocide has in matters relating to the prevention and
resolution of conflict.

Effective efforts to prevent armed conflict also
represent a tool to address cross-border and
transnational threats to stability, such as drug and
human trafficking, the proliferation of small arms and

light weapons and transborder organized crime. Austria
believes that prevention measures should also be aimed
at addressing those threats. We support numerous
projects that the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime in Vienna is undertaking in this regard and wish
to commend the Office for its valuable contribution to
conflict prevention.

Security Council resolutions 1325 (2000) and
1820 (2008) urge Member States and the Secretary-
General to ensure the increased representation of
women in all aspects of conflict resolution and peace
processes. We hope to see an increase in the
participation, representation and full involvement of
women also in preventive diplomacy and mediation
efforts in the future.

In conclusion, Austria would like to express its
thanks to Nigeria for promoting the issue of conflict
prevention and resolution in the Security Council and
congratulates it on the presidential statement that was
adopted today. We look forward to continuing our
discussions on this very important matter.

