Mr. Lucas (Angola): I would like to start by
thanking the President for convening this debate.
Likewise, I wish to thank the Presidents and
Prosecutors of the International Criminal Tribunals for
the Former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda for their
assessments and reports presented to the Security
Council pursuant to resolution 1534 (2004). Those
reports were eloquent and enlightening with regard to
the resolve of the international community to address
the consequences of the very painful episodes that
occurred in the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda. We
acknowledge with appreciation the valuable
contribution of the two International Tribunals to the
efforts of the United Nations and the international
community to combat impunity and to bring to justice
all those responsible for serious Violations of
international humanitarian law, thereby supporting
peace and stability and the process of national
reconciliation in the countries of the former Yugoslavia
and in Rwanda.

Despite the complexity and the unprecedented
nature of their mandates, the Tribunals are meeting the
Security Council's goal of ensuring that persons
responsible for war crimes, genocide and crimes
against humanity are accountable for their crimes in
just, fair and public trials meeting strict standards of
due process. In order to fulfil their mandates and meet
the goals set by the completion strategies, the Tribunals
must be able to try the most senior leaders indicted by
the Tribunals. However, as long as many of those
individuals remain at large, the Tribunals will be
unable to complete their missions - a situation that
calls for the stepping up of international cooperation in
order to capture those persons and bring them to
justice.

In addition to the need for international
cooperation in order to bring all indictees to account,
as recognized by Security Council resolutions 1503
(2003) and 1534 (2004), a key component of the
Tribunals' work entails referring lower- and mid-level
accused persons to national jurisdictions. Such a
strategy will enhance the critical involvement of
national Governments in the strengthening of long-
term national reconciliation, justice and the rule of law.
In that regard, while we recognize that further progress
is still required in connection with many issues, we
note with appreciation that the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) has begun to file motions for the
transfer of cases to domestic jurisdictions. It is our
hope that national jurisdictions will be able to deliver
free, fair and equitable trials. We welcome the
significant steps that have been taken in each of the
countries concerned to make such an endeavour a
reality. The fact that the special Chamber of the State
Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina will soon be ready to
accept cases is a significant development.

With regard to the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), my delegation believes
that the biggest challenge ahead will be the completion
of its mandate within the timeframe set by the Security
Council. As stressed by the Tribunal's President and
Prosecutor, meeting that challenge will require the full
cooperation and commitment of the international
community, including the provision of the necessary
human, material and financial resources to enable the
ICTR to complete trials at first instance by the end of
2008 and appeals by the end of 2010. The transfer of
low- and mid-level cases to national jurisdiction is also
a matter of great importance that deserves appropriate
attention by the international community.

As confirmed by the assessment reports presented
today, the implementation of the completion strategies
for the two Tribunals is on course. It is our hope that
the Tribunals' fundamental achievements - moving
from impunity to accountability, establishing facts,
doing justice vis-a-vis the victims and giving them a
voice and strengthening the rule of law - will
contribute decisively to peace, stability and long-term
national reconciliation in each of the countries
concerned and in their respective regions.

