Mr. Jiirgenson (Estonia): I would like to thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing. Estonia welcomes the signing of agreements between Israel and the United Arab Emirates and between Israel and the Kingdom of Bahrain. We also welcome the constructive role played by the United States in this respect. The normalization of relations is a positive development that contributes to the peace and stability of the whole region. It is positive that, along with these agreements, Israel has committed to suspending plans to unilaterally annex areas of the occupied Palestinian territory. We believe that these historic developments contribute to peace and stability in the whole region and give momentum to finding a comprehensive solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. A two-State solution and a lasting peace can be achieved only through direct negotiations, taking into account the legitimate aspirations of both parties and Israeli security concerns. We urge the Israeli and Palestinian leaders to re-engage in meaningful negotiations. We also call on the parties for the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) and to refrain from any unilateral steps that could undermine the prospects of the two-State solution and increase instability in the region. We would like to recall that the resolution calls for immediate steps to prevent acts of violence against civilians, including acts of terror, as well as acts of provocation, incitement and destruction. We condemn the continued firing of rockets into Israel and the attacks against civilians.Estonia strongly condemns the heinous killing of Rabbi Shai Ohayon on 26 August. We call on all parties to exercise maximum restraint in order to avoid an escalation of violence. We call on the Palestinian Authority to resume cooperation based on cooperation agreements with Israel. This would be especially vital in the context of the coronavirus disease pandemic. Finally, we note the positive signals that the Palestinian factions have once again reached consensus on holding elections. Hopefully, this agreement will soon result in the announcement of a date for the elections throughout the occupied Palestinian territories.
