The Secretary-General: I have just returned
from Beirut, where Arab leaders made a historic
decision to embrace Crown Prince Abdullah's peace
proposal, which confirmed the possibility of peace in
the Middle East and proposed a way forward. And just
prior to the Arab League Summit, the Security Council
itself passed one of its most significant resolutions on
the Middle East, resolution 1397 (2002), which
affirmed the vision of two States - Israel and
Palestine - living side by side within secure,
internationally recognized borders. The international
community must do everything possible to advance
these efforts. We should not allow terrorism and
extremism to prevail over the pursuit of political
settlement.

I am deeply alarmed at the rapid escalation of the
violence in the Middle East that we have witnessed
over the past two days. Horrific terrorist acts - or
attacks, if you wish - against Israeli civilians - first
in Netanya and then in Jerusalem - have been carried
out. Such attacks are aimed at undermining any
prospect for political settlement. I understand the anger
of the Israeli Government and people over those
attacks. The intention of such attacks, which I have
consistently and unreservedly condemned as morally
repugnant, is to subvert the possibility of any peaceful
settlement. Terrorism will not bring the Palestinian
people closer to the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State.

Yet I have also consistently voiced criticism over
Israel's use of disproportionate lethal force, especially
in civilian populated areas, in response to those attacks.
Such use of force will bring neither peace nor security
to Israel. Both sides need to adopt policies that
reinforce the prospects for a political process leading to
peaceful settlement, and eschew actions that make
peaceful settlement through negotiations more difficult.

I call on both Prime Minister Sharon and
Chairman Arafat to exercise responsible leadership at
this time. I would urge that they make every effort to
take advantage of the outcome of the Arab League
Summit in Beirut, which outlined a widely welcomed
vision for full peace in the region. United States
Special Envoy Zinni has put forward ceasefire
proposals that should be accepted by the Palestinians.
Israel should halt its assault on the Palestinian
Authority. Destroying the Palestinian Authority will
not bring Israel closer to peace.

At times like these it is possible to lose sight of
the fact that there is a path away from violence and
war. Via the Mitchell recommendations, the parties
should move quickly to achieve the two-State vision
expressed in Security Council resolution 1397 (2002)
of 12 March 2002, which is based on the principle of
land for peace, and Security Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973).

In your debate this evening, I would urge you to
consider not only the alarming deterioration of the
situation on the ground, but also how the international
community can help ensure that your resolutions -
particularly resolution 1397 (2002) - can become a
reality, and how the international community can help
the parties get back to the table.

