Chile expresses its appreciation to the Permanent Mission of Indonesia for having convened this open debate of the Security Council on the link between terrorism and transnational organized crime. The significant presence of the Under- Secretary-General of the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Office, Mr. Vladimir Voronkovy, and of the Executive Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Ms. Ghada Fathi Waly, demonstrates the relevance of this topic to international peace and security and for the coordinated work of the United Nations. The organization of this debate is timely and necessary, since it allows us to adequately monitor resolutions 2482 (2019) and 2462 (2019), dedicated to this topic, and note with concern that the links between terrorism and organized crime are evolving rapidly, especially in the current context of the coronavirus disease pandemic, which is helping to deepen both traditional and emerging threats. Although at the onset of the health crisis the closure of international borders and the intensification of police controls helped decrease the flow of illicit goods, criminal groups have demonstrated a great capacity to adapt to meet demand, while increasing their cybercrime capacities and taking advantage of the gaps generated by the diverted attention of the authorities. The possibility of a post-pandemic global economic and social crisis would herald a number of greater challenges in fighting this phenomenon, including the weakening of the State institutions tasked with preventing and combating such crimes at the national level, which could lead to an increase in corruption. On the other hand, economic despair and a lack of job opportunities could create recruitment opportunities for terrorist and criminal groups. Chile therefore believes it is essential to begin to better understand the links between terrorism and organized crime as a multidimensional, evolving threat with impacts at the national, regional and international levels. Against this backdrop, international cooperation in areas such as border security, financial intelligence and investigation and prosecution is of the utmost importance. In this context, Chile's Financial Intelligence Unit gathers and analyses intelligence to identify patterns and links between terrorism and organized crime, and regularly exchanges this information with its peers through the secure Egmont Group network. Likewise, the Unit monitors the sentences handed down by Chilean courts in order to identify typologies and warning signs derived from money- laundering and terrorist financing, as well as their preceding crimes, such as drug- and human-trafficking. Our country is in the midst of an evaluation process by the Financial Action Group for Latin America evaluating Chile's compliance with the 40 recommendations of the Financial Action Task Force on money-laundering and terrorist financing. We attach high priority to this process, since it allows us to strengthen and update national regulations to prevent and combat these crimes, which facilitate organized criminal activities due to the need for criminal groups to hide the illicit origin of their funds. The problems before us today are matters of high priority for Chile and the Latin America region. This is because the terrorist threat in the region to a great extent comes from drug-trafficking groups, which have increased their arsenals and violence, to the detriment of the human security of our societies. Furthermore, these groups increasingly collaborate and converge with regional and transnational terrorist groups. Chile is looking forward to the publication of the report of the Secretary General pursuant to resolution 2482 (2019), which will serve as a guide for identifying areas for priority action to counter the multiple challenges relating to this phenomenon and the consequences of the pandemic. In this regard, we encourage the Security Council and the United Nations system in general to continue supporting the efforts of Member States to maximize international cooperation and better face the complex times ahead.
