Mr. Shin Dong Ik (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, I would like to express my appreciation to you,
Madam President, for organizing this meaningful open
debate on securing borders against illicit flows. My
appreciation also goes to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Ban Ki-moon, for his thorough and
insightful briefing.

The illicit flow of materials, funds and goods, as
well as of people, poses grave concerns to international
peace and security. In an effort to circumvent tighter
national measures and international frameworks
against them, those engaged in illicit flows from
smuggling, trafficking, brokering, trans-shipment and
re-export have grown smarter and have developed
more complicated techniques, even engaging in
cyberspace activities.

By contrast, national and international measures
to counter them remain static and outdated, and lack
the necessary coordination among Member States and
international organizations. I believe that if proper
measures are not taken to close those loopholes, that
trend will pose an ever-growing threat to international
efforts to maintain and foster global peace and security.
Today's thematic meeting is therefore a timely
occasion to accomplish that while simultaneously
taking stock of current actions throughout the
Organization, with a View towards streamlining and
elevating the United Nations toolkit for addressing
such a significant problem.

States have the first and primary responsibility to
impose domestic measures with respect to securing
their borders against illicit flows of every kind. In the
same manner, it is also an international obligation; a
number of Security Council resolutions and
international regulations call upon Member States to
establish the necessary measures to fully respect and
implement their international obligations in that regard,
moving forward to better control illegal activities.

Moreover, as illicit flows continue to cross
borders and to occur at the margins of extra-territorial
jurisdictions, close regional and international
cooperation, including information-sharing and
assistance in capacity-building, are badly needed. The
Republic of Korea has redoubled its jurisdictional
efforts and is determined to contribute to international
action to prevent and combat illicit transnational flows.

To that end, the Republic of Korea and Australia,
submitted a draft resolution, entitled "Preventing and
combating illicit brokering activities", to the First
Committee at the sixty-third session of the General
Assembly; the draft was ultimately adopted by the
Assembly as resolution 63/67. It encourages States to
establish appropriate national laws and to engage in
international cooperation to prevent and combat illicit
brokering.

I believe the resolution has facilitated discussions
within the United Nations framework on the issue of
illicit flows, resulting in Member States establishing
domestic institutions to enforce their international
obligations. The resolution was re-adopted by an
overwhelming majority of Member States at the sixty-
fifth General Assembly in 2010 (resolution 65/75).

Furthermore, with its well-advanced Internet-
based infrastructure, the Republic of Korea has
effectively implemented its customs and export
controls. Particularly, with respect to non-proliferation,
I would like to draw your attention to our "yes-trade"
programme, a database and one-stop verification
system for dual-use and contraband materials. Yes-
trade provides self-classification and classification
services for strategic items, and a one-stop service for
acquiring an export license, should that be deemed
strategic.

Since its launch in 2005, the Korean Government
has not only implemented its export control system
successfully with that online system, but the Republic
of Korea has also presented its merits to countries
interested in the system in relevant forums.

In addition, given the new threats of illicit flows
in cyberspace, the Republic of Korea, as a leading
information technology powerhouse, has proven its
active participation in international cooperation and
collaboration for cybersecurity.

Our participation includes joining the work of the
Group of Government Experts on Information Security
and hosting seminars on cybersecurity within the
framework of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation
and Association of Southeast Asian Nations Regional
Forum. We are also running train-the-trainer
programmes for law enforcement officials in
developing countries to support their capacity-building,
on which we place high importance. In order to further
contribute to enhancing global efforts to address
cybersecurity issues, including illicit flows on the
Internet, the Korean Government will host the
Conference on Cyberspace in 2013, succeeding the
United Kingdom and Hungary.

I hold high expectations for the diagnostic
assessment to be prepared by the Secretary-General on
options and recommendations to help States with
regard to their illicit flows problems. I look forward to
hearing those recommendations, and I would like to
reassure you of our firm commitment and willingness
to closely engage in the issue in the coming future.
