The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council is increasingly alarmed at
the deterioration of the situation in Zaire and at the
humanitarian consequences this is having on the
refugees, displaced persons and other affected civilian
inhabitants. It expresses its deep concern at the lack of
progress in efforts to bring about a peaceful and
negotiated settlement of the conflict in Zaire.

"The Security Council once again underlines the
obligation of all concerned to respect the relevant
rules of international law, including those of
international humanitarian law.

"The Security Council is dismayed by the
continued lack of access being afforded by the
Alliance of Democratic Forces for the Liberation of
Congo/Zaire (ADFL) to United Nations and other
humanitarian relief agencies, and by the recent acts of
violence which have hampered the delivery of
humanitarian assistance. It reiterates the statement of
its President of 4 April 1997 (S/PRST/ 1997/ 19) and in
particular calls in the strongest terms upon the ADFL
to ensure unrestricted and safe access by all
humanitarian relief agencies so as to allow the
immediate provision of humanitarian aid to those
affected, and to guarantee the safety of humanitarian
relief workers, refugees, displaced persons and other
affected civilian inhabitants in the areas which the
ADFL control.

"The Security Council also expresses its
concern at the obstruction of the repatriation plan of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) for eastern Zaire. It calls upon the ADFL
and the Government of Rwanda to cooperate fully
and without delay with UNHCR to enable the early
implementation of the plan.
"The Security Council is particularly alarmed
by reports of massacres and other serious violations
of human rights in eastern Zaire. In this context, it
calls upon the ADFL and others concerned in the
region to cooperate fully with the recently
established United Nations investigative mission by
ensuring unimpeded access to all areas and sites
under investigation, as well as the security of the
members of the mission.

"The Security Council reiterates its full support
for the United Nations five-point peace plan,
endorsed by its resolution 1097 (1997) of 18
February 1997. It calls for an immediate cessation of
hostilities and calls upon the Government of Zaire
and the ADFL to engage seriously and fully in the
search for a speedy political solution to the problems
in Zaire, including transitional arrangements leading
to the holding of democratic and free elections with
the participation of all parties. In this context, it calls
upon the President of Zaire and the leader of the
ADFL to meet as soon as possible.

"The Security Council warmly commends the
efforts of the joint United Nations/Organization of
African Unity (OAU) Special Representative for the
Great Lakes region. It calls upon all States, in
particular those in the region, to support these efforts
and to refrain from any action that would further
exacerbate the situation in Zaire.

"The Security Council reaffirms once again the
importance of holding an international conference on
peace, security and development in the Great Lakes
region under the auspices of the United Nations and
the OAU.
 

"The Security Council expresses its gratitude to
the Secretary-General for keeping it informed of
developments in the Great Lakes region and requests
him to continue to do so on a regular basis.

"The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1997/22.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 115 pm,
