Mr. Kambogo (Gabon) (spoke in French): It is
a pleasure and an honour for Gabon to have been
invited by Equatorial Guinea to take part in this very
important meeting.

I should like to begin by thanking the Secretary-
General of the United Nations and the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission. I also thank the
Dominican Republic and congratulate it on its term in
January, and I welcome and congratulate the Ministers
for Foreign Affairs of Cote d'Ivoire and Rwanda.
Nor can I fail to thank all previous speakers for their
excellent contributions to our discussion today.

I am pleased to convey to the President of
Equatorial Guinea, Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo,
the brotherly greetings and congratulations of Mr. Ali
Bongo Ondimba, President and Head of State of the
Gabonese Republic, for having brought before this
important forum the issue of mercenaries, which
represents a real source ofinsecurity and destabilization
in Africa in general and in Central Africa in particular.

The recent events in Equatorial Guinea remind
us of the sad fact that Africa continues to fall victim
to upheavals as a result of a phenomenon that we
had believed to be a thing of the past and which,
unfortunately, constitutes a genuine threat to peace and
security in our countries.

This high-level debate provides us with the
opportunity to take an objective look at security issues
in the subregion, which are a source of deep concern
and are exacerbated by the presence of an increasing
number of hostile, well-equipped armed groups. The
terms of reference for this debate as given to us by the
President of the Security Council stress the impact of
this heinous phenomenon of mercenaries not only on
political stability, but also on the economic development
of African States.

That is why Gabon strictly respects all international
legal instruments relating to the combat against
mercenarism, and that is why we stress the importance
of respecting the national sovereignty of each country.

In that vein, we encourage all States of Central
Africa to continue to strengthen their fraternal ties,
friendship, good-neighbourly relations and cooperation
while providing holistic, coordinated responses to
the challenges posed by transnational threats such as
mercenaries, terrorism and violent extremism.

Only the mobilization earnest cooperation of our
States can effectively combat such threats to peace and
security. In that regard, Gabon, in its capacity as current
Chair of the Economic Community of Central African
States, will continue to work for the consolidation of
peace and stability in the subregion. It is worth recalling
that Central Africa has a remarkable institutional
architecture capable of promoting the prevention and
management of sources of instability and crises, in
particular the Council for Peace and Security in Central
Africa and the Central African Early Warning System.
On behalf of the highest authorities of the Republic
of Gabon, I must certainly take this opportunity to
commend the work of the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa and the ongoing support of
the African Union.

Another issue that contributes to the destabilization

of our States is the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons, which results from the armed conflicts in
certain countries of the continent and fuels poaching
and illegal wildlife trade. Such trade is one of the
primary sources of funding for mercenaries, which
we firmly condemn. Despite our firm commitment to
combating that phenomenon, it must be recognized
that without the sustained support of the international
community, we will not be able to permanently contain
those scourges.

In conclusion, on behalf of the President of Gabon,
Ali Bongo Ondimba, I would like to again congratulate
Equatorial Guinea, as President ofthe Security Council,
on the relevance of the theme of today's debate.

