Mr. Zannier: Following your invitation to brief
the Security Council, Mr. President, I am glad to share
some of my considerations on the issue at hand, in line
with my conflict-prevention mandate and to the extent
permitted by its confidentiality clause.

Later this week, in the margins of the High-level
Political Forum on Sustainable Development, my
Office will convene a meeting with other regional
organizations to examine how successful integration
policies can help strengthen the coherence of diverse
societies and their resilience to conflicts and crises.
In particular, we will focus on the role of youth and
the importance of balanced policies in the field of
education as tools to promote the full participation of
every member of society in public life.

Over the years, my Office has developed a set of
guidelines and recommendations addressing important
issues, such as education and the use of language,
and those recommendations are at the basis of our
engagement with all relevant States members of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
States (OSCE). It is also based on those guidelines and
recommendations that successive High Commissioners
on National Minorities have cooperated for more than
two decades with the authorities of Ukraine on various
sets of policies related to the integration of Ukraine's
diverse society, in particular on issues related to
language and education. Since I took office, I have
closely followed the adoption of the law on education
of 2017 and every stage of the process of drafting the
law on ensuring the functioning of Ukrainian as the
State language.

In that connection, I have visited Ukraine a number
of times to engage with the authorities, representatives
of national minority communities and other relevant
interlocutors. As Ipointedoutonanumber ofoccasions in
my interaction with the Government and the Verkhovna
Rada of Ukraine, Ukraine has indeed every right to
strengthen the role of the State language to enhance
a shared sense of belonging. Steps in that direction,
however, should be balanced with concerted efforts to
accommodate the ethnic and linguistic diversity of the
country. Accordingly, minority rights, including in the
sphere of language and education, should be taken into
account and respected, in line with Ukraine's OSCE
commitments and international standards.

A balanced and pragmatic linguistic policy
should ideally be achieved through positive means
and incentives rather than penalties, as well as take
regional specifics into account, also with a view to
facilitating progress with the resolution of the conflict
in and around Ukraine. That would help to establish
an enabling environment for increasing the use of the
State language as a tool for integration.

Thorough consultations with all relevant
stakeholders, including national minorities, should take
place at every stage of the process to reach a broad
societal consensus, increase ownership and arrive at a
mutually acceptable and inclusive policy. The opinion
and input from relevant international institutions,
including the Council of Europe's Venice Commission,
can help to ensure that language-related legislation is in
line with international standards. Legislation related to
language and national minorities should be developed
in a comprehensive way to ensure consistency and
avoid gaps in the legislative framework related to
national minorities.

The law on ensuring the functioning of Ukrainian as
the State language was promulgated during my visit to
Kyiv in May. I therefore discussed that and prospective
legislation regulating the use of languages in the
country with the outgoing presidential Administration
and several ministries, as well as with the Chairpersons
of all the relevant Committees of the Verkhovna Rada. I
also shared my considerations with regard to Ukraine's
language policy in an op ed piece published on the
eve of my visit, as well as in my letter to President
Zelenskyi following my visit, outlining possible ways
forward and pointing out that the language question
should be addressed in a way that unites rather than
divides Ukraine's diverse society. I also noted that
President Zelenskyi had made the same point in his
own inauguration speech.

Concerning the text of the law, the following are
the main considerations to which I would like to draw
the attention of the Security Council.
Compared with the text adopted in the first reading,
the promulgated version introduces differentiated
transition periods for the implementation of language
provisions in various spheres of State language use. I
welcome the fact that the State language law extends
the transition period for the implementation of article
7 of the law on education until 2023 for European
Union (EU) languages. However, the distinction
between EU and non-EU languages, as highlighted
by the Venice Commission in reference to the law on
education, remains a concern. Elements of a punitive
approach remain. The law establishes the Office of the
Plenipotentiary, not only with a mandate to monitor the
implementation of the law on the State language, but
also with the power to issue warnings and fines.

I also took note of the reference in the law and the
commitment of the authorities to adopting legislation
to realize the rights of national minorities within six
months, which I assess as a positive intention. Beyond
that stated commitment, however, the law on the State
language, as it stands, does not ensure sufficient legal
clarity or guarantees for the protection of the linguistic
rights of persons belonging to national minorities.
Therefore, pending the adoption of that prospective law
on the rights of national minorities, the protection of
their linguistic rights remains unclear.

Ideally, Ukraine's language policy should be
supplemented by a modernization of the overall
legal framework safeguarding the rights of national
minorities, including in the linguistic sphere, through
the introduction of a comprehensive law. All relevant
stakeholders, in particular the representatives of
national minorities, should be effectively consulted on
the development of that legislation.

On the part of my institution, I remain willing
and committed to assisting the new leadership
and the new Government in the development of a
pragmatic and forward-looking policy, including
in the area of education, that would comply with
Ukraine's international commitments and lay a solid
foundation for the development of a well-integrated and
cohesive society.

