Mr. Fendrick (United States of America): We
would like to thank you, Sir, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Greece, for having organized this important
debate. We would also like to congratulate Mr. Jean-
Marie Guehenno, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, for his contributions to this
discussion.

This is a timely discussion. It is especially
relevant to the wide-ranging discussions that are taking
place in these halls concerning United Nations reform.
Today's subject really involves the United Nations
institutional gap identified by the Secretary-General's
High-level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change.
As the Panel noted in paragraph 261 of its report
(A/59/565),

"there is no place in the United Nations system
explicitly designed to avoid State collapse and the
slide to war or to assist countries in their
transition from war to peace."

The High-level Panel wanted to help the international
community to address the spectrum of problems that
many States confront today, from pre-conflict, through
conflict itself to post-conflict or recovery.

The international community has often had to
play a role across that continuum, and properly so. For
most of the history of the United Nations, conflicts
have almost invariably wound up threatening regional,
if not global, peace and security, whatever their causes.
Whether conflict begins as internal strife or as a
localized cross-border affair, the wider international
community frequently becomes engaged. It is therefore
entirely appropriate for the Security Council to
consider lessons learned from helping societies emerge
from conflict.

In the light of that history, the High-level Panel's
recommendation that the Security Council establish a
Peacebuilding Commission makes eminent sense. The
Council should act on that recommendation promptly.
No one foresees the day when the international
community will be out of the business of helping post-
conflict societies. Therefore, we owe it to ourselves to
try to learn from experience and apply the lessons to
conflict prevention.

In our view, a stable society with a successful
economy is necessarily rooted in the rule of law and
has representative institutions that operate predictably,
according to law. The economy is also framed and
governed by law. As a society heads over the cliff into
conflict, the rule of law breaks or is weakened. In
recent cases, hostilities often have eroded respect for
the most basic norms, including those set forth in
international humanitarian law. Afterwards, confidence
in the rule of law must be rebuilt if a society is to avoid
slipping backwards.

Almost all of us have experience with these
issues. As a community, we have struggled with the
full array of problems in trying to help societies
emerge from armed conflict and stay away from it in
the future. We know that security is a sine qua non for
peace, justice and prosperity. To build or rebuild
security takes great effort, and security institutions
must be tied into the overall programme of social
reconstruction. Thus, training is indispensable - but
training not only in conflict management or control,
but also in support of the rule of law. No one wants the
effort to result in the formation of a praetorian guard.
Therefore, creating appropriate security structures must
be part of a larger whole: it involves training police
and reforming criminal justice institutions - courts,
prosecutorial offices and prisons.

Where the United Nations as an institution is
concerned, the work on security must be coordinated
with all the other efforts being undertaken in
connection with a particular society; and all the other
efforts must be coordinated with each other. That is a
great lesson that the United Nations as an institution
should take from its recent experience with complex
peacekeeping operations in Europe, Asia, Africa and
Latin America. The United States believes that the
Peacebuilding Commission under discussion can and
should make a significant contribution in that area.

Better coordination among United Nations family
entities and with donors, international financial
institutions and regional partners, as well as taking on
board the lessons from the complex United Nations
peacekeeping and peace support missions of the last 15
years, can help us all do a better job of conflict
prevention. In the event that conflict cannot be avoided,
such coordination and application of lessons learned
can improve our collective efforts to assist States to
recover from conflict. These activities are central to the
successful discharge of the Security Council's primary
responsibility for peace and security.

