Mr. Bull (Liberia): As you end your presidency of
the Council for this month, Sir, I should like, on behalf of
the delegation of Liberia, to warmly congratulate you on
having so skilfully carried out the responsibilities
entrusted to you. We particularly applaud your recent
initiative in convening a formal meeting to discuss the
issue of demining in the context of United Nations peace-
keeping. This matter is of vital importance to the
reconstruction efforts of countries which have been
ravaged by war, such as Liberia.

My delegation also extends its appreciation to your
distinguished predecessor, the Ambassador of France, for
the able manner in which he guided the Council's work
last month.

The Council will shortly take action on the
Secretary-General's recommendations outlined in his
eighteenth progress report on the United Nations Observer
Mission in Liberia, contained in document S/1996/684 of
22 August 1996. Permit me to thank the Secretary-
General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, for the report and
for his continued commitment to the quest for lasting
peace in Liberia.

The outbreak of hostilities in Liberia last April was
a serious setback to the peace process. Today, the
renewed hope in the continuing progress and viability of
the Abuja Accord is due to the commendable efforts of
the leaders of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) and other national, regional and
international actors who worked tirelessly over the past
four months to prevent the country's slide into a state of
anarchy.

Since the signing of the revised Abuja Agreement,
which incorporates far-reaching decisions, including a
new timetable for encampment, disarmament and
reintegration of combatants and the holding of democratic
elections by 30 May 1997, the leaders of the warring
factions have pledged anew their commitment to the
implementation of the revised Agreement.

 

To be sure, the repeated failure of the warring factions
to honour more than 12 previous agreements has raised
reasonable doubts about their sincerity and commitment to
these new undertakings. Nevertheless, the delegation of
Liberia believes that several recent developments have
increased the prospects for a peaceful transition in Liberia.
First, the Heads of State and Government of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) adopted a resolution
during their annual meeting, held in Yaounde, on 8-10 July
1996, which threatened the faction leaders with punitive
measures, including the imposition of sanctions against
them and the possibility of establishing a war crimes
tribunal for Liberia. This OAU resolve was reinforced at
the subregional level by the Heads of State and Government
of the Economic Community of West African States during
their Summits held in Abuja on 26-27 July 1996 and 17
August 1996.

Secondly, the resumption of armed hostilities in April
and the inability of any warring faction to overwhelm
another, even with the non-intervention of the ECOWAS
Cease-fire Monitoring Group (ECOMOG), has clearly
demonstrated that there cannot be any victor in the war.

Thirdly, the ECOWAS member States have taken
concerted action on several important issues: the Abuja
Agreement has been extended until 15 June 1997 and a new
timetable formulated for its implementation; other member
States in the subregion - Mali, Gambia, Burkina Faso and
Cote d'Ivoire - have decided to deploy troops or
personnel to Liberia. Moreover, there is a new resolve by
the ECOWAS countries, under the leadership of its current
Chairman, President Sani Abacha of the Federal Republic
of Nigeria, to remain fully engaged in the resolution of the
Liberian conflict.

Fourthly, the re-emergence of civil society in the
peace process reflects the determination of the civilian
majority to actively participate in decisions affecting them.
It was civilian groups which advocated a change in the
chairmanship of the Council of State, leading to the
selection of Mrs. Ruth Perry, former Senator of Grand Cape
Mount county and the first female to assume the highest
post in government since the country's independence 149
years ago. She is expected to be formally inaugurated in
Monrovia on Tuesday, 3 September 1996.

These developments make us confident that if internal
and external pressures are maintained on the present
leadership, the faction leaders will realize that it is in their
best interest to implement, without further delay, the
provisions of the Abuja Agreement. Indeed, since the
signing of the Agreement on 17 August 1996, the faction
leaders have publicly pledged their total commitment to
peace and are taking measures, including the dismantling
of checkpoints and the partial disarming of some of their
forces, pursuant to the terms of the Agreement. While
these are encouraging developments, nothing short of their
full compliance with the terms of the Agreement will lead
to durable peace.

It is well known that since the commencement of the
civil crisis, the member States of ECOWAS have
continued to make substantial sacrifices in pursuit of
peace in Liberia. While the ECOWAS peace initiative has
experienced some financial and administrative problems,
it nevertheless represents a pioneering effort to bring to
fruition Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations. This praiseworthy effort is deeply appreciated by
the Liberian people and deserves greater support from the
United Nations.

In this connection, the Liberian delegation would
like to re-emphasize the urgent need for the United
Nations to ensure that there is a mechanism whereby
subregional and regional peace-keeping operations
undertaken with the approval of the Security Council
receive the requisite support.

In order to build on the recent positive developments
in the peace process, ECOMOG must be fully supported.
In keeping with recent decisions, ECOMOG has to
increase its troop strength to 18,000, and an estimated
$132 million is required to assist ECOMOG to implement
its mandate. The lack of support from the international
community following the signing of the Abuja Agreement
in August 1995 prevented ECOMOG from deploying
throughout the country as called for by the timetable
formulated by the parties. The tragic developments which
ensued in Liberia as a result of this deficiency are well
known to the international community. It is therefore the
prayerful hope of the Liberian people that these negative
developments will not be allowed to reoccur because of
lack of support for ECOWAS.

It is clear that there are urgent needs which must be
quickly satisfied in order to advance the peace process in
Liberia. Foremost among these is the need for assistance
to ECOMOG to facilitate its deployment throughout the
country, leading to the encampment, disarmament and
demobilization of combatants and their reintegration into
civil society. Concomitantly, Liberian refugees would be
repatriated and resettled and pilot programmes undertaken
to rehabilitate combatants. The army and paramilitary

 

organizations would be reorganized and preparations for
elections undertaken by a reconstituted and independent
Elections Commission.

As regards elections in Liberia, it is imperative that
they be preceded by the complete disarmament of
combatants. It is important to stress the need for the
electoral process to be internationally supervised and
declared to be free and fair. Due to the adverse effects
which the civil war has had on all Liberians, the people
will not accept any leadership which attains political power
by fraudulent means. This is why the international
community must help support the disarmament and
electoral processes as means of ensuring permanent peace
in Liberia.

The total disarmament of combatants will prevent
intimidation of the electorate, build confidence and facilitate
national reconciliation and reconstruction of the country. It
is most unfortunate that those who have pledged to honor
the terms of the Abuja Agreement which, inter alia,
requires the disarmament of combatants, would oppose
rather than support the process in its entirety, since it is
widely seen as a precondition for durable peace. Would
opposition to total disarmament not imply some hidden
agenda? Would total disarmament not ensure that those
bearing arms after the completion of the process were doing
so illegally, thereby ensuring accountability and restoration
of civil society and the rule of law?

It is important to emphasize that these laudable
objectives cannot be achieved without the support of the
international community. On behalf of the Liberian
Government and people, I appeal to all Member States to
contribute generously to the Trust Fund for Liberia. We
thank all the countries which have made contributions to
this important effort. The Liberian people, who have been
deprived of their rights for so long, are depending on the
Security Council to take the lead in supporting the efforts
of ECOWAS to achieve peaceful change in Liberia.

As the security situation continues to improve in the
country, the Liberian delegation appeals to governmental
and non-governmental organizations to resume fully their
activities in Liberia, activities which are so vital to the
humanitarian needs of the people and the revival of
development activities in the country.

We endorse the draft resolution on Liberia now before
the Security Council and join in its appeal to Member
States to comply fully with the arms embargo on Liberia.

The United Nations has been involved in the peace
process since the commencement of the civil crisis in
Liberia. In spite of the setbacks, we must not allow
ourselves to be discouraged. Liberians have the faith and
the determination, as recent developments confirm, that
the path ahead will ultimately lead to the restoration of
peace and democracy in Liberia.

