Mr. Menkerios: Last week's peaceful conclusion
of polling in the Southern Sudan referendum marked
an historic milestone in the implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA). This is a
testament to the commitment of the two parties to the
Agreement they signed six years ago and an illustration
of their strategic decision to uphold the CPA as they
approach the final and decisive stages of its
implementation. I would like to take this opportunity to
commend President Al-Bashir and Vice-President Kiir
for the leadership and courage they displayed in taking
the country along this difficult path, and call on them
to continue such a partnership, which, as we have
witnessed during the past few weeks, is absolutely
critical to the successful completion of the peace
process.

Polling, which started, as required by the CPA, on
9 January, concluded as planned on 15 January. Despite
the short time frame and logistical challenges, all
materials were distributed on time to the referendum
centres. Registered voters in Southern Sudan, Northern
Sudan and out of country were able to vote without any
major problems. No significant security incident
affected polling areas. Voting was disrupted only by
weather conditions in Brisbane, Australia, and was
extended by three days to guarantee that all registered
2

persons could vote. I would like to take this
opportunity to applaud the work of the Southern Sudan
Referendum Commission, the Southern Sudan
Referendum Bureau, the State High Commissions and
the polling centre staff, as well as all their national and
international partners who have worked tirelessly for
the past few months and organized a remarkable
polling process.

The Southern Sudan Referendum Commission
announced on 13 January that the required 60 per cent
threshold of registered voters - that is, 2,359,553
voters - had been reached by the fourth day of
polling, making the referendum legally valid.
Subsequently, on 16 January, the Southern Sudan
Referendum Commission Chairperson, Professor
Khalil Ibrahim, announced that 83 per cent of
registered voters had cast their ballots, a remarkable
turnout.

The United Nations Mission in the Sudan
(UNMIS), the United Nations Development
Programme and other international partners worked
closely with the Southern Sudan Referendum
Commission and its subsidiary bodies, providing
technical assistance and guidance on all aspects of the
process. United Nations air assets were heavily utilized
to deliver and retrieve polling materials and to
transport key referendum staff and international
observers. The international community, through its
generous financial contributions, made possible the
timely procurement of ballots, polling kits and other
materials, and helped finance the training of polling
staff and referendum security officials.

Security remained calm throughout the polling
period in the South except for some minor clashes
between the Sudan People's Liberation Army (SPLA)
and a rebel group in Unity state at the start of polling
and some disturbances by cattle rustlers in Western
Bahr el Ghazal, but none had any connection with the
referendum, and the disruption these events caused to
the polling process was minimal. Clashes in Abyei,
where no voting was scheduled to take place, also had
no direct impact on referendum security.

The referendum was closely observed and
monitored by large numbers of domestic and
international observers. More than 22,000 domestic
observers were accredited to oversee the process,
alongside approximately 600 international observers.
Observers were present in the overseas centres in eight
11-20932
countries. As Mr. Mkapa will undoubtedly mention in
his briefing later, the Secretary-General's Panel on the
Referenda in the Sudan noted in its preliminary
statement that, based on its observations and those of
its staff in the field, the Panel is satisfied that the
process allowed the people of Southern Sudan to
express their will freely. Similarly, the observer
missions of the African Union (AU), the European
Union, the Carter Centre, the Arab League and the
Intergovernmental Authority for Development have
issued statements concluding that the polling was free
and fair.

The counting of ballots at each referendum centre
commenced immediately after the closure of polls on
15 January. Results have been posted at each centre
and are to be forwarded and aggregated at the next
level between 17 and 23 January. Results from all
referendum centres will be verified, approved and
progressively announced. The Southern Sudan
Referendum Commission will announce preliminary
results for the entire referendum on 2 February. Barring
any legal appeals, the final results will be declared on
7 February and, in the case of appeals, on 14 February.
Senior officials of the National Congress Party in
Khartoum have already announced that the referendum
would most probably meet the standards necessary for
its outcome to be recognized and accepted.

With regard to post-referendum negotiations, as
we move into the final six months of the CPA interim
period, much remains to be done. The African Union
High-Level Implementation Panel on the Sudan, led by
President Mbeki, is mediating the negotiations on post-
referendum arrangements with the help of UNMIS, the
United States and other partners. We hope that the
successful completion of the Southern Sudan
referendum will help to enhance confidence between
the two parties and help them make the necessary
compromises to find solutions to the future status of
Abyei and a host of other pending issues, as well as
accelerate the popular consultations in Southern
Kordofan and Blue Nile states. The parties now have
the chance to launch a new stage in their relationship
and to begin building a foundation for trust and
cooperation.

As members of the Council are aware, the
referendum for Abyei did not take place. Nonetheless,
the parties remain engaged in the search for a
resolution to the area's future status. The AU High-
Level Implementation Panel has presented a set of
11-20932
proposals to the two parties, but they have not yet
agreed on any of the options or presented alternatives.
The talks are scheduled to resume on 27 January in
Khartoum at the presidency level.

Uncertainty over Abyei continues to present a
risk to peace and stability on the ground, and the Abyei
area remains tense and volatile. Incidents on 7 and
8 January in different areas in the northern part of
Abyei culminated in a significant confrontation
between Ngok Dinka police forces and Misseriya
communities on 9 January near the village of Makier
Abior, approximately 13 kilometres north-west of
Abyei town. Following the incidents, UNMIS was
repeatedly denied access to the area and could not
confirm the number of casualties, which is estimated at
between 20 and 60. Soon thereafter, reprisal operations
were launched by some of the affected Misseriya
community members against a convoy of southern
returnees while they were passing through Southern
Kordofan on their way to cross the border home.

UNMIS moved quickly to prevent any escalation
of violence, both through political intervention with
political leaders and by directing increased patrolling
on the ground. With UNMIS encouragement and
participation, an intercommunal conference was
quickly organized in Kadugli to address immediate
concerns over the impending migration of the
Misseriya, and a subsequent governmental meeting
took place yesterday to address outstanding security
needs in Abyei, returning internally displaced persons,
Southerners living in the North and vice versa. The
parties agreed to bolster security in Abyei, particularly
its northern part, with an additional two battalions of
joint integrated units, and to pull back the 300 Ngok
Dinka policemen who had come from Wau, in the
South, and had been deployed to northern Abyei posts,
which triggered Misseriya reactions. They also agreed
to completely disarm all communities in Abyei, to
escort returnees to safe destinations, and to ensure the
freedom of movement and security of migrants with
their cattle through Abyei and southwards into other
grazing areas in Southern Sudan.

UNMIS has increased both the size of its military
deployment to Abyei and its military and civilian
patrolling in the area in order to deter further attacks.
Movement restrictions were placed on UNMIS patrols
by both Ngok Dinka and Misseriya forces, which
impeded the Mission's efforts in responding to the
violence. Furthermore, incidents involving the
3
commandeering of United Nations vehicles by and
direct threats to United Nations personnel by these
armed elements reoccurred, which cannot and will not
be tolerated.

These efforts to reduce tensions and prevent
violence can help contain the situation. However, the
continued absence of a final settlement for the future
status of Abyei leaves open the possibility of further
clashes between the communities on the ground. I
therefore call on the parties to redouble their efforts to
settle the Abyei dispute and display the same
leadership and courage they have displayed regarding
the Southern Sudan referendum.

Regarding Southern returnees, I welcome
statements from both parties on their commitment and
arrangements to protect and respect the rights of
Southerners in the North and Northerners in the South,
respectively. Over 1.2 million Southerners have
returned since the signing of the CPA, with a recent
surge since October 2010 involving approximately
160,000 Southern returnees. This process needs careful
handling to avoid a humanitarian crisis. The United
Nations is providing humanitarian support to the return
process and stands ready to provide additional
technical support as necessary. I welcome the recent
decision taken by the Government of Southern Sudan
to promote return and reintegration, in accordance with
internationally accepted principles of voluntariness,
safety and dignity.

Ahead of the referendum, the Government of
Southern Sudan pursued its road map for political
accommodation in the South with the signing of a
ceasefire framework agreement between the SPLA and
Lieutenant General George Athor. This is most
welcome. The implementation of the promises made by
the Sudan People's Liberation Movement (SPLM)
during the all-party conference of October 2010 will
similarly be critical to consolidating Southern stability
in the post-referendum environment. UNMIS stands
ready to provide support and assistance to this process
and encourages the SPLM. to move forward with it.

Regarding the popular consultations, the
achievements of the CPA and the future of governance
in Northern Sudan are also supposed to be reviewed
through popular consultations in Blue Nile and
Southern Kordofan. Unfortunately, however, no
sufficient political commitment has yet been
demonstrated or clarity of objectives provided by the
parties to meet the requirements of the peace process in
the two states. One can hardly say that even in Blue
Nile state, where elections have taken place, there is
real confidence that the popular consultations will be
carried out properly and lead to a solution to the
inequities that led to marginalization and conflict in the
past.

The popular consultations represent one of the
key final benchmarks of the CPA and require both
clarity and attention from the parties. Neither of them
can afford to leave grievances and fears between rival
communities in the two states unaddressed, and risk a
resumption of hostilities in the border areas. Progress
will absolutely need to be made on that front in the
next six months if the gains achieved by the peace
process so far are to be consolidated.

The Southern Sudan self-determination
referendum is probably the single most important
foundation for the future peace and stability of the
Sudan and of the entire region.

The next few months will provide the basis for a
transition to the post-CPA environment. As with any
transition, it will be marked by a degree of uncertainty,
considerable expectations and hopes for some, and
fears of the new and unknown for others. Both the
SPLM. and the National Congress Party need to
continue displaying the remarkable leadership,
statesmanship and political courage they have
demonstrated in the past few weeks to guide the Sudan
through this difficult period.

Whatever the referendum's outcome, both
Northern and Southern Sudan will remain multi-ethnic,
multicultural and multireligious societies. Such
diversity is always the strength of nations, never their
weakness. With the conclusion of the CPA, both the
North and the South will need new constitutional
arrangements. This represents an important opportunity
for both of them to engage relevant stakeholders and
consolidate the peace and stability achieved under the
CPA.

The United Nations and the rest of the
international community will need to continue
supporting the parties through the rest of the peace
process and help to ensure that peace is maintained
between them while stability and democracy are
consolidated and deepened within them. The Sudan is
on the eve of a new dawn, and it is going to need a
heavy dose of encouragement and support from the
11-20932
international community to make sure that committed
implementation of the CPA signifies a final and
definitive break with the past and opens a new era of
prosperity and stability for all Sudanese.

