Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Several members of the Security Council
today made statements that have unequivocally further
demonstrated that my country, Syria, is the victim of two
simultaneous acts of aggression. The first involves the
attack by the permanent members of the Council, and
the second concerns the attack by proxy being carried
out by armed terrorist groups in Syria on the instructions
of those permanent member States of the Council. Both
seem to have an appetite for falsifying and fabricating
evidence. We have borne witness to such practices for
more than 10 years in the Council. It all began with the
lie concerning Iraq and its alleged weapons of mass
destruction (WMD). First and foremost, we categorically
reject the false accusations and allegations of the Syrian
Arab Army's use of toxic chemical substances against
Syrian civilians in Khan Shaykhun. The latter are used
as human shields by armed terrorist groups. Syria also
reaffirms that the Syrian Arab Army does not possess
any type of chemical weapon. We have never used them,
and we never will.

My Government subscribes to the principled and
firm position that eschews the use of chemical weapons
and all weapons of mass destruction whatever the parties
concerned, wherever, whatever the circumstance and
whatever the justification. Such use constitutes a crime
against humanity - an unjustifiable crime that runs
contrary to all ethics. Those are the firm principles by
which we stand and based upon which we joined the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW). We have honoured all our obligations under
the Convention on Chemical Weapons because we
believe that the Middle East should be a WMD-free
zone. We have demonstrated our commitment and
transparency within the framework of the agreement
between my country, the OPCW and the United Nations
Office for Project Services.

Baseless politicized accusations have been levelled
against my country and its allies in our war against
terror since day one, as the media have disseminated
information provided by Council-designated terrorist
groups, especially in Khan Shaykhun. That confirms
that certain parties represented within the Council,
as well as Turkey and other countries, will continue
their politicized and dangerous practices aimed at
blackmailing my Government and its allies, tarnishing
our reputation in our efforts to combat terror,
obstructing talks in Astana and Geneva and ending all
prospects for a political settlement of the crisis, even if
it is at the expense of children and women who are the
innocent victims of the terrorism that today threatens
Syria and the rest of the world. Certain Governments
are now of one voice in unjustifiably and systematically
accusing Syria so as to as to send us back to square one
with regard to the issue of chemical weapons and serve
clear political objectives. That is an attempt to hamper
the attitude of openness towards Syria that had begun
to take shape only recently.

On 21 March, the head of my country's delegation
in the Geneva talks expressed to Mr. De Mistura
Syria's concern about reports of armed terrorists
groups' possession of toxic chemicals in the rural areas
of Damascus, Idlib and Hama and their potential use
as weapons against civilians. He warned of fabricated
and falsified evidence and any other accusation levelled
against my country as was done in the past.

I would like to remind the Council that my
Government has sent more than 90 letters, of which the
most recent dates from several days ago, to the Council,
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), the High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs and the OPCW Joint Investigative Mechanism.
All those letters includede information documenting
armed terrorist groups' - namely, the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh) - possession of toxic
chemicals that had been acquired via Turkish territory.
We condemn the latter and find it very strange that
such actions coincide with the holding of international
meetings on Syria, negotiations with Syrian
representatives in Astana and Geneva, and incidents in
which civilians have been targeted.

That is in line with the continued cheap political
exploitation by certain Member States represented
in the Council through using fabricated reports
disseminated by the media that have ties to certain
countries' intelligence bodies. They do not rely on
reason or logic, or wait to establish the facts. They
do not even give a minute's thought to who is the real
beneficiary of using toxic chemicals against innocent
civilians. The answer is clear: the main beneficiaries
are the same regimes that have targeted Syria for
more than six years. They are now attempting to come
to the rescue of the armed groups and the alliance of
armed groups, so that they can undermine the political
process in Geneva and Astana. That narrative in the
Council against my country is the only explanation that
accounts for the statements made by the President of
the Council for the month of March when he declared
that he would oppose any draft resolution introduced
by the Russian Federation or China with regard to the
issue of armed groups' possession of chemical weapons
in Syria and Iraq.

It is quite paradoxical that France called for this
meeting. On instructions from former Minister for
Foreign Affairs Laurent Fabius, that country fabricated
the report of the use of toxic chemicals in eastern
Ghouta in August 2013, which was documented in
a book by two French journalists entitled Le Chemin
de Damas. France, along with its accomplices, is
politically, legally and ethically responsible for the
illegal international coalition's role in the shelling of
civilians and the destruction of infrastructure. I would
like to remind the Council of the barbaric massaerc
carried out by French warplanes against 200 civilians
in an Aleppo village in July 2016 and the recent airs
trikes by the international alliance in Raqqa and Deir
eZ-Zor that claimed the lives of scores of civilians and
destroyed numerous bridges and infrastructure.

In conclusion, my Government categorically rejects
falsified and fabricated accusations. lt nevertheless

reaffirms that it will continue to honour its obligations
under the Convention on Chemical Weapons and in
its ceaseless war against terror. We will relentlessly
combat terror despite any cheap attempt to exploit the

innocent blood spilled in Syria.

The meeting rose at noon.
