Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I would like to
thank Mr. Farid Zarif, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his comprehensive briefing, and
commend the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), under his leadership,
for its achievements in implementing its mission. I
thank His Excellency Mr. Tomislav Nikolie, President
of Serbia, and Ms. Atifete Jahjaga of Kosovo for their
respective statements. Our thoughts and prayers go to
the Serbian people, under the Serbian Government,
after the devastating floods of last week.

Rwanda welcomes the continued dialogue between
Pristina and Belgrade towards the full implementation
of the First Agreement of Principles Governing the

Normalization of Relations of 19 April 2013. We
commend the European Union (EU) for facilitating the
ongoing dialogue and encourage both sides to remain
engaged in fruitful discussions on their common
objective ofintegration within the European Union.

We also acknowledge the achievements of the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX) in promoting the rule of law in Kosovo. We
take note of the extension of EULEX mandate until
15 June 2016 and the continuation of the EULEX
Special Investigative Task Force, which is focused on
investigating the alleged trafficking of organs. We
hope that the ongoing EULEX strategic review will
enable the Mission to continue supporting Kosovo
in strengthening the rule of law, particularly in the
judiciary customs and police areas.
Rwanda welcomes the progress made towards the
normalization of relations between Serbia and Kosovo,
as demonstrated by the inclusion of former Serbian
police officers who are now on active duty in northern
Kosovo as part ofthe integration ofthe Serbian Ministry
of the Interior personnel into the Kosovo police. That
is an encouraging confidence-building effort, which
we hope will be followed by a final agreement on the
integration of Serbian parallel judicial institutions into
Kosovo's legal system within the framework of the
EU-facilitated dialogue.

On the return of displaced persons, we remain
concerned that the rate of return remains relatively
low. However, we welcome Kosovo's strategy for
communities and returns for 2014-2018, which is aimed
at improving and providing a conducive environment
for returnees with regard to housing construction,
local security, freedom of movement, access to public
services and employment. We consider that initiative
to be an important step in the overall integration of
Serbs into Kosovo and we welcome the efforts of all
municipalities south of the Ibar/Iber river that have
complied with the statutory requirement of appointing
minority community officers to key positions.

On the security situation, we note that Kosovo
remains generally stable and that the crime rate
continues to decline. We underscore the central role and
the important work done by the authorities and police
in that regard. However, we are concerned about the
multiplication of incidents in northern Kosovo, mainly
attacks on UNMIK convoys, the arrest of Kosovo
Serb officials, violent protests and the restrictions on
visits by Serbian officials. We also express concern at
incidents affecting Kosovo Serbs, mainly violations of
property, including property of the Serbian Orthodox
Church, the desecration of graves and offensive graffiti.
We urge the Kosovo authorities to redouble their efforts
in preventing and investigating those incidents so that
the authors can be held accountable. We stress the need
for the Kosovo authorities to protect Kosovo Serbs
and other ethnic minorities, which is a prerequisite for
reconciliation.

In conclusion, as Kosovo prepares for parliamentary
elections on 8 June, my delegation recognizes the
tremendous efforts and progress made by both parties
towards the full implementation of the 19 April 2013
Agreement. We encourage them to go the extra mile
through dialogue, which is the only way to ensure
sustainable peace between both sides. We thank the
European Union for its continued facilitation and we
pay tribute to Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Farid Zarif for his continued commitment in
implementing the UNMIK mandate.

