Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): The Committee
pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009)
concerning Somalia and Eritrea is the oldest Sanctions
Committee among the Council's subsidiary bodies and
has completed two decades ofexistence. The Committee
is unique in that it is mandated to cover two countries
in the Horn of Africa, namely, Somalia and Eritrea.
Resolution 751 (1992), imposed an arms embargo on
Somalia and established a Sanctions Committee to
oversee its implementation.

The mandate of the Committee has since been
expanded to include new provisions for arms embargoes,
assets freezes and travel bans through resolution
1844 (2008). In 2010, the Committee was mandated
by resolution 1916 (2010) to oversee the provisions
connected with the delivery of humanitarian assistance
to Somalia. Resolution 2036 (2012) also imposed a ban
on exports of charcoal and mandated the Committee to
monitor its implementation.

With respect to Eritrea, the Committee is mandated
to oversee the implementation of targeted measures
imposed by resolution 1907 (2009). The mandate was
expanded to include new provisions under resolution
2023 (2011). Given that background, the work of the
Committee is complex in terms of mandate and political
sensitivity.

During my two years as Chairman, the Sanctions
Committee pursued its mandate with the full
cooperation of Council member. The Committee,
however, continues to face significant challenges in
overseeing the sanctions regimes concerning both
Somalia and Eritrea. These include issues related to
technical violations of the arms embargo, objections
by humanitarian partners to the reporting requirement,
questions about the working of the Monitoring Group,
and in some cases non-cooperation by Member States
with the Monitoring Group.

In view of these issues, I made a sincere effort
to promote transparency and equity in Committee's
decision-making. I convened regular meetings with
the Special Representative for Somalia, the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, and
representatives of the World Food Programme and
UNICEF. I also encouraged Somalia, Eritrea and
interested States members of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development to participate in Committee
meetings, to interact with the members and to express
their views over the monitoring of the sanctions regime.
My effort was always towards building consensus with
utmost transparency.

Both in 2011 and this year, the Sanctions Committee
invited Somalia and Eritrea to interact with the
Committee immediately after the submission of the final
reports ofthe Monitoring Group. Also, I encouraged free
and frank discussions in the Committee over the reports
and recommendations of the Monitoring Group. I held
several meetings with the Member States, including the
Permanent Representatives of Somalia and Eritrea. In
these meetings, I emphasized the implementation of the
sanctions regimes and cooperation with the Sanctions
Committee.
During the past two years, the Committee met
18 times in informal consultations. It approved
25 requests for exemptions to the arms embargo,
pursuant to paragraph 3 of resolution 1356 (2001),
and 26 requests for exemptions to the arms embargo
pursuant to paragraph 11 (b) of resolution 1772 (2007).
It approved two travel ban exemptions to the same
person in 2012. I must also state here that the work ofthe
Committee has increased exponentially in comparison
to that of the two years prior to my chairmanship.

During the course of the past two years, there has
been remarkable progress in the process of stabilization
of political, security and humanitarian situations in
Somalia. This has created a historic opportunity that
must be seized for the full restoration ofpeace, security
and stability in Somalia. In addition, the overall
political and security situation in the Horn of Africa
continues to improve, with increasing cooperation and
reconciliation among Member States.

In this context, the next Chairman of the Sanctions
Committee on Somalia and Eritrea will need to continue
the Committee's engagement with not only Somalia
and Eritrea but also other States in the region. In the
short term, the Committee will also have to take a view
on the issue of the large quantity of charcoal found
in Kismayo and surrounding areas. I am convening a
meeting of the Sanctions Committee shortly to discuss
the issue with the Monitoring Group.

It is my considered view that sanctions should be a
measure of last resort by the Security Council and must
fully comply with the provisions of the United Nations
Charter. Sanctions regimes of the Security Council
must be not an end in themselves, but instruments for
the promotion and maintenance of peace and security
in the region. In their implementation, the sanctions
regimes must ensure that they have the intended impact
and do not exacerbate the suffering of the population.
As such, it is necessary to keep these regimes under
constant review and adjust the measures to suit the
objective and also keep pace with the changing situation
on the ground in the countries concerned.

In view of the developments in Somalia during the
past year, I think that time has come for this Council
to review the sanctions regimes in the Horn of Africa.
This should be done taking into consideration the views
expressed by the States of the regiona, as well as the
African Union.

In conclusion, on my personal behalf and also
on behalf my delegation, I would like express our
sincere appreciation to all colleagues in the Security
Council for reposing their faith in my chairmanship
of the Somalia-Eritrea Sanctions Committee for past
two years. I would also like to thank all members of
the Committee, their experts and the Secretariat for
their valuable support, especially the Secretary of the
Committee and his team.

