Mr. Logar (Slovenia): 1 would first like to thank
the Lithuania presidency for its initiative to convene
this important high-level open debate, as well as the
Deputy Secretary-General and the two panellists for
their briefings.

Slovenia also aligns itself with the statement
delivered on behalf of the European Union.

Journalism is one of the most influential, but also
under-respected and dangerous professions in the world
today. Events in recent months, like hostage taking
and beheadings of journalists by non-State actors,
such as the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS), have
shown that, in contemporary conflicts, attacks against
journalists are not a side effect, but rather a front-line
consideration.

It is important to stress that, under international
humanitarian law, journalists in armed conflict
are classified as civilians and entitled to the same
protection as the civilian population. Their work often
puts them at particular risk of intimidation, harassment
and violence in situations of armed conflict. States bear
the primary responsibility for ensuring the protection
of journalists on the territory under their jurisdiction,
including by investigating any attacks against them.
Yet, in most cases, the perpetrators of crimes against
journalists, media workers and associated personnel
escape justice and no one is held accountable. Such
realities are worrisome and must be addressed.

When States are unwilling or unable to ensure
justice themselves, victims rely on the possibility of
seeking justice outside national forums. We therefore
welcome the ongoing efforts to document evidence of
atrocities committed by members of ISIS, as well as
efforts made by the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) to investigate the possibility
of exercising personal jurisdiction over atrocities
committed by ISIS. The fight against impunity cannot
be won by a single stakeholder. We need greater
partnerships and cooperation to achieve the desired
end, including by the Security Council - the only body
vested with the authority to refer atrocities to the ICC
even when a State is not a party to the Rome Statute.

We should do our utmost to close the impunity gap,
as lack of accountability only leads to further violence
against journalists, creates a culture of fear and
conditions conducive to other systemic abnormalities,
and hinders post-conflict rebuilding, the rule of law
and long-term peace and stability.

We cannot afford to let terrorist- and non- State actor-
controlled zones become blackholes of information.
We have to acknowledge the courageous choices of
journalists, media workers and associated personnel
in going to war zones to report on atrocities and the
suffering of innocent civilians, even at the risk of their
own lives. When addressing the safety ofjournalists a
gender-based approach is necessary in order to address
the situation of women journalists, who are at greater
risk of becoming victims of sexual violence, which is
often used as a weapon of war in conflict zones.

Let me reiterate that the Security Council is not
alone in dealing with these issues, as various United
Nations bodies have adopted resolutions on the safety
ofjournalists. The General Assembly also affirmed the
need to end impunity for crimes against journalists, by
declaring 2 November as the International Day to End
Impunity for Crimes against Journalists.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that we
condemn the violence against journalists and media
workers, whether or not they are in conflict situations,
since it has serious repercussions on the freedom
of expression and on human rights in general. There
should be zero tolerance for any form of violence against
journalists. Worrisome trends call for the continued
attention of the Security Council. The adoption of
resolution 2222 (2015) today is an important step in that
direction, and it is also for that reason that Slovenia
co-sponsored the resolution.

