Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): Allow me to join
others in congratulating the French Republic on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of October and to sincerely thank it for
having convened yet another open debate on children
and armed conflict, shortly after having organized the
open debate last week on realizing the promise of the
women and peace and security agenda.

In that regard, I would like to commend you,
Madam President, for your outstanding work, for the
leadership and commitment that you have demonstrated
during your tenure and for placing on the global agenda
matters that have a bearing on the welfare of women
and children, as they are among the most vulnerable in
society. Let me also take this opportunity to thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing and for his annual
report on children and armed conflict (S/2017/821).
Equally, I wish to thank the respective briefers,
including Ms. Gamba, who is here with us, for their very
insightful contributions to the topic under discussion.

The report of the Secretary-General provides a
harrowing account of the recruitment and use of child
soldiers and of the increasing number of children killed
and maimed in armed conflict. The United Nations
has estimated that in 2016 more than 8,000 children
were killed or maimed and that there were over 14,500
violations of international norms and standards on
the protection of children in armed conflict. It is also
disturbing that the recruitment and use of child soldiers
has been prevalent in war-torn countries such as the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Somalia, South
Sudan, Syria and Yemen. Consequently, the number
of child casualties and cases of sexual violence against
children has also been increasing.

It is also alarming that the estimated number
of child casualties in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo increased by 75 per cent last year, while
Afghanistan had the highest recorded number of child
casualties, standing at 3,512 during the armed conflict.
The conflict in Yemen has affected over 11 million
children, with reported cases of grave violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights,
including atrocities against children.

Given the gravity of that matter, Botswana applauds
the Council for adopting the historic resolution
1612 (2005), on children and armed conflict, and for
convening open debates on the topic for the past 12 years.
Botswana also commends the Security Council for
establishing the monitoring and reporting mechanism
to gather and provide timely, objective, accurate and
reliable information on the recruitment and use of child
soldiers, including documenting violations and abuses
committed against children in conflict situations.

My country fully supports the initiatives adopted
in recent years to end the recruitment and use of
child soldiers, and to protect and promote the rights
and welfare of children in armed conflict. In that
connection, Botswana reaffirms its support for
the mandates of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Violence Against Children and the UNICEF Children,
Not Soldiers campaign.

We also support the development and implementation
of norms and standards, the zero-tolerance policy
on sexual exploitation and abuse, the United Nations
code of conduct, the deployment of child protection
advisers in United Nations peacekeeping operations,
and the safeguarding of the rights of children in peace
processes, peace agreements, post-conflict recovery
and reconstruction programmes.

Botswana strongly condemns indiscriminate
attacks on schools, hospitals and homes. We are
deeply concerned that such attacks have been on the
increase. The United Nations estimated in 2016 that 753
schools had been attacked that year. To demonstrate
our commitment to safeguarding education during
armed conflict, in June Botswana signed the Safe
Schools Declaration.

In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm Botswana's
commitment to international and regional instruments
that promote and protect the rights of children, such
as the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the
African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child
and Africa's Agenda for Children 2040: Fostering an
Africa Fit for Children. It is the duty of us all to secure
the future of our children and spare them the agony
of conflict.

