Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation would like to thank Ambassador Gary
Quinlan for his informative briefing and for the diligence
that he and his team have shown since assuming the
chairmanship of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006). I would like to draw attention to
several points with regard to the report before us today.

First, we commend the work of the Committee,
which has continued to consider requests for information
and reports of alleged violations from Member States.
With regard to States' requests for information on the
sanctions regime, it is important that the Committee
reply in a manner that is clear, direct and, most
important, prompt, in accordance with its mandate.

Secondly, with regard to the final report of the
Panel of Experts (see S/2013/331, annex), my delegation
welcomes that valuable document and supports the
recommendations it contains. We commend the
promptness with which it was published, as we consider
it to be essential that it be accessible to all States
Members of the United Nations.

Moreover, we welcome the recently adopted
resolution 2105 (2013), which extends the mandate
of the Panel of Experts for a further year. The Panel
provides valuable support to the work of the Committee.
Accordingly, we welcome the inclusion of a paragraph
on the matter of selection criteria for experts of Security
Council subsidiary bodies, in accordance with the note
by the President of the Security Council contained in
document S/2006/997.

We note with concern the contents of the latest
report (GOV/2013/27) of the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) on the
application of the IAEA safeguards regime in the
Islamic Republic of Iran, pursuant to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). It is
stated once more in the report that Iran has continued
to speed up its nuclear programme and that pending
matters remain unresolved, including issues relating
to the possible military dimension of its nuclear
programme. That lack of outcomes and progress in the
dialogue between Iran and the IAEA continues to cause
serious concern and, as all are aware, is a source of
great frustration for the international community. In the
current international context, the lack of cooperation
by the Iranian authorities is a definite threat to
international peace and security. We again urge the
Islamic Republic of Iran to adopt measures towards
the full implementation of the Safeguards Agreement
and other obligations and commitments under the NPT
and, above all, to allow inspections and to reach an
agreement on a structured approach.

In conclusion, my country followed with great
interest the electoral process that took place in Iran in
June. We hope that this new chapter in the political life
of the country will facilitate its cooperation with the
entire international community. We believe that Iran's
nuclear issues should be resolved by diplomatic means.
We hope that the President-elect of Iran, Mr. Hassan
Rowhani, will contribute towards achieving progress
in the nuclear dialogue. In that regard, we look with
great interest the outcomes of the E3+3 negotiations to
be held this week in Brussels.

