Mr. Pemagbi (Sierra Leone): This meeting marks
an important milestone in the history of United Nations
peacekeeping. I am therefore grateful to the Council
for the honour of participating in its proceedings on
behalf of the Government of Sierra Leone.

The United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL) has every reason to be proud of what it
has accomplished in Sierra Leone during the past six
years. The Mission has turned out to be one of the most
successful peacekeeping operations undertaken by the
United Nations in an internal conflict in the last three
decades. At the same time, notwithstanding the
difficult challenges it faced - what the Secretary-
General described as trials and tribulations - in the
early days of the operation, UNAMSIL bears testimony
to the triangular partnership that must be at the centre
of all United Nations peacekeeping: regional
organizations, troop-contributing countries and the
United Nations. As the Secretary-General observed in
his final report (S/2005/777), UNAMSIL was the first
United Nations peacekeeping operation to "re-hat" a
parallel sub-regional peacekeeping force.

In that context, allow me to pay special tribute to
our subregional organization, the Economic
Community of West African States, and its Monitoring
Group (ECOMOG), for the vital and timely
contribution they made to the safety and the security of
the people of Sierra Leone before the deployment of
UNAMSIL. ECOMOG troops exchanged their hats for
blue berets to serve under the flag of the United
Nations. Another symbol of partnership and
cooperation in United Nations peacekeeping was the
parallel contribution of the United Kingdom to the
maintenance of stability in the country. We thank them
for the role that they have played and continue to play.

As the report of the Secretary-General notes,
UNAMSIL forged an effective partnership with the
United Nations country team, countries of the
subregion, the donor community, civil society, the
Government and, of course, the people of Sierra Leone.
Without such partnership, UNAMSIL would not have
accomplished its task.

In that connection, I should add that UNAMSIL
succeeded because the people of Sierra Leone made it
possible for it to succeed. Indeed, as the report of the
Secretary-General puts it, the Government and the
people of Sierra Leone also deserve commendation for
their remarkable resilience and for making good use of
the opportunity offered by international partners to lift
their country from crisis. I am convinced that we have
demonstrated that, with some assistance, Sierra Leone
is capable of fulfilling its responsibilities.

The departure of UNAMSIL is a clear indication
that the Government of Sierra Leone has resumed full
responsibility for the security of the country. I would
like to assure the Council that the people of Sierra
Leone are determined to muster the same resilience
that carried us through those dark days of the rebel
conflict to prevent the outbreak of another so-called
fratricidal war. We wish to assure the international
community that Sierra Leoneans have pledged that
never again will Sierra Leoneans give the United
Nations, the Economic Community of West African
States or any individual State, for that matter, cause to
bring troops into our country to end a civil conflict.

Of course, we remain concerned about the
situation in the West African subregion. However, we
hope that the Security Council and the international
community will remain engaged in the efforts towards
the maintenance of security and stability in the
subregion. We must not forget the destabilizing role
that external forces played in fomenting and sustaining
the conflict in Sierra Leone. Let me take this
opportunity to express our sincere thanks to all the
countries that contributed military, police and civilian
personnel and other forms of support to the United
Nations operations in Sierra Leone. We promise that
their efforts and sacrifice will not have been in vain.

I would also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and his team
for the good work that they have done. I would like to
extend that appreciation to the mandate to his
predecessor, Ambassador Oluyemi Adeniji.

We look forward to the operationalization of the
new the United Nations Integrated Office in Sierra
Leone. Of course, we anxiously look forward to the
work of the new Peacebuilding Commission.

Lastly, I would like to all thank all those who
have asked the international community to continue to
support Sierra Leone. Clearly, continued support is far
less expensive in the long run than a relapse into
conflict.

