Mr. Henze (Germany): Like other delegations, we
would like to express our pleasure at seeing you in the
chair of the President of the Security Council, Sir, the
Council needs good Presidents, if it wants to do its work
properly. You have already demonstrated that we are in
good hands, and I pledge full cooperation.

At the same time, we would like to thank Ambassador
Somavia and his collaborators for the excellent work they
did in the presidency of the Council for the month of April.
Ambassador Somavr'a's negotiating skills and persuasive
force were already well-known. He confirmed them in his
work as President of the Council.

I would also like to welcome the Minister who has
come to the Council to present the views of the
Government of Angola.

Germany voted in favour of extending the mandate
of the United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM. III) for two months. In this context, Germany
associates itself fully with the statement Italy made on
behalf of the European Union.

By extending the mandate, the international
community underlines its readiness to promote the peace
process. However, both parties in Angola have to be
reminded that the lack of progress since the last extension
of UNAVEM's mandate has given rise to serious doubts
as to the will for peace. These doubts will have to be
dispelled by a full implementation of the calendar of
actions for the month of May, as agreed within the
framework of the Joint Commission. The parties must
know that the international community expects them to do
their utmost to consolidate peace in Angola. Therefore, all
means should be deployed to make clear to both parties
to the conflict what would be the consequences in the
event of a further stagnation of the peace process. There
will be no United Nations peace-keeping operation in
Angola after February 1997.

We recognize the efforts made by the Angolan
Government to fulfil its obligations arising from the
Lusaka Protocol. We welcome, in particular, that the
withdrawal of Government forces from advanced
positions has made considerable progress and that the
quartering of its rapid reaction police is almost completed.
We call on the Angolan Government to continue in this
vein.

At the same time, we appeal to UNITA to renew its
efforts to meet its obligations as well. In this context, we
deplore the fact that the quartering of UNITA' s troops has
come to a virtual standstill. This could put in question the
entire peace process. UNITA will have to increase
considerably the quartering of its actual fighting units, not
just underage youths, and turn in the entire spectrum of
its arms. To facilitate this process, the German
Government has provided shelters and water treatment
equipment for the assembly sites. In this context, both
sides have to be reminded that in the Lunda provinces the

 

withdrawal of Government troops and the quartering of
UNITA's units has not begun at all. This is not acceptable.

We welcome the fact that the dialogue between
President Dos Santos and the Chairman of UNITA,
Mr. Savimbi, is continuing. Concrete results, however, have
to be brought about in the near future.

The formation of the Government of Unity and
National Reconciliation should take place as scheduled. In
order to allow for this, UNITA's deputies should rejoin the
National Assembly, and the participation of UNITA in the
country's Government, especially the question concerning
the post of the Vice-President and its competences, should
be resolved.

The ongoing military talks should be successfully
completed. This is particularly important since the
incorporation of UNITA personnel into the joint armed
forces should stabilize the relative calm in the military
situation and prevent further defections from the assembly
sites.

The integration of UNITA personnel into the
administrative structure should make rapid progress to
prove that there will be a solid basis for power-sharing in
the country.

The German Government attaches particular
importance to the question of mine clearance. We very
much deplore the fact that UNAVEM's efforts to free the
country from that curse, which especially hurts innocent
civilians, still encounters obstruction, especially by UNITA.
The Angolan Government should, furthermore, continue to
invite qualified international organizations to participate in
these efforts. They are essential for the return of refugees
and the normalization of economic life in Angola. Concrete
progress in this field will condition the readiness of the
international community to assist in the reconstruction of
the Angolan economy. In recognition of its essential
importance, the German Government has contributed to
UNAVEM's mine-clearing activities by providing quality
control personnel. We see this in the framework of our
humanitarian assistance to the people of Angola, which,
including the German share of aid given by the European
Union, adds up to $90 million over the last five years.

There is reason to call again for a complete end of
arms deliveries to Angola. These arms have a very
destabilizing effect and stand in the way of confidence-
building. Any further purchases of arms can only raise

suspicion concerning the respective commitment in the
peace process.

Finally, the question of good governance and
economic reform has to be addressed. Unless the
legitimate interests of a large part of the population are
properly considered, widespread discontent and delays in
the return of internally displaced persons threaten to be a
serious obstacle to the political and economic recovery of
Angola.

Let me conclude by thanking the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Maitre Beye, and
the members of UNAVEM. for the good work they are
doing under difficult conditions. We also want to express
condolences to the families of those who lost their lives
in the effort to bring about a peaceful development in
Angola.

