Mr. Serry: It is an honour for me to brief the
Council today in your presence, Sir, and under your
presidency.

During the reporting period, both parties engaged
separately with the Quartet in the framework of the
23 September statement. While that is constructive,
direct negotiations without preconditions, in which the
parties would be expected to table territorial and
security proposals within 90 days, are still not taking
place. Provocations continue to damage confidence and
make resuming direct negotiations very difficult.
Settlements are expanding, undermining the territorial
basis for a future Palestinian State and the credibility
of Palestinian moderates.

The Palestinian bid for membership in the United
Nations is viewed negatively by Israel, and the
Palestinian Authority's tax revenue is being withheld
by the Government of Israel. UNESCO funding has
also been affected. Palestinian unity has not moved
forward, though there is speculation about future
developments. Meanwhile, Gaza has once again
witnessed dangerous violence, including rocket fire by
militants into Israel and Israeli strikes.

President Abbas has publicly warned that the
status quo cannot endure. We have to find a meaningful
diplomatic path forward. As the Secretary-General's
envoy, I am engaged with both parties and my Quartet
and regional partners in that effort. His Majesty King
Abdullah II of Jordan paid an official visit to Ramallah
today to hold consultations with President Abbas,
underscoring his concern at the current situation and
2
his support for the Palestinian Authority and a
resumption of meaningful negotiations for the creation
of a Palestinian State.

The 23 September statement of the Quartet
reaffirmed the international legal basis for peace talks.
It continues to provide the framework for a way
forward if both parties Show flexibility and
responsibility. Quartet envoys and Quartet
Representative Blair met separately on two occasions
in Jerusalem with Israeli and Palestinian
representatives, on 26 October and 14 November.
Quartet envoys stressed the need for the parties to
avoid provocations, develop serious proposals on
borders and security, and discuss them directly with
each other without delay or preconditions, with active
Quartet support.

The United Nations appreciates the substance that
has been discussed by the Palestinian side, which
shows serious intent. At the same time, we believe its
potential can be realized only in direct negotiations.
While we appreciate Israel's stated security concerns
and its readiness to enter direct talks, we also believe
that Israel should provide genuine assurances that it is
willing to present serious proposals, including on
territory, in the context of direct negotiations.
Moreover, direct engagement should be facilitated by a
conducive environment.

That remains very difficult given the lack of
mutual trust and tensions on the ground. In particular,
Israel continues to engage in settlement activity,
including in highly sensitive areas, and demolitions of
Palestinian structures are ongoing. On 1 November,
Israel announced the accelerated construction of
housing units in occupied East Jerusalem after the
decision by UNESCO to admit Palestine as a member.
Israel subsequently publicized its intention to invite
tenders for the construction of 1,557 new units in East
Jerusalem and 673 units in other areas of the West
Bank. On 2 November, the Secretary-General strongly
criticized settlement activity, which runs contrary to
international law and the Road Map and prejudices
final status negotiations. Unilateral actions on the
ground will not be recognized by the international
community and must cease.

The Palestinian application for membership in the
United Nations remains before the Council.
Meanwhile, on 31 October, UNESCO's General
Conference voted in favour of Palestinian membership.
11-60238

The decision was the prerogative of member States.
The Secretary-General had urged that all parties
approach the issue wisely in determining a course of
action. Since the adoption of the decision, he has
indicated that he wishes to work With member States
on practical solutions to preserve UNESCO's financial
resources.

The Israeli Government reacted to the UNESCO
outcome by freezing the transfer of value-added tax
and customs revenues it collects on behalf of the
Palestinian Authority pursuant to the Paris Protocol.
Those funds amount to approximately $100 million per
month, and represent two-thirds of the Palestinian
Authority's annual revenues. Withholding that level of
funding would cripple any Government, let alone an
authority under occupation. If the funds are not
immediately unblocked, this action will threaten the
State-building gains made by the Palestinian Authority,
including the increased good governance benefiting the
Palestinian people and the development of the security
forces that uphold law and order in the West Bank. The
United States is also partially withholding the
assistance funds that it had been providing to the
Authority.

We must de-escalate this situation. In addition to
acting on its settlement obligations, Israel should heed
the calls of the Secretary-General and other
international leaders to unfreeze transfers to the
Palestinian Authority immediately, in accordance with
existing agreements. Donors should also unblock their
funding to the Palestinian Authority. For its part, the
Palestinian Authority should find ways to contribute to
the de-escalation of the situation and improving the
prevailing divisive climate, including in the
international arena. De-escalation will be necessary to
create an environment conducive for direct talks. In
this regard, as Israel prepares for a further prisoner
release pursuant to the swap of two months ago, I hope
that it will be mindful of the continuing appeal of the
Palestinian Authority for prisoners - some of whom
have been incarcerated since before the signing of the
Oslo Accords - to be released.

We underscore the importance of the security
efforts of the Palestinian Authority and of continued
coordination. Palestinian security forces seized and
defused unexploded devices on two different occasions
in the reporting period. An eighth battalion of
internationally trained Palestinian security forces has
been deployed on the ground, bringing their number to
11-60238
over 4,000. In a positive gesture, 51 alleged militants
being held in protective custody by the Palestinian
police in the West Bank were granted amnesty by Israel
on 4 November.

Weekly demonstrations continued against the
barrier in the occupied West Bank, which deviates from
the Green Line in contravention of the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice. The route
of the barrier was reportedly recently moved in the
northern Jordan Valley, resulting in a de facto
annexation of Palestinian land. During a speech
marking the seventh anniversary of President Arafat's
death, President Abbas firmly rejected violence, but
called for the widest possible Palestinian "non-violent
resistance". On 15 November, Palestinian activists
boarded an Israeli bus near Ramallah, which headed to
Jerusalem to protest travel restrictions, and seven were
detained by the Israel Defense Forces (IDF).

However, violent incidents continue. Citing
security concerns, the Israel Defence Forces conducted
218 operations, during which 44 Palestinians were
injured, including three children, and 113 arrested,
including a prominent West Bank Hamas leader, who
was placed in administrative detention without charge
for six months on 31 October.

Meanwhile, 21 settler attacks on Palestinians
resulted in six injuries and the destruction of another
174 olive trees during the harvest season. On
15 November, the IDF arrested six Israeli settlers near
Ramallah for throwing stones at Palestinian vehicles.
Palestinian stone-throwing against Israeli vehicles in
the West Bank resulted in three injuries, and several
arrests of Palestinians. A Jewish holy site in Nablus
was desecrated on 31 October.

I wish to note that the weekly average of attacks
by settlers has increased by 40 per cent in 2011
compared to 2010, and by 165 per cent compared to
2009. Israel recently made some arrests in connection
with previous "price-tag" incidents. On 1 and
7November, the IDF demolished structures in three
West Bank settlement outposts, resulting in clashes
with settlers and several arrests. However, on
10 November the Israeli Government delayed the
demolition of two unauthorized West Bank settler
outposts built on private Palestinian property. Israel
must remove outposts consistent with its Road Map
commitments, and provide adequate law enforcement
for acts of settler violence in line with its obligations
3
towards the Palestinian civilian population under
occupation.

Preserving calm in Gaza and southern Israel
continues to be crucial for improvements there and for
the overall political atmosphere. The United Nations
remains committed to promoting the implementation of
resolution 1860 (2009). The fragility of the relative
calm was once again demonstrated on 26 October when
a Grad rocket launched by militants in Gaza exploded
near the Israeli city of Ashdod. Between 29 and
31 October, a dangerous escalation ensued. Tens of
Grad and homemade rockets, as well as mortars,
landed in Israel. Israel conducted air strikes in Gaza,
targeting mainly Islamic Jihad militants. Throughout
the episode, both Israel and the de facto Hamas
authorities in Gaza signaled their desire to de-escalate.
Diplomatic efforts led by Egypt helped to restore
relative calm on 1 November. However, Islamic Jihad
released footage purporting to show its possession of
increasingly sophisticated mobile rocket launchers
smuggled into the coastal strip, highlighting the need
for more effective steps to prevent the illicit trafficking
of arms and ammunition.

During the reporting period a total of 56 rockets -
including 24 Grad rockets - and 16 mortar shells were
fired into Israel, killing one Israeli civilian and injuring
four others. We condemn these indiscriminate attacks,
which must stop. The IDF fired nine tank shells and
conducted 25 airstrikes and four incursions into Gaza,
killing 14 Palestinian militants and injuring 12 others,
While two Palestinian civilian were killed and five
were injured. A 14 November Israeli airstrike injured a
French consular official in Gaza, as well as his
daughter and pregnant wife, who miscarried. Israel
must exercise maximum restraint and minimize the risk
to civilians. We reiterate the Secretary-General's call
for all to fully respect international humanitarian law.

In a welcome development, on 8 November the
Government of Israel granted four new sets of
approvals for construction projects, valued at
approximately $5.5 million, to be carried out by the
United Nations Development Programme, the
International Committee of the Red Cross, Sweden and
the United States Agency for International
Development. I also welcome the start of the delivery
of aggregate, bar and cement for use by the private
sector in Gaza, in a pilot arrangement that represents a
significant step towards rebuilding the Gaza economy.
We are urgently awaiting further approvals of vital
housing projects under the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.

With due consideration for Israel's legitimate
security concerns, I continue to call for further
measures towards the lifting of the land closure on
Gaza, such as imports of construction materials at
scale, exports, the extension of the Gaza fishing zone,
and the freedom of movement of people. Opening Gaza
is vital to the well-being of Gazans and for closing
gaps in supply increasingly filled by other actors,
including illicit tunnel trade largely controlled by the
de facto authorities. During the reporting period the
Israeli navy stopped two boats attempting to reach the
Gaza Strip by sea.

Following Fatah-Hamas contacts, a further high-
level meeting is being prepared to discuss the
implementation of the reconciliation accord agreed in
Cairo in May. The reconciliation accord envisages,
inter alia, elections in May 2012, following the
formation of a technocratic transitional Government.
Prime Minister Fayyad, who has consistently supported
reconciliation efforts, has publicly reaffirmed his long-
standing position that he Will not be an obstacle to an
agreement on a new Government. The issues among
the Palestinians remain challenging, while the
substance of any reconciliation arrangement will be
carefully assessed by donors. As the United Nations,
we continue to support reconciliation efforts within the
framework of the commitments of the Palestine
Liberation Organization, the positions of the Quartet
and the Arab Peace Initiative.

The situation in Syria is a source of deep and
growing concern for the United Nations. Violent
repression by the Syrian security forces has escalated.
There are also worrying signs of an armed
confrontation taking place in several areas of the
country. The League of Arab States has intensified its
efforts to stop the bloodshed and seek a political
solution to the crisis, announcing on 2 November a
work plan to which the Syrian Government agreed in
principle. In the absence of full implementation by the
Syrian authorities, the Ministerial Council of the
League suspended Syria from participating in its
meetings and activities, and decided to consider
imposing economic sanctions. The League is currently
seeking to dispatch an Arab observer mission to
monitor the implementation of the plan and protect
civilians in Syria.
11-60238

Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon has repeatedly
called for an immediate end to the bloodshed. He has
remained closely engaged with Arab partners and the
Secretary-General of the Arab League in this regard.
We call for the Arab work plan to be implemented fully
and expeditiously. All violence should stop for a
Syrian-led process of comprehensive political change
to take place that will address the democratic
aspirations of the Syrian people regardless of their
political, religious or ethnic background.

In this challenging context, there was no progress
towards peace between Syria and Israel, which
continues to maintain settlements in the occupied
Syrian Golan. No incident has been reported in the area
of separation since the events of June.

I now turn to the situation in Lebanon, where
developments in neighbouring Syria have continued to
stoke political tension. Lebanon's vote on
12 November against the League of Arab States'
proposal to suspend Syrian membership has become a
divisive issue between the coalition in power and the
opposition. The discussion in the parliamentary human
rights committee of the disappearances of four Syrian
opposition figures in Lebanon earlier this year also
sparked a heated debate between the 14 and 8 March
movements.

The situation along Lebanon's border with Syria
also remains a concern. The Syrian army planted
landmines on the Syrian side of the border, in areas
most commonly used as illegal crossing points into
Lebanon. At least one person was admitted to Lebanese
health facilities as a result of injuries from the
explosion of a landmine. The United Nations continues
to coordinate closely with the Government of Lebanon
on the provision of assistance to displaced Syrian
nationals, as well as on matters of protection and the
determination of their status. As of mid-November, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and the Government had registered 3,581
displaced persons.
11-60238

Two explosions took place in the southern city of
Tyre on 16 November, targeting a hotel and a liquor
store. They caused only material damage, including to
two United Nations vehicles that were parked near the
hotel. The Lebanese authorities have launched an
investigation into the explosions. Thus far, neither the
motive nor identity of the perpetrators is clear. There
are no indications that the United Nations was targeted.

The situation in the area of operations of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon has otherwise
remained generally quiet and stable. However, Israeli
flights over Lebanese air space continue on an almost
daily basis. The Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs will brief the Council in greater detail on
29 November, during consultations on the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006).

In conclusion, the stakes remain high. As I
warned in my briefing to the Council in July (see S/PV.6590), Without a credible political path forward,
accompanied by more far-reaching steps on the ground,
the viability of the Palestinian Authority and its State-
building agenda - and, I fear, of the two-State
solution itself - cannot be taken for granted. Gaps of
trust, perception and substance remain between the
parties. It will not be easy to overcome them. However,
I appeal to them to de-escalate, refrain from
provocations and adhere to their obligations, enter
direct negotiations and come forward with concrete
and negotiable proposals. The United Nations stands
ready to play its full role in supporting such efforts in
good faith, based on the international legal basis
affirmed by the Quartet, including the resolutions of
the Council and existing agreements between the
parties.

