Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation would like to thank Mr. Tom
Koenigs, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Afghanistan, for his briefing. China
appreciates the vigorous efforts of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) to
promote reconstruction in Afghanistan. We are
prepared to continue to support the Special
Representative and UNAMA in their work.

China is pleased to note that, with the help of the
international community, including the United Nations,
Afghanistan has made progress in its recovery and
development. In political terms, the Afghan
Government, led by President Karzai, has undertaken
measures to combat corruption and to actively seek
political reconciliation. In economic terms, this year
Afghanistan has achieved basic self-sufficiency in its
food supply and has maintained steady economic
growth. In the areas of education and health care, the
enrolment of primary-school students has reached a
historic high and infant and maternal mortality rates
have continued to decline. The Government has
reached out to neighbours and other countries to
engage in friendly cooperation.

At the same time, however, there remain many
grave challenges to peaceful reconstruction in
Afghanistan. Extremists and terrorists continue to pose
a serious threat to peace and prosperity. The country's
institutional capacity still needs to be strengthened at
various levels. Economic and social development still
cannot satisfy the people's basic needs. The cultivation
and trafficking of illicit drugs are on the rise.

China believes that, in addressing those
challenges, priority must be accorded to the following
aspects. First, security is the primary issue facing
Afghanistan. The international community must
provide additional resources to expedite the building of
the military and police forces so that they can, at an
early date, independently shoulder their responsibility
for the maintenance of national security and social
stability.

Secondly, the functions of Government need to be
strengthened. Accelerated economic development is the
key to achieving long-term stability in the country. The
Government must work hard to produce strong teams
of qualified civil servants and must continue to seek
stability and promote development if it is to achieve
concrete results in the areas of economic
reconstruction, education, health care, human rights
and the rule of law. In that way, the people's
confidence in the future of the country can be restored.

Thirdly, the United Nations should continue to
play a central and coordinating role in the peaceful
reconstruction of Afghanistan and in international
assistance to that end. China supports UNAMA's
consistently neutral position in its role of promoting
political reconciliation in the country. We also hope
that the international community will provide more
material and human resources to UNAMA.

Fourthly, regional cooperation is an effective
means through which the international community can
help Afghanistan to achieve stability and good
governance. We hope that Afghanistan and its
neighbours will fully utilize existing mechanisms to

enhance mutual political trust, to strengthen
cooperation in combating terrorist activities and drug
trafficking and to seek mutual development.

As a friendly neighbour of Afghanistan, China
feels great empathy with Afghanistan with regard to
the hardship that it has endured. We sincerely hope that
Afghanistan can soon build a strong and prosperous
State and achieve social harmony and well-being. To
that end, China has participated actively in efforts
aimed at post-war reconstruction in Afghanistan. Over
the past five years, we have provided Afghanistan with
assistance in the form of engineering projects, material
assistance and the training of personnel. We are
currently focusing on building the Republic Hospital in
Kabul, the Parwan irrigation project and the
presidential compound conference centre. The
President of China, Mr. Hu Jintao, announced a few
days ago that this year, the Chinese Government will
once again provide Afghanistan with a grant, in the
amount of 18 million yuan.

Although the road ahead remains rocky, the
Afghan people have high expectations and enduring
faith that they will achieve peace, stability, security
and development. That gives us every reason to be
confident that, through the efforts of the Government
and the people of Afghanistan and the assistance of the
international community, that ancient and beautiful
land, which has known despair, will once again see the
blossoming of hope, as well as new and notable
achievements in the process of its peaceful
reconstruction.

