Mr. Adom (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court (ICC), for her useful
and informative briefing.

In adopting resolution 1593 (2005), which referred
the situation in Darfur since 1 July 2002 to the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court, the Security Council
expressed its resolve to translate its commitment to
the principle of accountability into concrete action,
with a view to having crimes of genocide and serious
violations of human rights punished in international
courts of law. Since then, it must be recognized that,
despite the difference in views and the contention that
this issue raises among Member States, the Council has
consistently supported initiatives aimed at bringing the
persons or organizations convicted of massive human
rights violations and crimes against humanity before
the competent international courts.

In fact, the mass crimes perpetrated in certain
hotbeds of conflict around the world, which challenge
our collective conscience, justify more than ever the
need for the Council to remain seized of these serious
events and to promote the appropriate legal responses.
The security and humanitarian situation in Darfur, as
well as the recurring violence endured by civilians at
the hands of armed groups, is in perfect alignment with
this Security Council concern. My country therefore
subscribes to the urgent appeals of the international
community to identify and bring to justice before the
competent international tribunals, in particular the
International Criminal Court, the persons or armed
groups responsible for such serious acts.

It is undeniable that the sociopolitical crisis that
the Sudan has experienced in recent weeks, with its
eruptions of violence, is likely to affect the region of
Darfur, which is already facing many security and
humanitarian challenges. Cote d'Ivoire, a signatory
to the Rome Statute, therefore strongly hopes that the
mediation efforts under way will inevitably converge
and bear fruit in the near future, protecting the Sudan
from instability that could undermine the foundations
of peace in that country and the region.

Cote d'Ivoire deplores recent disgraceful events,
which have led to the loss of much human life and
left hundreds of civilians wounded, and sincerely
hopes that appropriate measures will be taken by the
Sudanese authorities to investigate the events of 3 June,
in accordance with the recommendations of the African
Union Peace and Security Council, issued at the end
of its 854th meeting. We call for the full protection of
civilians and respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms in Darfur and throughout the Sudan, as
recommended by the Peace and Security Council.

In paragraph 4 of resolution 1593 (2005), the
Security Council encourages the International
Criminal Court to support, in accordance with the
Rome Statute, domestic efforts to promote the rule
of law, protect human rights and combat impunity. In
paragraph 5, the Council also emphasizes the need to
promote reconciliation and encourages in this respect
the creation of inclusive institutions, such as truth and/
or reconciliation commissions, in order to complement
judicial processes. Cete d'Ivoire is of the opinion that
this approach has the virtue of being able to contribute
to the restoration of lasting peace, with the support of
the African Union and international institutions, as
stipulated in the aforementioned resolution.

In the light of the foregoing, my country believes
that cooperation between States and the ICC will be
constructive only if, and only if, the fog of unnecessary
suspicion and fantasy surrounding the International
Criminal Court is dispersed. That, in any case, is
the wish of Cote d'Ivoire concerning how the ICC
approaches the Sudanese question, which should be
based on the imperative need to apply the principle of
accountability and, above all, on the will of the two
parties to work together to promote the strengthening
of national judicial institutions.

After several years of conflict in Darfur and
amid persisting sociopolitical tensions in the Sudan,
my country wants to believe in possible cooperation
between Sudan and the ICC. On that optimistic note, I
conclude by reiterating the full support of Cote d'Ivoire
for Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor Office of the
International Criminal Court, and for her Office for the
quality of the work done.

