Mr. Cohen (United States of America): We thank
the United Kingdom delegation for its efforts to strength
the mandate of the United Nations Peacekeeping
Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP) to ensure that it conveys
the strong sentiment of the Security Council and the
international community that peacekeeping operations
must support political solutions and the urgency we
see for the leaders of both the Greek Cypriot and
Turkish Cypriot communities to come together. We
appreciate the United Kingdom's commitment both as
the penholder and as a troop-contributing country to
peace and stability in Cyprus.

We join the Council's unanimous urging to the
leaders of both Cypriot communities that they take
immediate steps to rebuild trust, improve the public
atmosphere and resume talks towards a settlement. The
United States continues to support a comprehensive
settlement to reunify the island as a bicommunal,
bizonal federation to benefit all Cypriots and the wider
region, and we want to underscore the following.

First, while the United Nations has a critical role to
play the political process towards a settlement must be
Cypriot-led. For a durable lasting peace to take hold,
the leaders must demonstrate the political courage
and will to negotiate in good faith and with a sense
of urgency. We urge the leaders to proactively engage
United Nations consultant Jane Holl Lute to negotiate
the terms of reference for resuming negotiations.

The leaders must also pursue their own lines of
effort to prepare their respective communities for a
comprehensive settlement. This mandate makes clear
the Security Council's strong urging that the leaders
fulfil their previously agreed 2015 confidence-building
measures, particularly on mobile-phone interoperability,
and complete the integration of electricity grids, as soon
as possible. We also welcome the Council's call for the
establishment of mechanisms and enhancing existing
initiatives to alleviate tensions. These mechanisms
should provide for direct contact between the sides
without prejudice to recognition, which also allows for
top-to-bottom communication across the communities.

The second point is that, on principle, perpetual
peacekeeping missions are unacceptable. We are
pleased that the new mandate reflects this view and
that the Secretary-General will examine how the
many United Nations activities on Cyprus can best be
configured in the current environment. UNFICYP and
the overall United Nations presence in Cyprus cannot
be a substitute for or part of a landscape that lacks a
path towards a political solution. We look forward
to the Secretary-General's report, particularly with
regard to this point. We are hopeful that the leaders
will quickly reach agreement on terms of reference.
We will be prepared to exert all efforts to reach a
comprehensive settlement. The United States has made
clear, in reviewing all peacekeeping missions, that
we will not support the status quo for missions where
political processes are stalled.

Finally, we want to recall that the Security Council
has the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security. One of the main
ways it exercises that responsibility is through setting
peacekeeping mandates and policies. We cannot, and
should not, accept the view that the Security Council
should cede its leadership and responsibilities to the
General Assembly Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations. We will continue to defend the Security
Council's primacy on peacekeeping matters and the
tremendous progress the Council has made in recent
years in reforming and strengthening peacekeeping by
putting peacekeeper performance improvement at the
heart of our efforts. Implementing the Secretariat's
performance policy framework is essential to our
shared goal of making United Nations peacekeeping
as effective and efficient as it can be. Building on
the accomplishments of resolution 2436 (2018), on
peacekeeper performance, we are pleased that the
Council reaffirmed in that resolution its support for
the development of a comprehensive and integrated
performance policy framework that identifies clear
standards of performance for evaluating all United
Nations personnel working in and supporting
peacekeeping operations.

