Mr. Amum: I am very grateful for the
opportunity to address the Security Council and to
present the Views of the Sudan People's Liberation
Movement (SPLM) and the Government of Southern
Sudan. I also want to thank you, Mr. President, and the

United Kingdom, for taking the initiative to call this
meeting at this important moment. I am particularly
grateful to you, Sir, for inviting me to this meeting.
Your presidency during this Council meeting today, as
the very fact of this meeting, sends a very strong signal
of support for the full implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement, for the referendums
to be conducted on time and, above all, for peace to be
maintained. I would also like to take this opportunity to
convey to the Council the greetings of President Salva
Kiir Mayardit, and to thank the Council for visiting the
Sudan last month. Its visit reassured the Sudanese
people, and especially the people of Southern Sudan,
that the world is watching and that it is determined to
keep the peace in the Sudan and to prevent another
return to war.

I wish to underline, first and foremost, that the
SPLM. and the Government of Southern Sudan will
never waver in their commitment to implementing the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement. The signing of the
Agreement was the key to ending civil war between the
South and the North. Its full implementation is the
guarantee of lasting peace in the Sudan. The core of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement is the provision for
holding two referendums on self-determination, in
Southern Sudan and Abyei. We very much welcome the
beginning of voter registration for the Southern Sudan
referendum yesterday and today. The turnout was
impressive and peaceful. This is a clear sign that the
Southern Sudan referendum will take place on time on
9 January 2011. It is essential that all parties hear an
emphatic and firm message from the Council today that
the referendum must be conducted on time and its
results must respected, and that the parties to the CPA -
the National Congress Party (NCP) and the SPLM. -
fully cooperate to that end.

The Government of Southern Sudan has made,
and will continue to make, tremendous efforts for the
referendum to take place on time. We are making sure
that every logistical arrangement is in place. We have
made our share of funds available, and more, and
would ask Council members to use their good offices
to ensure that our partners in the NCP and the
Government in Khartoum do the same.

We are working with the United Nations to
enable all eligible Southern Sudanese to register and
vote in a free and fair environment and peaceful
process. In the end, it is for the people of Southern
Sudan to decide and determine their future, choosing

between unity and secession. All voices for unity or
separation must be heard in the campaign, so that the
people's View can be clearly determined. Any
intimidation or harassment of those campaigning for
separation or unity in the South or the North should not
be tolerated. In the South, we are committed to
protecting everyone, but especially those campaigning
for unity. We thank the United Nations Mission in the
Sudan and other United Nations agencies, as well as
the international community, for the support they are
providing to the Southern Sudan Referendum
Commission. We welcome their continued engagement
in this process.

All signs point to the fact that the people of
Southern Sudan are likely to vote for independence in
January. We call on the Council and all United Nations
Member States to respect the choice of the people of
Southern Sudan as reflected in the outcome of the
referendum.

We welcome the timely appointment by the
Secretary-General of the monitoring panel led by
President Mkapa. We also welcome the work of the
panel in actively monitoring both registration and
voting. We call on the panel to be proactive in raising
any issues with the parties to ensure that the vote is
free and fair and that the results reflect the will of the
people of Southern Sudan. We also call on the panel to
authenticate the results quickly, in order to ensure
stability and a smooth transition to the next phase of
the process.

At the same time, the Government of Southern
Sudan is ready to negotiate and agree on final post-
referendum arrangements, to ensure stability and the
clarity of the relationship between Southern and
Northern Sudan. The Government of Southern Sudan
has just negotiated a framework agreement with its
northern Sudanese partners that lays out the general
principles that would govern the future relationship
between Southern and Northern Sudan as two
sovereign States, if the choice of the people of
Southern Sudan is separation.

We are grateful for the support of the African
Union High-Level Implementation Panel, led by
President Thabo Mbeki, as well as the support of the
United States of America, the United Nations, Ethiopia,
Kenya, Norway, Egypt and other partners, who have
recently engaged the parties and convened numerous
meetings to facilitate these negotiations.
The people and Government of Southern Sudan
strongly desire a peaceful and collaborative
relationship between the South and the North, a
relationship that benefits and protects all of our
peoples. We share a common history. Even though we
are sitting on opposite sides of the Security Council
table, and even though the people of Southern Sudan
may choose to secede, we shall always be neighbours.
We have no choice but to be good neighbours. We are
economically interdependent. We therefore have to be
partners, too. We need to work out the foundation and
details of that partnership. Both North and South must
be viable entities or States that cooperate for the
mutual benefit of their peoples.

One of the issues of crucial importance,
especially given the long-standing historical ties
between Northern and Southern Sudan, is the question
of citizenship rights. The Government of Southern
Sudan wishes to reiterate that the rights of all Northern
Sudanese in the South will be fully respected and
protected. Additionally, the property rights of
Northerners, as well as foreign investment in Southern
Sudan, will be completely respected and protected by
the Government of Southern Sudan. No Northern
Sudanese rights will be violated or activities
obstructed, regardless of the outcome of the
referendum. All we ask is that the rights and
livelihoods of Southern Sudanese in the North be
protected and treated in exactly the same way.

The second issue that the parties agreed to
address is that of border demarcation. There are only
five areas of disagreement or dispute between the
parties on the border. We have recently agreed, in the
latest discussions led by President Thabo Mbeki, to
demarcate the agreed-on areas of the North-South
border and to settle the areas in dispute through
dialogue and negotiations, including recourse to
international arbitration, if necessary. We thank the
United Nations for offering support for the
demarcation of the border. We especially thank the
United Kingdom for its pledge to support the border
demarcation process. If we cannot reach a solution
jointly, we have agreed that we will have recourse to
binding and international arbitration, with no return to
conflict.
Another critical outstanding issue between North
and South is Abyei. We call on the Council to support
the full implementation of the Abyei Protocol, which
defines Abyei as the area of the nine Ngok Dinka

chiefdoms. We also call on the Council to support the
full implementation of the ruling of the Permanent
Court of Arbitration tribunal on the Abyei boundaries.
As the Council knows, the parties agreed in recent days
to have the presidency of the Sudan resolve the
impasse on Abyei. We are hopeful that next Sunday the
parties may reach agreement on that matter.

We see two options. The first would be a
referendum in which members of the Ngok Dinka
community would be allowed to vote on whether they
wish to remain part of the North or rejoin the South,
while giving guarantees for the protection of grazing
rights to the Misseriya and other nomads who go to
Abyei and cross through it to Southern Sudan for
grazing purposes. The second option would involve the
transfer of Abyei to the South by a Sudanese
presidential decree, in the same way as Abyei was
transferred in 1905 by an administrative order.

The SPLM. is ready to discuss the matter and to
resolve the impasse on Abyei. We are ready to put
together, with our other partners in the international
community, the necessary package to set the Abyei
process free.

We know that we cannot change our geography.
The referendums may change the nature of the
relationship between the South and the North. But
whatever happens, we shall remain committed to a
peaceful, stable and prosperous future for the people of
the Sudan, whether in one country or as two separate
States.

In the South yesterday, all political parties
reaffirmed their support for a road map that provides
for a stable and democratic dispensation in Southern
Sudan and for peaceful development for our people in
the South in the post-referendum period. That is a very
positive development.

We are ready to engage in discussions on a full,
rich and peaceful relationship with our CPA partners,
and we are desirous to build an enhanced partnership
between the South and the North. To the National
Congress Party, our partners and the leading party in
the Government in Khartoum, we say, please join us in
the positive politics of peace, reconciliation, respect
and the pursuit of mutual interest. Let us together
present a good example for our Sudanese people,
Africa and the world that, after failure and many years
of conflict in the Sudan, we can succeed even in
separating peacefully and can be good neighbours.
I thank Council members for this meeting and for
their concern and interest at this critical time in our
history. I sincerely thank you, Mr. President, for
holding this meeting and for your own personal interest
and support for peace in the Sudan.

Such sentiments are often expressed with pious
words but insincere hearts. But my heart could not be
more sincere when I say to Council members and the
world, please ensure that every letter of the CPA is
fully implemented. Let there be peace in the Sudan and
no return to war. The Security Council was established
for moments such as this.

