The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of Uruguay.

On behalf of Uruguay, I would like to begin by
expressing our total condemnation of the terrorist
attack last night in Manchester. We offer our heartfelt
condolences to the families of the victims, as well as to
the people and the Government of the United Kingdom,
for this horrible, cowardly attack, and wish the dozens
who were injured a speedy recovery.

I would like to thank Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu,
Under-Secretary-General and High Representative
for Disarmament Affairs, for her briefing and to
wish her the all the best in her new position. The use
of chemical weapons, wherever it occurs, is a grave
threat to international peace and security and a serious
violation of international law. Uruguay therefore firmly
condemns as a war crime every instance of the use
of toxic chemicals as weapons in the Syrian conflict
affecting the civilian population, and reiterates that
those responsible for such aberrant crimes must be
brought to justice. Until the entire Syrian chemical
arsenal, declared or not, has been destroyed or
safeguarded, the Security Council cannot definitively
close its dossier on the subject. In that regard, we
encourage the Syrian authorities to cooperate with the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) to clarify the omissions and discrepancies in
the initial Syrian declaration.

Unfortunately, a little more than a month ago,
as well as previously in February, the Council failed
in its responsibility to take steps to investigate those
aberrant crimes. That is why we want to reiterate that
the existence of the veto reduces the functionality
and effectiveness of the Security Council's work and
unbalances its efforts even more. In future, the members
that possess this privilege should refrain from using it
in cases of war crimes, which the attack on 4 April in
Khan Shaykhun clearly was. Uruguay urges the Council

to continue its efforts to reach a consensus that will
enable its members to overcome their differences with
a View to preventing new incidents involving chemical
weapons in Syria and combating impunity for those
who are responsible for such atrocities.

We do not yet have enough evidence to enable us to
assert categorically who is responsible for the attack on
Khan Shaykhun. Several Council members and various
international organizations have already submitted
reports in which they reached certain conclusions.
However, the OPCW's confirmation that sarin gas or
a similar substance was used will undoubtedly help
to clarify who organized the attack. In the coming
months, it will be the job of the OPCW-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism to determine who was
responsible so that the Council can finally take action
on it, something has been too often postponed.

Uruguay reaffirms its full support for the Joint
Investigative Mechanism's important and impartial
work and its trust in the leadership and proven
experience of Mr. Edmond Mulet, Head of the
Mechanism's independent panel, in ensuring that in
the next few months the perpetrators of these and other
incidents will be investigated in accordance with the
Council's mandate. The conclusions will again enable
the council to decide on the steps it should take to bring
them to justice. While this task has turned out to be
complicated, it should not be impossible to accomplish
it, considering that the Council has the tools it needs
to do it.

We reiterate our call on all Council members to rise
above internal differences in order to arrive at a political
solution that can end the violence, help to consolidate
a ceasefire, prioritize the protection of civilians and
give hope to the hundreds of thousands of victims that
the perpetrators of the serious crimes that have been
committed in Syria can finally be brought to justice.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.

The meeting rose at10.35 a.m.
