The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ambassador Gaspar Martins for his briefing.

I shall now make a statement as Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) and Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1718 (2006).

In the exercise of the chairmanship of three
committees on non-proliferation, Spain had always
made clear that its main role was to search for
consensus. As the main drivers in this task, we have
acted responsibly and, above all, transparently. For that,
we always counted on the cooperation of the members
of the Council. I thank them for their support and the
manner in which they helped us to solve problems.

Now, there are three ideas that, in my opinion,
would contribute to improving the effectiveness of the
Committees.

The first is relevance. I believe that formalisms
should be avoided in Security Council meetings, where
there should be greater focus on discussion and analysis
of relevant issues. I believe that briefings to the Council
by the President should avoid the mechanical reading
of a previously circulated text that is sometimes
incomprehensible, not just for non-experts but also
for the Chairs of the Committees themselves. The
briefings should therefore be simple and allow for a
substantive debate.

The second is transparency. Transparency is
essential in the actions of the Committees and in
reflecting their decisions, particularly in the area of
sanctions. States should be able to understand, with
simple and complete clarity, the obligations they must
fulfil. I therefore welcome the progress made by the
Secretariat in the management of the Committees'
websites.

The third is unity. The Council must act united in
both the adoption and implementation of the resolutions.
Ambiguous clauses should be avoided, which create
uncertainties and make implementation difficult.

To those three I would add a fourth. I fully endorse
the five proposals that the Ambassador of New Zealand
put forward and which seem to me to be perfect, and of
the five, I would emphasize one in particular: the way in
which the need to get 15 votes in favour, which in the end
turns the Committees into gatherings of 15 delegations

each with a right of veto, makes decision-making in the
Committees difficult.

I shall now briefly refer to specific issues in the
three Committees I have chaired: the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006), the 1718 Committee and the 1540 Committee.

With respect to the 1737 Committee, my greatest
joy was to see it disappear in January. The signing of
the nuclear agreement in 2015, thanks to the efforts of
many, made it possible for diplomacy to triumph. I am
confident that the full implementation of resolution 2231
(2015) will allow this matter to be definitively resolved.

With respect to the 1718 Committee, it was always
clear that the sanctions are directed exclusively against
the military nuclear programme and ballistic missiles,
not against the people of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea. It was this that led to the Council
adopting resolutions 2270 (2016) and 2321 (2016), and
we have always made sure that we do not affect the
humanitarian situation.

In the coming months, there remains much to do, and
I am sure that the Italian presidency will do it brilliantly.
For example, if I might make a recommendation, it
would be useful to have an open briefing on resolution
2321 (2016). It is necessary for the various aspects
of the implementation of a resolution as complex as
resolution 2321 (2016) to be explained to the members
of the United Nations.

Obviously, I have failed in my efforts to see the
1718 Committee disappear, but I do not lose hope that
this will happen in the near future. It is in the hands
of Pyongyang to return to international legality and
bring about an end to the sanctions. As always, I have
confidence in the way of diplomacy and in dialogue.

With respect to the 1540 Committee, little needs
to be added. The activities over the last two years have
been intense. We worked hard on the global review
and a few days ago we adopted, under the presidency
of my Minister for Foreign Affairs, resolution 2325
(2016), which updates resolution 1540 (2004), while
maintaining its cooperative and preventive approach.
I would like to thank all the members of the Security
Council for their help in this effort.

Finally, I offer a word of final thanks, making
special mention of those who have been our "family"
in the management of the Committees: the Security
Council Affairs Division, the United Nations Office
for Disarmament Affairs, the 1540 Committee Panel
of Experts and the 1718 Committee Panel of Experts.
Without them, from their Directors or Coordinators, to
the officials who took care of the correspondence or
the web page, we would not have been able to carry
out our task. They were our eyes and our ears. With
professional rigour and patience, they were able to
advise, inform or support us. We will miss them all,
as we will miss our colleagues in the Security Council.
And we will support all of them from the other side of
this table.

I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Ibrahim.

