Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): First of all, I should like to underscore the
importance of the full implementation of resolution
2253 (2015) in order to combat the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL), Al-Qaida and associated groups
such as Jabhat Al-Nusra.

Strategic reports of the Secretary-General to
implement this resolution are meant to shape an
objective understanding of the terrorist threat and
assess the contributions ofMember States in combating
this global threat. Unfortunately, the current report of
the Secretary-General (S/2015/501) not meet this goal.
Furthermore, the document is based on one-sided
data and therefore does not give a true picture of the
situation. For example, in paragraph 4 of the report, it is
stated that ISIL's military setbacks are directly linked
to some efforts of the international coalition forces.
The impression one gets is that the report specifically
highlights the role of the coalition led by the United
States, whereas the efforts of other States, which are
often more effective, are intentionally ignored. This
kind of philosophy is fundamentally wrong, as it does
not contribute to the shaping of the global anti-terrorist
coalition whose establishment President Putin of
Russia has called for during the seventieth session of
the General Assembly.

It is important to note that significant damage to
capacity ofISIL was inflicted by the Russian air force.
We deem it unacceptable to say nothing about that or
about the efforts of the Syrian armed forces, which
selflessly are on the front lines of the fight against
the terrorist threat. It is difficult to understand that
the report says nothing about the role of the Russian
air force or the important expulsion of terrorists from
Palmyra and the restoration, with the help of the Russian
armed forces and experts, of peaceful conditions there,
including the demining of that historic citadel.

We would also like to ask the authors of the report
why it does not reflect the data that was provided on the
results of the efforts of the Russian air force in Syria,
including lists of eliminated terrorist leaders, which
were specifically requested from us by the monitoring
group of the anti-terrorist sanctions committees. What
then was the purpose of asking for this information?

In this connection, we think that it is very important
to convey to the Members of the United Nations an
objective picture of the Russian anti-terrorist operation
in Syria. We are convinced that its effectiveness is
based on the fact that we are acting with the legitimate
consent of the Syrian Government. As a result of the
efforts of the Russian air force in Syria, this operation
was a turning point in destroying the resource base ofthe
terrorists. We destroyed thousands of support facilities
with stockpiles of ammunition and military equipment,
material resources, oil and fuel supplies and explosives.
We destroyed more than 200 oil production, transit and
refining facilities, as well as more than 2,000 transport
modalities used to smuggle oil to Turkey. The most
recent example was the destruction, just several days
ago, of four sites for the illegal production of oil located
in the Raqqa and Horns provinces, which are controlled
by ISIL fighters.

We would like to underscore that without the
consolidation of efforts in combating terrorism, the
threat will remain significant. The situation in Syria
remains a source of considerable concern. What is
important is to quickly separate Jabhat Al-Nusra from
the Syrian opposition. It is essential for those who
are fighting in Syria to clearly state whether they are
with the terrorists or against them. We should not
delay this process, because by delaying it we are only
strengthening terrorist groups.

As a consequence, Jabhat Al-Nusra, Ahrar
Al-Sham, Jaish Al-Islam and Jaish Al-Fatah have
practically become connected structures, and some
entities have violated the ceasefire regime. These
kinds of threatening developments are occurring due
to external interference by forces that are trying to
undermine Russian-American cooperation. As a result,
the Syrian armed forces are combating large-scale
offensives on the part of the jihadists, who are moving
across the Syrian-Turkish border. A clear illustration is
the situation in Aleppo, where terrorists are continuing,
with external support, to seize new territories. The
Kurdish neighbourhood of Sheikh Maqsoud has been
the target of daily artillery shelling by Al-Nusra. We
have found that Al-Nusra are being helped by other
armed groups that are considered moderate. As a result
of double standard politics, Al-Nusra thinks it can act
without any consequences and is now deploying its
forces in civilian neighbourhoods and using civilians
as human shield.

For several months, we have been assured that the
link between the terrorists and the moderate opposition
would be broken. But we are not seeing any results.
Consequently, violent confrontation continues to
increase, while the terrorist threat, as the events of the
past year have shown, continues to intensify and to
extend far beyond the Syrian border.

Ending external support for terrorists requires
an immediate solution. The Syrian-Turkish border
needs to be closed immediately. In addition to what I
said earlier, border crossings, which the international
community designated for humanitarian deliveries, are
often being used for criminal ends. There is irrefutable
documentary evidence of that process taking place in
the border districts, but that proof is being disregarded.
In that regard, we also continue to be surprised by the
inexplicable lack of action on the part of some of our
international partners.

One is amazed at the ongoing disregard for Turkey's
role in the financing of, and the provision of resources
and recruits for, terrorist operations in Syria. The report

has been scrubbed of even indirect links to information
provided by Russian on the financing of ISIL.

The regular flow of information about supplies
from Turkish territory into Syria of components for
the production of chemical weapons for the needs of
terrorists requires particular attention. Unfortunately,
that issue is persistently hushed up, and a corresponding
Russian initiative to strengthen the fight against the
threat of chemical terrorism is being slowed down for
no apparent reason.

Another example is the information we have
provided to the Security Council on supplies to ISIL of
components for the production of improvised explosive
devices (IED). Our analysis had shown that those
substances were produced in Turkey and were provided
to Syria. Our analysis of the IED components found in
Syria and Iraq shows that they were either manufactured
in Turkey or delivered to that country without the right
of re-export.

Once again, it behooves us to pay particular
attention to actions by Turkey and to such disturbing
elements in its regional policy as its unauthorized
intrusion on the territory of Syria and Iraq. There are
reports that Turkey is building extended concrete walls
on Syrian territory close to its borders. We request the
Secretariat to find out about that and to report back to
the Council.

As before, we believe that resolution 2253 (2015)
includes a very important list of measures to strengthen
the regime and put an end to the illegal supplies being
channeled to ISIL and groups related to it, as well
as to strengthen the United Nations monitoring and
sanctions regime. As we see it, currently, the goal is to
further strengthen that very important resolution. An
objective, balanced and fair report of the Secretary-
General, pursuant to that resolution, would be a very
important contribution to that cause.

