The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Indonesia.

First of all, I wish to welcome the Deputy Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation,
Mr. Sergey Vershinin, to the Chamber. I also thank
Assistant Secretary-General Ursula Mueller for her
briefing - indeed, another grim and worrying briefing
on the humanitarian situation in Syria.

With today's meeting, I would like to highlight the
fact that the Council has held three meetings related
to the humanitarian situation in Syria, of which two
specifically discussed the humanitarian impact in the
north-west. With tomorrow's briefing by Special Envoy
Pedersen, we will have had five meetings on Syria this
month. That is quite a large number. While Indonesia
prefers to conduct all Council meetings appropriately
and as necessary, my delegation wishes to highlight the
fact that the most important approach for the Council is
to be united in addressing humanitarian issues in Syria.

Indonesia is following very closely the situation in
north-western Syria, where the ongoing violence and
hostilities continue to take a heavy toll on civilians and
key infrastructure. Hundreds of people have been killed
and injured, while almost 240,000 have been displaced
in north-western Syria. The increasing number is
alarming, and I think everybody in the Chamber is
fully aware of that.

When we say that there are 3 million people in
the de-escalation area of Idlib, including 1.3 million
internally displaced, we are also talking about a majority
of individuals who have already been displaced multiple
times. How do we think those displaced individuals
should cope with their situation while heavy fighting
and violence are going on near them? The ceasefire is
very important and needs to be addressed, along with
the restrictions on freedom of movement due to safety
and security concerns, and the absence ofbasic services
in key infrastructure, such as hospitals that have been
damaged or destroyed. As Assistant Secretary-General
Mueller mentioned just now, more than 45 health
facilities have ceased to operate, depriving civilians of
immunization and health services. That is not only sad
but in contravention of human rights.

While we have focused on the situation in north-
western Syria in recent weeks, the Council also needs
reminding of how things stand in the Rukban and Al-Hol
camps. More than 13,000 people have left Rukban, but
the situation in the camp, where there around 28,500
residents, remains dire. As for Al-Hol, 92 per cent of
whose population is made up of women and children,
some issues remain of concern and urgently need to be
addressed. Many residents have limited access to basic
services, such as health-care facilities. Food assistance,
nutrition and education are also sources of concern. In
the light of all of that, I would like to highlight three
points.

First, the increase in humanitarian needs must be
met with concrete actions. We urge all parties to fully
respect international humanitarian law and protect
civilians and civilian infrastructure, including by
providing unlimited access for humanitarian activities
throughout areas where people need safety and
protection. The humanitarian responses from the United
Nations and its humanitarian partners must be supported
in order to ensure the rapid and full implementation
of humanitarian assistance to those who are really in
need. This year marks the seventieth anniversary of the
Geneva Conventions and the twentieth of the adoption
of resolution 1265 (1999) on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. We held an open debate on the issue
just last week (see S/PV.8534). People will be asking us
all about what comes next. We need to have an answer.

Secondly, I would like to highlight the need to
ensure sustained humanitarian responses. Sadly, the
humanitarian situation in Syria will not be resolved
overnight. The international community must make
every effort to alleviate the suffering of the Syrian
people and prevent another humanitarian tragedy.

And this brings me to my third point, on the
urgent need for a humanitarian preparedness plan,
adjusted to current priorities, especially as many
humanitarian partners have suspended their operations
due to heavy fighting in the north-west. Earlier, I urged
the upholding of the ceasefire. That would give the
United Nations and humanitarian actors the ability to
quickly respond and provide life-saving humanitarian
responses to the affected population. In this regard, I
want to request additional information from Assistant
Secretary-General Mueller on the update of the 2019
humanitarian response plan and how it could assist
meeting humanitarian needs on the ground. Are there
any new ideas for alleviating the suffering of the people
of Syria?

In conclusion, we once again urge all parties to
fully cooperate in ensuring the protection of millions
of people in Syria, with particular attention to the
north-west and north-east of the country. Indonesia
fully believes that the humanitarian situation in Syria
can be resolved only if all the relevant parties come
to the negotiating table and together advance the
political process in Syria, based on respect for Syrian
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity, as
well as resolution 2254 (2015). The people of Syria
are exhausted, as Assistant Secretary-General Mueller
mentioned. People are tired of hoping for peace. It is
our solemn responsibility here in the Council to not
only bring hope back to the people of Syria, but also
the reality of peace on the ground.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked to make a further statement.

