Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate the brotherly Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan on assuming the presidency of
the Council for this month. I would like to welcome
Mr. Nasser Judeh, Minister for Foreign and Expatriate
Affairs of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, for his
attendance at this meeting. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General for his briefing.

His Majesty King Hamad bin Issa Al Khalifa, King
of the Kingdom of Bahrain, affirmed that while our
causes and challenges todays are complex and diverse,
our principles and positions remain unchanged. At the
top of those positions is the right of the Palestinian
people to build an independent State on its territory
with East Jerusalem as its capital, in accordance with
Council resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative. It is
also important to put an end to the settlements and lift
the unjust and illegal blockade of Gaza.

The Kingdom of Bahrain consistently reiterates
its firm position with regard to the Palestinian issue,
which is based on the need to implement the resolutions
of the Security Council and the General Assembly and
to respect the pertinent international agreements. It is
essential to work assiduously to find a comprehensive,
fair and lasting solution to the issue of Palestine. This
can be done only with the complete withdrawal of
Israel of occupied Arab territories, the creation of an
independent Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as its
capital, and in accordance with the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council, the Arab Peace Initiative and
the decisions of the Quartet. It is also important to lift
the illegal blockade of the Gaza Strip.

The Kingdom of Bahrain reaffirms that Palesine's
official membership in the International Criminal Court
is a historic event, an important step in the fight of the
brotherly Palestinian people and the result of tireless

diplomatic and legal efforts for the nation to recover its
full rights.

The path to solving the problem in the Middle
East requires the end of the Israeli occupation of Arab
and Palestinian territories since 1967, including East
Jerusalem and the Syrian Golan. It is also important for
Israel to relinquish Lebanese territories, in accordance
with the Security Council resolutions.

The Palestinian State must be created as a
sovereign State within the borders of4 June 1967, with
Jerusalem as its capital. It is also important to reach
a fair settlement to ensure the return of Palestinian
refugees in accordance with resolution 194 (111). It is
also important to implement resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Security Council and to strictly
respect international law, in particular in the framework
of the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949, which bans
the introduction of demographic changes in occupied
territories.

In conclusion, we must redouble the efforts to
support our Palestinian brothers to ensure that their
aspirations are realized and that they recover their
legitimate and inalienable rights.

