Mr. Roet (Israel): I would like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, and Sweden onjoining the Security
Council and presiding over its activity this month.
I would also like to welcome the other new Council
members and to wish them success in fulfilling their
important role.

In 2016 the international community experienced
an increasing threat of global terrorism, which
indiscriminately claims innocent lives from Brussels
to Baghdad and from Paris to Istanbul. In Israel,
Palestinian terrorists have been responsible for
numerous attacks. Men and women on their way to
work, as well as children and the elderly waiting for
their buses home, have all fallen victim to shootings,
stabbings and other horrendous acts of terror. Just a
few days ago, a terrorist drove his truck into a group
of cadets gathered on a Jerusalem promenade, taking
the lives of Yael Yekutiel, who was 20 years old,
Shir Hajaj, 22, Shira Tzur, 20, and Erez Orbach, 20.
Blessed be their memory. We thank the Secretary-
General, the Council and the many countries that have
expressed their condolences. Despite the evils of hate
and terrorism that we face, Israel is, and will always
remain, committed to the way of peace.

Our history has taught us that courage, impartiality
and seeing reality for what it is are important elements
in preventing conflict. More important, they are
essential to establishing the ground for a durable
peace. We believe that they are also vital to the work
of the Security Council in its pursuit of global peace
and security.

While it is clear that courage is needed in the
conflicts that take place on the battlefield, courage
is even more important in preventing them. For the
Security Council, courage should mean not turning
a blind eye to actions that pave the way for future
conflict. For the Council, courage should mean its
equal application of moral values and standards to
all, without allowing politics and special interests to
interfere in its work.

Sadly, that is not the case when the Council
examines the actions of those who systematically try
to harm the State of Israel. As a matter of fact, since
the adoption of resolution 1701 (2006), Hizbullah,
which is internationally acknowledged to be a terrorist
organization, has multiplied its missile stockpile
tenfold and has amassed more than 150,000 rockets and
missiles. We continue to see increases in the number
of Hizbullah operatives, described in reports relating
to resolution 1701 (2006) as "civilians", in possession
of unauthorized weapons. The situation serves only to
heighten tension in an already volatile environment.

It seems that political considerations undermine
the Council's ability to receive accurate reports on the
real situation on the ground. If conflict between Israel
and Hizbullah is to be prevented, the Security Council
must acknowledge Hizbullah's dangerous buildup in
southern Lebanon and demand that the Governments of
Lebanon and Iran fully comply with the provisions of
resolution 1701 (2006).

Time and again we have warned the Security
Council that, where the Middle East is concerned,
we can be sure that wherever and whenever there is
terrorism, there is Iran. We urge this new Council to
put an end to Iran's destabilizing actions in our region
and around the world.

For centuries, justice has been depicted as a
woman wearing a blindfold, which represents the
basic legal element in maintaining peace and order:
impartiality. Unfortunately, on too many occasions
this institution has lifted the blindfold where the State
of Israel is concerned. Biases, hypocrisy and double
standards - the same double standards that Secretary-
General Guterres spoke of earlier today - have
unfortunately become honorary members of the long
debates and meetings condemning Israel. The Council's
latest initiative, resolution 2334 (2016), epitomizes its
failure to address all sides of a conflict equally. Its
condemnation of Israeli actions and attempt to portray
them as the one major obstacle to a two-State solution
portrays the type of bias that hinders real diplomatic
progress. It is clear that these biases are paralysing the
Council and holding it back from playing a constructive
role in conflict prevention.

Courageous and impartial actions to achieve
sustainable peace must be based on facts, not on mere
perceptions. Like the prisoners in Plato's famous
allegory of the cave, some members of this institution
refuse to see the facts, while indulging themselves in
the comfort of the lies presented to them. One dire
consequence of that dangerous behaviour is the failure
to effectively identify the real aggressor. Almost
every time the Council has condemned terror attacks
against Israelis, it has avoided answering the most basic
questions: who is the terrorist, and who is the victim?
If we cannot make that simple differentiation, how can
we even begin to solve the problem?

A new year offers us an opportunity to have a fresh
start and to stand together for the true values of the
Organization. It provides us with an opportunity to have
the courage to face the facts, to call the aggressor by its
name, to be impartial and to apply equally standards to
all aspects of every conflict we face.

