Mr. Seruhere (Tanzania): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report (S/2010/394) on possible options
to further the aim of prosecuting and imprisoning
persons responsible for acts of piracy and armed
robbery at sea off the coast of Somalia.

The United Republic of Tanzania recognizes that
the United Nations has the responsibility to address the
problem of piracy and armed robbery at sea off the
coast of Somalia. We are pleased to see that the
Security Council is actively seized of the matter, and
we welcome actions taken so far by the Council in
order to combat piracy and armed robbery at sea off the
coast of Somalia. Piracy and armed robbery off the
coast of Somalia and in the Gulf of Aden continue to
constitute a threat to international peace and security in
the region. This is an issue of great concern to the
United Republic of Tanzania.

The problem of piracy has gained a global
character. No region of the world is immune to it, and
all manner of other crimes can spin off from it.
International efforts have yielded some success, but we
need to do more and adopt a comprehensive approach.
We are witnessing the expansion of piracy further off
the coast and from the northern to the southern waters
of the Indian Ocean. These developments demand a
coordinated approach and a coherent, comprehensive
and integrated response which includes political,
military, financial and legal support. The United
Nations and the international community should work
closely with the African Union, members of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
other neighbouring States to suppress acts of piracy
and apprehend and prosecute those who commit this
crrme.
We also need to address the causes of piracy. The
absence of a functioning Government in Somalia
threatens regional security and provides freedom of
action for those engaged in piracy along the Somali
coast. Sustaining peace and stability on land in Somalia
and re-establishing effective Government authority in
the country are essential for a long-term solution to
piracy.

We must also ensure that pirates, once captured,
are brought to justice. In the United Republic of
Tanzania, we have recently amended the criminal code
to allow our courts to prosecute suspected pirates under
universal jurisdiction. We also appreciate the
contributions of other countries in the region, in
particular Kenya and Seychelles, for taking the lead in
bringing pirates to justice. We call upon the
international community to enhance the prosecution
and custodial capacities of these and other States as
well as to agree to share with affected States post-
prosecution custodial responsibilities.

In conclusion, we welcome the range of options
that have been proposed by the Secretary-General for
combating piracy and armed robbery off the coast of
Somalia. A combination of approaches should be
applied to deal with the problem. There should be
shared responsibilities to prosecute and imprison
persons responsible for acts of piracy and armed
robbery at sea and a United Nations mechanism that
would suppress and prevent piracy and armed robbery
off the coast of Somalia in the longer term, including
by addressing the root causes of piracy and related
crimes.

We reaffirm the strong commitment of the United
Republic of Tanzania to the efforts of the Security
Council in countering piracy and armed robbery on and
off the coast of Somalia.

