The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of the Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Mozambique and Senegal, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I welcome the Vice-Prime Minister of Guinea-
Bissau.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Imbali
(Guinea-Bissau) took a seat at the Council table.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Jagne
(Gambia), Mr. Fall (Guinea), Mr. Gouveia
(Mozambique) and Mr. Ka (Senegal) took the seats
reservedfor them at the side ofthe Council Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Callisto Madavo, Vice-President of
the World Bank, Africa Region.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Madavo to take a seat at the Council
table.

I should like to inform the Council that l have
received a letter dated 27 November 2000 from the
Permanent Representative of Mozambique to the
United Nations, in which Mozambique, in its capacity
as President of the Community of Portuguese-Speaking
Countries, requests that an invitation be extended to
Mrs. Dulce Maria Pereira, Executive Secretary of the
Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries, under
rule 39 of the Security Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

That letter will be issued as document
S/2000/1130.

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 to
Mrs. Pereira.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I now call on the Secretary-General.


