Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): Thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this monthly wrap-
up meeting in a public format, thus enhancing the
transparency of the Council's work. I would also like to
congratulate you, Sir, and your team for your dynamic
and effective presidency ofthe Security Council during
the month of August, which removed any lingering
doubts that there might have been as to the fact that the
Council does not take summer breaks.

Most of the situations on the Council's agenda this
month have seen their share of suffering for civilian
populations. The deepening of the crisis in Ukraine,
which we addressed again today (see S/PV.7253); the
continuing violence in Gaza up until the ceasefire of
26 August; the continuing deterioration of the situation
in South Sudan and Libya; the unspeakable barbarity
displayed by the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria; the
humanitarian situation in Syria, which remains dire
despite the modest gains in terms ofhumanitarian access
obtained thanks to resolution 2165 (2014) - all are
situations that should concern us and cause us to ponder
the best way to strengthen the work of the Council in
the maintenance of international peace and security.
They lead us to ask the question: what can we do to
prevent such situations from arising and prevent the
suffering on the part of civilian populations?

The open debate on conflict prevention (see S/PV.7247) that you, Sir, organized on 21 August
provided some answers to that question. A vast
majority of the participants in that debate stressed
the importance of the Security Council adopting a
proactive posture to conflict prevention rather than
reacting after the fact. We welcome the adoption, at
that open debate, of resolution 2171 (2014), which lays
out a whole range of instruments aimed at promoting
conflict prevention. We must now make use of them
and give full expression to Article 99 of the Charter of
the United Nations. We hope that the Secretary-General
and his Special Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide
and the Responsibility to Protect, to mention but two,
will inform us as soon as warning signs of potential
conflict situations appear.

We believe that a significant deterioration in
the human rights situation often precedes conflict.
Such warning signs must be noted and brought to
the attention of the Security Council. The Secretary-
General's Rights Up Front initiative is the instrument
of choice for warning of such situations, and we hope
it will be fully implemented with the assistance of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights.

This month, as several others have mentioned,
featured a field visit by the Security Council that
enabled us to better assess the crises affecting Southern
Sudan and Somalia. We were able to see with our
own eyes the complexity of the environment in which
United Nations staff and humanitarian actors carry out
their tasks. They are on the front lines of the efforts
to restore peace and provide support and assistance
to people trapped in conflict situations, at great risk
to themselves. In the open debate on 19 August (see S/PV.7244) we honoured the memory of the many
humanitarian workers and United Nations personnel
who have paid for their commitment with their lives.
We support the initiative to update resolution 1502
(2003) in order to adapt it to the realities of today, and
we hope that tomorrow we can adopt a new resolution
on the protection of humanitarian personnel. It is our
individual and collective responsibility to ensure that
humanitarian assistance is not diverted from its primary
purpose and to ensure that the principles governing
it are respected. The credibility of humanitarian aid
depends on it, as does the safety of those who provide
it.

One of the important lessons we have learned from
past conflicts is the importance of combating impunity
for the perpetrators of violations and abuses of human
rights and violations of international humanitarian
law. Making it clear that the perpetrators of such acts
must atone for them can help to deter others from such
heinous acts. Our recent visit to The Hague once again
enabled us to highlight the significant contribution
of the International Criminal Court and international
criminal justice in general not only to the maintainance
of peace but also to the prevention of conflicts.

The Security Council bears a special responsibility.
Only our collective commitment will make a difference.
In that regard, as the United States prepares to take over
the presidency of the Security Council, I would like to
wish the American delegation every success and to
assure it of our full support.

