Mr. Madeira: I thank you, Madam President, for
this opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
situation in Somalia. It is a great honour for me to do
so once again.

Somalia is on its way to taking full ownership of
its future. Despite many daunting challenges, Somalia
is on an upward trajectory, and tangible progress can
be seen in a number of critical areas. The country's
journey towards lasting peace and security remains
achievable through the concerted efforts of its people,
leadership and many international friends and partners,
including the strong partnership of the African Union
and that of the United Nations. The momentum created
by encouraging developments in the region, where
leaders of the Horn of Africa have become more aware
of the urgency of achieving peace and stability around
them and are taking deliberate initiatives to enhance
and captitalize on the factors that are common to their
peoples and unite their countries, is creating new
opportunities for reconciliation, stability, regional
cooperation and economic integration. That momentum
must be maintained by Somalia and its people, who
should remain steadfast on the path on which they
have embarked under their Government, which has
been characterized by reconciliation among Somalis,
economic growth and prosperity without corruption,
security and stability through respect for human rights,
inclusive politics, power- and resource-sharing and
equitable land distribution. In that connection, the
African Union congratulates the Federal Government
of Somalia for placing inclusive politics at the core of
its national reform agenda towards federalization and
the constitutional review, as expressed through the
political road map on inclusive politics.

We welcome the decisions taken at the National
Security Council meetings on resource-sharing,
security force integration and the transition plan. We
view with satisfaction and salute the commitment of
the Federal Government of Somalia to accelerating the
taking of the political decisions needed to effectively
tackle and address all remaining issues delaying the
finalization of the constitutional review process,
including formalizing the status of the federal member
states under the National Security Council, resource-
and power-sharing between the Federal Government of
Somalia and federal member states, fiscal federalism,
the allocation of responsibilities in the security and
justice sectors, the rule of law, the system of political
representation and the implementation of an agreed,
transparent and credible justice model. The creation of
the Federalization Negotiation Technical Committee,
tasked to drive forward negotiations on the fundamental
pillars for long-term stability, including election model
resource-sharing and allocation of powers to support
political agreements at the leadership level, is a
landmark step towards lasting peace in the country.

President Farmajo and his Government, as well as
the leaders of Somalia at both the national and federal
member state levels, have charted the way to realizing
Somalia's constitutionally guaranteed one person-one
vote election, as stipulated in the Somali provisional
Constitution. We need to continue to encourage
and support the leadership as it strives to implement
and bring clarity to all other outstanding issues in
this regard, such as the passage of the electoral law,
the continued registration of political parties, the
finalization of related constitutional amendments,
amendment of the law on political parties, protective
inclusivity, particularly in terms of ensuring the equal
representation ofwomen, as well as internally displaced
persons, young people, minorities and disadvantaged
groups, in decision-making.

Tremendous progress has been made towards
achieving debt relief, which will offer Somalia the
opportunity to have access to international concessional
financing and increase financial resources. We strongly
applaud these efforts and congratulate the Somalis on
that outstanding achievement.

Progress in Somalia has never been easy and cannot
be taken for granted. The Government is operating in
an unstable environment, using very fragile tools and
managing extremely weak institutions. Peace dividends
accumulated as a result of the sustained efforts of the
Somalis and their partners are constantly threatened
and hampered by mistrust, clan dynamics, extremist
ideological narratives, divisive politics, insurgency,
unregulated competition for power and resources,
violent extremism and vicious Al-Shabaab activity.
The current political crisis in Somalia is putting
unusual pressure on the cohesion of the Federal
Government and federal member states. I believe in
the wisdom and the capacity of the Somali leadership
to overcome this new challenge through continued
focus and unity of purpose, protracted dialogue, a
spirit of partnership, shared interests and mutual
accommodation. We should, however, remain
supportive of such efforts and be ready to intervene in
case of need and provide sustained dependable, timely,
coherent and proactive support to the parties.

Turning to the security situation, there is a backdrop
of continued violence and local clan conflicts that
remains areal concern. Al- Shabaab and the Islamic State
continue to maintain an active presence across Somalia
and to conduct deadly attacks. Most recently, there has
been Al-Shabaab's shift in operations, with a renewed
focus on Mogadishu. This shift creates real danger. The
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) remains
ready to partner with the Somali national security
forces, which have taken over from the Mogadishu
stabilization force. Similarly, beyond Mogadishu,
Al-Shabaab continues to resort to using improvised
explosive devices (IEDs), including vehicle-borne and
remote-controlled vehicle-borne IEDs, and ambushes,
particularly along the main supply routes. The impact
of Al-Shabaab's freedom of movement continues
constrain AMISOM. troops, Somali national forces and
civilians, as well as humanitarian actors.

Addressing the threat ofAl- Shabaab will ultimately
require the completion of the national security
architecture and progress on the comprehensive
approach to security. In this regard, AMISOM. will
continue to support these frameworks and the necessary
security reforms required by the Federal Government.

As Somalia navigates its way through a learning
curve, we must not lose sight of the real progress made
by the Federal Government and, I should add, within
a short period of time. Over recent months, we have
seen genuine attempts at defence reform by the Federal
Government. This has seen significant progress on
biometric registration, payroll reform and the recent
operational readiness assessment of the regional forces
conducted by AMISOM's police component.

In addition, last month, we witnessed substantial
changes in the security establishment and a genuine
attempt to improve gender parity within its senior
ranks with the appointment of Brigadier General Zakia
Hussein Ahmed as Somalia's first female Deputy Police
Commissioner. AMISOM. welcomes these important
changes and looks forward to working closely with
the new security chiefs in securing Mogadishu and
improving security across Somalia.

As Council members are fully aware, such
progress will be critical in transforming the landmark
national security rchitecture agreement of 2017
from design to implementation. In this connection,
AMISOM. welcomes the outcomes of the National
Security Council meetings that took place in Baidoa
in June, calling for the completion of the national
security architecture. Completing the national security
architecture will ensure that the progress on transition
made to date by the Federal Government and federal
member states, together with AMISOM, is sustained.
The rationale for the transition is to design a framework
for building Somali operational and institutional
capacity for its forces as well as to meet the needs
of Somali citizens, especially in the areas of justice,
responsible local governance, freedom of movement
and service provision.

Today, I can report that progress is being made on
the implementation of the transition plan, but before
that I wish to pay tribute to the efforts of the Federal
Government in leading the transition implementation
team. The implementation team continues to meet and
plan regularly and has fostered a close partnership
between AMISOM, planners and its Somali National
Army counterparts. This close partnership and joint
planning is now the basis of AMISOM's mentorship
of the Somali security forces and, within the coming
weeks, planning will soon be devolved to the regional
security offices as part of the Federal Government's
next step on transition. This also represents a major
step in transition planning, as federal member states
will receive urgently needed support for their regional
support offices.

Regarding the implementation of the pilot
phase, as announced in July at the Brussels Somalia
Partnership Forum by His Excellency Ambassador
Sma'i'l Chergui, Commissioner for Peace and Security
of the African Union, AMISOM. would hand over the
Mogadishu stadium. It is with great pride that I wish to
inform the Council that AMISOM. has now relocated
from Mogadishu stadium. A formal handover of the
premises will be completed at a date and in accordance
with modalities mutually agreed with the federal
Government of Somalia and all stakeholders once the
United Nations Support Office in Somalia concludes
the environmental clean up of the stadium.

As for the remaining pilot locations, securing the
Mogadishu-Baidoa main supply route has seen major
progress. More needs to be done, particularly on
ensuring that the commitments made during the past
two National Security Council meetings in Mogadishu
and Baidoa are implemented not only by the Federal
Government, but also by the federal member states.
More important is the financial support required from
Somalia's international partners so as to ensure that we
can mitigate potential threats to the transition and not
reverse the gains made by AMISOM.

The next six months will be crucial for the African
Union and AMISOM. as we focus on the critical tasks
ahead. Following the fourth joint review of AMISOM,
the AU Peace and Security Council renewed AMISOM's
mandate at its 782nd ministerial meeting, as reflected in
its 27 June communique, which is now complemented
by Council resolution 2431 (2018).

The implications of both mandates are far-reaching.
The transformation of AMISOM's operations is taking
place across Somalia as we plan our eventual exit
from the country. In adjusting to the new strategic and
operational realities, AMISOM. is now in its final phase
of deploying its civilian component across its sectors.
Their role will be to support AMISOM. military and
police in implementing the transition plan, in addition
to focusing on stabilization, reconciliation and human
rights efforts. In doing so, I welcome the commitment
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
to working alongside AMISOM's soon-to-be-deployed
civilians across the federal member states.

Similarly, as required by resolution 2431 (2018),
AMISOM. has recently concluded a comprehensive
internal review ofits capabilities, I am pleased to report
that the review was conducted in full transparency,
highlighting AMISOM'S achievements within its
capabilities and identifying gaps across its three
components. The outcomes, including defining a model
for AMISOM's reconfiguration, will set a baseline for
the next AMISOM. concept of operations. That will
also provide enhanced support to the implementation
of the transition.

