Mr. Heinonen: I appreciate the opportunity to share
some of my personal reflections on nuclear terrorism
with the Security Council today. I would specifically
like to address the issue as it relates to the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and the Council. To that
end, I have given the full version of my statement to the
Secretariat, as it includes complementary information
supporting some of the points I will make today.

We all understand that a nuclear accident anywhere
is a nuclear accident everywhere, as are the ramifications
of nuclear terrorism. We are fortunate that so far we
have been spared from acts of nuclear terrorism, but we
should bear in mind that terrorists have already openly
expressed a desire to acquire nuclear weapons. Thefts
and other attempts to obtain nuclear and radioactive
materials have shown that there are circumstances in
which that could happen. Nuclear security can also be
compromised in other ways. For instance, the energy
industry has been the victim of cyber attacks, including
by sabotage at nuclear installations, for which my
written statement includes some documentary evidence.

There are two ways in which the risk of nuclear
terrorism is heightened today. The first is the increased
use and spread of nuclear technology for the production
of electricity, radiation technologies in medicine and
industry, and the shipment of radioactive and nuclear
materials across borders and seas. That brings with it
an increase in the number of physical installations and
shipments that could be potential targets for terrorist
attacks or theft. The second way is a new phenomenon.
Terrorist organizations are becoming more
sophisticated. A recent report from Conflict Armament
Research describing the production by Islamic State
in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) of ammunition reflects a
professional approach that included quality controls for
the manufacture of its devices. In other words, ISIS is
able to attract skilled engineers and other specialists to
its production activities, and to internalize sophisticated
ways of functioning and means of production. We
should therefore not ignore the possibility that such
organizations are able to recruit or are at least seeking
to co-opt individuals with nuclear skills that could bring
insider threats to nuclear installations or increase the
probability of the release of dirty bombs, for example.

At the same time, when we are considering the
possibility of acts of nuclear terrorism, we should not
confine ourselves to traditional ways of thinking about
how such acts can occur or be delivered. For instance,
just as nuclear material could be used to build dirty
bombs, the possession of such toxic materials could also
very well be used as for blackmail purposes, or in novel
scenarios involving the dissemination of the materials
in urban environments. In that regard, we might recall
the issue of the possible contamination ofwater supplies
in Damascus in recent weeks. Radioactive materials
could be used for similar purposes.

Threats of nuclear terrorism can come from many
sources, ranging from sophisticated, well-financed
terrorist organizations to nuclear smugglers, hackers
capable of launching devastating cyber attacks and
individuals with malicious intentions and access to
inside information on nuclear installations. We must be
prepared to deal with wide-ranging threats from various
angles and scenarios. When it comes to operating
nuclear installations, all those challenges have an effect
on their management by facility operators, regulators
and those in charge of emergency planning and
response. While every State is responsible for nuclear
safety and security on its own territory, we have to
be prepared for accidents, emergencies and incidents
that have cross-border impact, including handling
emergencies arising from the transportation of nuclear
and radioactive materials through or near a State's
territories. Preparedness and response capabilities
should also cover incidents and emergencies arising
from possible terrorist acts using materials that do not
originate in the target State.

I would like to draw the Council's attention to
another sensitive aspect. We should recognize that any
assessment of nuclear security relating to the use of
nuclear or radioactive materials in military applications
in States possessing nuclear weapons remains outside
the control of the international community in the
situation that exists today.

There are a number of ways that States can
approach the issue of better addressing ways to combat
nuclear terrorism. They include closer collaboration
between nuclear safety and security regimes, as well as
changing the roles of the IAEA and the United Nations.
While the following list is by no means exhaustive, it
should represent good directions to pursue. Safeguards,
security and safety are commonly seen as separate
areas of nuclear governance. While there are technical
and legal reasons justifying that, the three can also
coexist and be mutually reinforcing in many ways.
They have synergistic effects on one another, and
avenues for collaboration should be identified in order
to contribute to the efficiency and effectiveness of the
overall nuclear order.

The relevant IAEA treaties, conventions,
non-legally binding codes of conduct and United Nations
resolutions, as well as the sharing of best practices and
resources, are all considered part of today's global
nuclear norms.However, what is adopted on paper can
be at variance with what is implemented in practice.
An option to consider is the establishment of a review
process for such legal instruments or mechanisms in
order to achieve a more transparent assessment of
States' implementation of their obligations. Before
such measures can be achieved, there are other steps
to take, such as more active engagement by the IAEA.
For example, the IAEA Director General could inform
the State in question in writing about the potential
risks associated with inadequate implementation of its
legal commitments in relation to the legal instruments
adopted, which could open a channel for corrective
action that could be undertaken.

The proposed changes could be initiated in a
number of ways. The IAEA Board of Governors could
mandate the secretariat to initiate action. States parties
to the nuclear safety and security conventions could
also prompt such action during the review meetings
on such instruments. The forthcoming International
Conference on Physical Protection of Nuclear Material
and Nuclear Facilities, scheduled for November, is
yet another venue in which we can explore hardening
nuclear infrastructure against acts of terrorism.

In addressing risks relating to nuclear security
threats, including acts of terrorism, the Nuclear
Security Summits have made important contributions.
That work continues now, to a great extent, within
the IAEA and in cooperation with other international
organizations and industries, as guided by the IAEA
Ministerial Conference held in Vienna in December
2016, which reaffirmed the importance of protecting
nuclear and radioactive material. The Conference
adopted a declaration that puts that responsibility in
the hands of the international community, international
organizations and Member States. In order to fulfil
that requirement, the IAEA and other international
organizations need adequate funding. To that end, the
support of the Security Council is indispensable. The
efforts of the Security Council to analyse and assess
terrorist threats, highlight existing vulnerabilities,
identify capacity gaps with the aim of understanding the
challenges posed by terrorism to critical infrastructure,
and recommend how best to support Member States in
those efforts are essential in combating terrorism.

