I would like to begin by once again thanking the Special Envoy for his briefing, and Ms. Noura Ghazi Safadi both for joining us today and for her heartfelt yet clear- eyed appeals for justice. We felt the pain she expressed on behalf of so many Syrians. We remain deeply concerned at the security situation in north-west Syria, and we welcome the 5 March ceasefire agreed between Russia and Turkey that brought a vital period of relative calm to the north-west and allowed some of the | million people displaced during the regime's and Russia's offensive at the beginning of this year to start returning to their homes. But in recent weeks we have seen fierce fighting between extremists and regime forces, and in recent days we have heard worrisome reports of renewed Russian air strikes, including those that took place on 8 June, causing civilian casualties and prompting others to flee. The United Kingdom fully supports the request of the United Nations Special Envoy and the Secretary-General for a lasting cessation of hostilities in the north- west and throughout Syria. The Security Council and the United Nations have repeatedly warned that a continued escalation in fighting would have catastrophic consequences for the 3 million Syrian civilians in the north-west. We urge all parties to show restraint and redouble their efforts to work together and with the Secretary- General and his Special Envoy to find a political solution, particularly at a time when the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) poses a severe threat in a country already weakened by conflict. As we agreed unanimously in resolution 2254 (2015) and have reiterated many times since, the only sustainable solution to the crisis in Syria is through an inclusive and Syrian-led political process that meets the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people. Yet, despite this unanimous agreement, the Syrian regime, aided and abetted by a permanent member of the Security Council, has ignored resolution 2254 (2015) and continued to subordinate the interests of the Syrian people to its pursuit of a military solution. The devastating effects of that policy on the Syrian people and the Syrian economy are increasingly clear and have been compounded, as Mr. Pederson informed us, by global factors. The collapsing economy in Syria is exacerbating the plight of civilians in all parts of the country. While COVID-19 and the problems of the Lebanese economy are clearly important contributing factors, the main cause for the state of the Syrian economy is the years of conflict, corruption and mismanagement by the Al-Assad regime. Unless the regime resolves to engage genuinely in political dialogue, focus on reform and address the legitimate concerns and aspirations of the Syrian people, there will be no sustainable solution. While the crisis intensifies, the United Kingdom continues to support the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the World Health Organization in providing life-saving assistance to those who need it most. While the cross-border aid mechanism is a temporary measure to achieve this end, the Secretary-General has made clear in his report (S/2020/401) that there is not yet any alternative either in the north-west or the north-east. It is with that in mind that resolution 2504 (2020) must be renewed for a further 12 months and cross-border assistance into the north- east reauthorized. We note that, last week, Al-Assad sacked his Prime Minister and that, at the end of May, he appointed a new set of governors, undoubtedly to give the impression that he is doing something to address the problems facing Syria and his failure to deal with them. However, that is not what Syrians have been calling for. What they need and what they deserve is a better Syria and for the concerns and grievances that brought them into the streets in 2011 to be addressed. It is in this regard that we greatly commend the work of Noura Ghazi Safadi in promoting the rights of the families of the detained. Time and again in meetings of the Security Council, we have discussed the need for the regime to properly engage on the issue of detainees. Limited prisoner swaps are not enough. We urge the regime to make a widespread release of political prisoners and vulnerable people and to ensure medical care is available for those still in detention. This is even more important given the threat posed by COVID-19. We are proud that the United Kingdom is able to support Noura's work through the Women's International League for Peace and Freedom. Finally, we again today heard criticism of sanctions imposed against the Syrian regime. The way to achieve the removal of these sanctions is clear. Rather than interfering with aid, bombing schools and hospitals, and detaining and torturing its people, the regime must heed the call of its population and engage seriously with Special Envoy Pedersen and the United Nations-led political process to achieve a peaceful end to the conflict. We would reiterate once more that goods and medical supplies used for humanitarian purposes are not subject to European Union sanctions, which the United Kingdom continues to apply, and additional exemptions from sanctions are available for humanitarian activity in Syria. I would again note that the United Kingdom and our European partners are among the leading donors to humanitarian aid to Syria, including in regime-held areas.
