Mrs. Craft (United States of America): I thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing. Addressing these issues in a fair manner is not easy and we appreciate her efforts and those of her team to do so. Lalso thank Assistant Secretary-General Mueller for her briefing. As I have stated on many prior occasions, if we are to see genuine progress in our work to help bring peace to the Middle East, the Council must treat this issue more even-handedly. Given the likelihood that we will hear continued criticisms of Israel that are unfairly one-sided, I wanted to take a few moments to shed light on Israel's contributions to the international community and to appreciate publicly all that has been overcome in order to make those contributions. This week and next week, in New York and around the world, we will be commemorating the seventy-fifth anniversary of the liberation of Auschwitz. No one in this Chamber should need reminding of the horrors that occurred just beyond Krakow and across Europe during the Second World War. Those are the horrors that lead us to say never again. While we can never forget the unparalleled horrors of the Holocaust, Israelis consistently look to the future and the ways in which they can improve the lives of all people. Israelis have won 13 Nobel Prizes, including in chemistry and economics. They have improved drip- irrigation technologies that allow countless individuals in the desert environment around the world to be fed. They have enhanced surgical technologies that improve the success of medical operations. Indeed, while the world criticizes Israel, Israel is making the world a better place. The Council should not lose sight of that fact. I will not allow us to and instead I call upon my colleagues to embrace a more appropriate focus for a Council dedicated to international peace and security - a focus on the regional actor fuelling division, violence and hatred; the regime that funds and trains militants focused on the destruction of Israel; the regime that provides weapons and other support to the Houthis and Hizbullah, props up the Al-Assad regime and seeks to interfere with Iraq's fragile democracy; the regime that guns down its own citizens when they protest the corruption, lies and mismanagement of the leadership. Yet, despite a long history of advocating for the obliteration of Israel and aggressively undermining regional peace and security, Iran too often escapes serious scrutiny by this organ. When Iran attacked tankers in the Persian Gulf and energy facilities in Saudi Arabia last year, the Council was silent. When Iran provided weapons to the Houthis and Hizbullah,the Council was silent. When Iran sought to prop up the Al-Assad regime's brutal repression of its own people, the Council was silent. It is not as though Iran's malign behaviour occurs without the Council's knowledge. It has been well documented by the United Nations or is simply out in the open. Our failure to address Iran's central role in destabilizing the region sends a powerfully damaging message to those who seek lasting peace and prosperity in the region. It only encourages further instability, which puts the peace we all seek at greater risk. I have said before that Israel has no_ better friend than the United States and I will say it again today - whether it is reminding the world what Israel has done to make substantive contributions to global peace and prosperity or what Iran is doing to frustrate efforts towards peace. President Donald Trump and the American people together will do what is required to stand by our partner, our ally and, indeed, our friend again and again.
