Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland): We are very
grateful for the useful briefing which the Assistant
Secretary-General has given us this morning, and I
would like to warmly welcome the presence here today
of His Excellency Goran Svilanovic, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
We have taken careful note of his remarks, and I agree
that it is the task of all of us, in particular, to try to
sustain a positive momentum in the implementation of
resolution 1244 (1999).

The substance of the United Kingdom position is
well covered in the statement which Ambassador
Levitte made in his capacity in the presidency of the
European Union. I would like to echo the welcome
expressed there and in earlier statements for the

S/PVAZA')

 

appointment of Mr. Haekkerup as Special
Representative and join others in thanking Mr. Bernard
Kouchner extremely warmly for the tremendous job
that he has done as Special Representative.

One or two additional points. The United
Kingdom strongly condemns the attack on the joint
United States/Russian Kosovo Force (KFOR) near the
Kosovo-Serbian boundary a few days ago. KFOR will
not be deterred from carrying out its mission by
extremist attacks. Violence directed against
representatives of the international community cannot
be in the interests of the residents of the Presevo Valley
region who want to live in peace. This violence must
stop immediately.

We also condemn the violence in Leposavic on 16
December, and we call on the Serb residents of Kosovo
to avoid being manipulated by extremists who do not
have the real interests of the Serb community at heart.
That incident in particular demonstrates that there is a
long way to go with the challenge of normalizing the
situation in Kosovo. All sides have to respect the law
and exercise restraint in the run-up to the Serbian
parliamentary elections on 23 December. The holding
of those elections in Kosovo is without prejudice to the
future status of Kosovo and must not be used as an
excuse for agitation.

The elections to Kosovo-wide provisional
democratic self-governing institutions, as envisaged in
resolution 1244 (1999), should be held when the right
conditions are in place. The process of creating those
conditions has to begin now, and we call on the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) to begin those preparations, including the
registration of Serbs and other minorities.

Finally, I should like to welcome contact between
the Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
and UNMIK on the issue of Kosovar Albanians
detained in Serbia. We hope a decision on their release
can be taken as soon as possible. This will be a
valuable confidence-building measure. I urge Foreign
Minister Svilanovic to do all he can to move forward
this important step towards normalization.

The United Kingdom is pleased to have
sponsored the presidential statement which we are
about to adopt.

