Mr. Blanchard (Canada) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Sir, for inviting Canada to join today's debate.

(spoke in English)

Many thanks to Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo
for an excellent and sobering briefing.

(spoke in French)

Canada welcomes the opportunity to discuss
Venezuela in the Security Council. Since we last met
on this issue (see S/PV.8452), the situation in Venezuela
has only deteriorated, with grave consequences. On
23 February, regime actors employed deadly force
against their own people instead of accepting the
delivery of aid from neighbouring countries. Canada
offers deepest condolences to the families of the
victims and we reiterate our call, as many others today
have done, for the events to be investigated and the
perpetrators brought to justice.

The Nicolas Maduro regime continues to hinder
access for much-needed humanitarian assistance to
vulnerable people in Venezuela. Let there be no doubt
that Venezuela is under the control of a dictatorship that
would see its people starve rather than cede one iota of
power. Fleeing such conditions, more than 3.4 million
people have left Venezuela since 2015 and neighbouring
countries have generously offered refuge and support.

On 4 February, during the 10th ministerial
meeting of the Lima Group, Canada announced
some $53 million in development, stabilization and
humanitarian assistance to help those affected by the
crisis in Venezuela, including refugees, migrants and
host communities. However, despite the international
community's efforts, it is clear that the deepening crisis
in Venezuela is having a growing effect on regional
stability and security.
(spoke in English)

The Lima Group, including Canada and now
with the full participation of Venezuela's interim
Government, met yesterday in Bogota, where we
affirmed that the continuance of Nicolas Maduro
and his illegitimate regime in power represents an
unprecedented threat to security, peace, freedom and
prosperity throughout the region. We also reiterated
our commitment to democratic and peaceful transition,
based on the Venezuelan Constitution, and our rejection
of the Maduro regime's illegitimate claim to power.

Let us be clear. The presidential elections in May
2018 were clearly 4 I repeat, clearly 4 fraudulent.
When opposition leaders are jailed, placed under house
arrest or forced into exile and when the media is unable
to report freely, it is not a free, fair and legitimate
election. It is a sad travesty; it is a fraud. Even during
his original mandate, Nicolas Maduro demonstrated
a record of repression, corruption and serious human
rights abuses that violated the constitutional rights of
Venezuelan citizens and denigrated their democratic
institutions. The regime's attacks on democracy
included the establishment of the National Constituent
Assembly, created to usurp the powers of the
democratically elected National Assembly because of
the opposition majority in that body.

It is clear that the Maduro regime has no authority
to govern Venezuela. Together with more than 50
democratic countries around the world, including
most countries of the Americas, we have recognized
Juan Guaido as the legitimate interim President
of Venezuela. That recognition is based firmly on
Venezuela's own Constitution.

On 15 January, the democratically elected National
Assembly declared that the presidency had been
usurped by Nicolas Maduro. According to article 233
of the Venezuelan Constitution, in the absence of a
legitimate President Juan Guaido, as President of the
National Assembly, shall assume the functions of
interim President. The Lima Group supports his agenda
to call free and fair elections as soon as possible in
order to peacefully restore constitutional democracy
in Venezuela.

Let us recall that the democracy clause of the
Inter-American Democratic Charter, signed by then-
President Chavez in Quebec City in 2001, clearly
rejected any unconstitutional alteration or interruption
of the democratic order. In that spirit, we repeat our call
on the Maduro regime to cede power immediately. Tens
of thousands of Venezuelans have taken to the streets
in recent weeks demanding genuine change. The Lima
Group has made it clear that it supports a peaceful
and democratic transition in Venezuela - a transition
that is already under way, based on the Venezuelan
Constitution 4 and that it rejects the use of force.

We call on all member States that are in
communication with the Maduro regime to urge an
end to violence. Peaceful protesters seeking food and
medicines should not face tear gas and bullets. Until
that time, Canada stands with the people of Venezuela
in their peaceful struggle for democracy, human rights
and the rule of law. It is those principles that we have
expressed in the Ottawa declaration for Venezuela, and
we encourage all those present to endorse that document
to demonstrate their shared commitment.

We will continue our efforts in cooperation with our
partners in the Lima Group, through the United Nations
system and in other multilateral forums. Canada calls
on all members of the international community to
likewise support the Venezuelan people as they seek
to liberate their country from the Maduro dictatorship.

