Mr. Gurirab (Namibia): Let me at the outset, albeit
belatedly, extend my best wishes to one and all for a
splendid new year and share with you my own dream for
a world completely at peace, with prosperity for all. This
ought to be our common yearning: that 1995, the United
Nations Year for Tolerance, will usher in a change for the
better in old habits and in the ways we have been doing
things up till now.

Allow me, Sir, to congratulate your country on its
assumption the presidency of the Security Council for this
month, a month when, by happy coincidence, the question
of Angola is being discussed. You, Sir, will no doubt be
playing a crucial role in helping find a lasting solution to
the Angolan conflict. As the leader of the Southern African
Development Community, Botswana is well placed to
bring its accumulated wisdom and diplomatic excellence
to bear upon the deliberations of the Council. We in
Namibia have strong sentiments towards you personally,
towards your Ambassador to the United Nations, and
towards your great country, whose history and destiny are
so closely tied up with Namibia's own fortunes and fate.
You can always count on my support and on the
cooperation of my delegation.

I wish also to congratulate your predecessor, His
Excellency Ambassador Cardenas of Argentina, on having
successfully presided over the Council in January.

My thanks go also to the indefatigable and
imaginative Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-
Ghali, for his hard work, and especially for his excellent
report (S/1995/97 and Add.1), which provides useful
information on the situation in Angola and details for the
deployment of a third United Nations Angola Verification
Mission (UNAVEM. III). In the same vein, I would like
to commend my brother and colleague, Maitre Alioune
Blondin Beye, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, for the patience, perseverance and diplomatic
skill he displayed during the protracted negotiations that
culminated in the Lusaka Protocol.

The signing of the Lusaka Protocol was a significant
victory and a breakthrough for us all, especially for the
Angolan people, who have for so long been yearning for
peace and normalcy in their lives.

President Chiluba of Zambia was a sage adviser and
a lightning-rod behind the scenes, encouraging, cajoling
and inspiring the negotiators - and not least the observer
delegations too - to turn set-backs and frustrations in the
negotiations into challenges and opportunities on the basis
of the step-by-step consensus-building that eventually
produced the expected result. The Government and the
people of Zambia wholeheartedly gave President Chiluba
the support he needed to carry on with this noble task.
We salute President Chiluba for his critical role, and we
express gratitude to his people for their generosity and
their commitment to helping their Angolan neighbours to
end the human tragedy in their country.

As Angola's neighbour, Namibia has a strong, direct
interest in finding a lasting solution to the conflict in that
sister country. In our continued search for peace in
Angola, the President of the Republic of Namibia, His
Excellency Mr. Sam Nujoma, accompanied by me and
other senior Government Ministers, visited Angola on

 

3 February 1995 for discussions with His Excellency
President Jose Eduardo dos Santos and his Ministers. We
left Angola fortified in the knowledge that the Angolan
Government is interested in a lasting peace in that country.
Namibia is seriously considering making a meaningful
contribution to the peace process in Angola, including the
implementation of UNAVEM. III.

We have made repeated offers for similar
consultations with the leadership of UNITA and have
invited Mr. Jonas Savimbi to come to Namibia for
discussions. Neither we nor others in the region have been
successful so far in this regard. I wish to take this
opportunity to renew our invitation to Mr. Savimbi to visit
Namibia and to find a way to turn a new page and be able
to interact with other African leaders, in the interest of
peace, stability and regional cooperation.

Africa has repeatedly expressed appreciation to the
members of the Security Council and other United Nations
Member States, in particular the troika - Portugal, the
Russian Federation and the United States of America - for
the pivotal role they have played in the Angolan conflict.
That conflict has been long and difficult, but the United
Nations did not abandon its mission or leave the Angolan
people to their own fate. As the Council embarks on the
larger mission of the deployment of UNAVEM. III, it is the
view of the Government of Namibia that the Secretary-
General should be allowed sufficient latitude and flexibility
to be able to carry out the mandate entrusted to him
effectively.

What this means is that the United Nations and, in
particular, the Security Council should adopt uniform
standards and approaches in situations of conflict and
peacemaking that involve the Organization. International
peace-keeping and regional conflict management and
resolution are laudable undertakings that require effective
coordination and generous funding by the entire
international community.

The Organization of African Unity (OAU) Council of
Ministers, at its sixty-first session, held in Addis Ababa,
decided, inter alia, to send a high-powered delegation of
several African Foreign Ministers, together with Mr. Salim
Ahmed Salim, our able and dedicated Secretary-General, to
take part in this important debate. We are here to join
hands with the members of the Council and the Secretary-
General to speed up the deployment of UNAVEM. III in
Angola so that there is no delay. Its deployment will serve
both as an effective deterrent to likely violations of the
cease-fire and as a concrete confidence-building measure in
the eyes of the Angolan people themselves. The Angolan
Government and UNITA have made a commitment to
peace and reconciliation, starting with the cease-fire
which, while so far satisfactory, still remains susceptible
to threats or actual violations, whether deliberate or
accidental.

We can now clearly see the light at the end of the
tunnel. It is high time cooperation and brotherhood
replaced blood-letting and enmity in Angola.

Namibia welcomes the ongoing meetings between
the Chiefs of Staff of the Angolan Armed Forces and
UNITA as positive steps. Such high-level meetings will
strengthen the cease-fire before and after the deployment
of UNAVEM. III and will help create the necessary
confidence-building measures. In this context, the face-to-
face meeting between President dos Santos and Mr.
Savimbi, which we hope will take place soon, will usher
in a new phase in Angola and further strengthen the
transition from war to peace.

The draft resolution before the Council seeks
specifically to authorize the creation and early deployment
of UNAVEM. III in Angola in accordance with the
Lusaka Protocol, and this is what the OAU Ministerial
delegation has come here to support. In this context, I
wish to place on record my commendation to the
chairman of the OAU ministerial delegation, the Foreign
Minister of Malawi, my colleague and brother the
Honourable Mr. Bwanali, for his sterling leadership of
this mission, and also to say to my other colleagues that
our working together to serve Africa in this case is an
example that our continent should emulate in other
conflict situations in Africa. It goes without saying that
Namibia also shares the concerns and preoccupations
which the Foreign Minister of Angola, my good friend
and colleague Mr. Venancio de Moura, expressed in his
important statement. It is my sincere hope and expectation
that the collective wisdom of the Council will help
overcome those concerns.

On 15 July 1993, I addressed the Council on the
issue of Angola. I implored the international community
to consider providing massive assistance for the
reconstruction of Angola. In his current report, the
Secretary-General states that Angola is reported to be the
most land-mine-infested country in the world. It is
estimated that in Angola there are between 9 and 15
million land-mines and pieces of unexploded ordnance
that have been broadcast throughout the country over the
three decades of conflict.

 

I also pointed out then that the successive reports of
the Secretary-General had revealed massive destruction of
cities, economic infrastructure, public utilities, hospitals and
schools. What was true in 1993 is even truer after two more
years of war.

I wish once again to appeal to the international
community for generous assistance for the reconstruction of
Angola. Non-governmental organizations will have an
important role to play in providing humanitarian assistance
to the Angolan people. In 1993 I made an appeal for a
pledging conference for the reconstruction of Angola to be
considered. I reiterate that appeal today. In this regard, I
welcome the initiative of the Department of Humanitarian
Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat, which has already
issued an appeal for the clearing of land-mines - a
necessary condition for the resettlement of the displaced
population and for normalization of their lives.

Lastly, successful reconstruction of Angola will be the
surest and most secure way of guaranteeing peace and
reconciliation in Angola, as well as accelerating the
Southern African Development Community's objectives of
regional integration, trade, reconstruction and development.

