The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.

I would like to begin by reiterating France's sincere
condolences to the relatives of the victims of the tragic
crash of Ethiopian Airlines Flight ET-302. I would
like to express our solidarity with the families of the
victims; with Ethiopia, Kenya and all other countries
of those who died; and with the United Nations family.

Allow me to thank Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), for his insightful briefing on
the peace efforts and electoral process. I also thank
National Security Adviser of Afghanistan Hamdullah
Mohib for travelling to be with us at today's debate
and for his very comprehensive briefing. Lastly, I
would like to warmly thank Ms. Storai Tapesh for her
briefing, in particular on the crucial issue of women's
political participation - a very important subject on
which we intend to focus during the French and German
presidencies of the Security Council.

I shall make four points.

First, while 2018 was one of the deadliest years
for civilians, our priority, more than ever, must be
to achieve lasting negotiated peace in Afghanistan.
I commend the United States, through the work of
its Special Representative Zalmay Khalilzad, for
engaging in discussions with the Taliban with a view
to bringing its members into peace talks with the
Afghan Government and all Afghan political forces.
France calls on the Taliban to accept direct talks with
the Afghan Government. As the Special Representative
underscored, it is essential that the peace process be
inclusive and led by Afghans for Afghans. In that
regard, as has been said, it is particularly important
that women and young people participate directly and
meaningfully in the peace process and at all levels of
decision-making.

In addition, France recalls the need to unify
the various regional and international initiatives to
achieve lasting peace so that international efforts are
coordinated and non-competing. The Kabul process
provides an appropriate framework in that regard. As
the High Representative of the European Union for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy said in Geneva,
we are also convinced that the European Union can
play a facilitating role in peace talks. Others before me
have stressed that we must not forget how far Afghans
have come in the past 18 years. As talks continue,
the preservation and strengthening of achievements
in the areas of justice, the rule of law, human rights,
including women's rights, and respect for fundamental
freedoms - in particular the freedoms of expression,
opinion and the press - must remain an absolute
priority. Sacrificing those elements could jeopardize
the international community's support, including
financial support from international donors, for the
ongoing process.

Secondly, it is important to ensure the smooth
conduct of presidential elections. To be credible, the
presidential elections to be held on 20 July must be free,
transparent and inclusive. The shortcomings identified
in the parliamentary elections and in previous elections
must be rectified and efforts to prepare for the electoral
process must be intensified to prevent further delays.
That will require all candidates to act constructively.
The reform of the electoral law and the renewal of the
terms of the members of the electoral commissions must
help rebuild the trust of the Afghan people because
credible institutions and legitimate representatives are
also an indicator of peace. The Independent Election
Commission must continue to work to ensure the widest
possible participation of the population in elections, in
particular women, as candidates and voters. Security
for the elections will also be a key element, and we
reiterate our full support for the Afghan security forces,
whose efforts were recognized during the last elections.

Thirdly, it is urgent that we redouble our efforts to
protect civilians, including humanitarian and medical
personnel, and meet humanitarian needs. In addition to
the unprecedented increase in the number of civilian
casualties in 2018, including 900 children killed,
caused in particular to attacks by Da'esh, the number
of attacks on humanitarian workers has also increased
by more than 150 per cent in one year. Hospitals and
schools continue to be targeted. The World Health
Organization database lists 87 attacks on medical
personnel and health infrastructure since January 2018.
It is imperative that all parties to the conflict respect
their obligations under international humanitarian law.

France welcomes the efforts of UNAMA in
support of the Afghan authorities to curb the number
of civilian casualties, in particular among children.
It is also imperative that laws to eliminate violence
against women, as well as the articles of the penal code
amended in 2018 to protect women and children from
sexual violence and to combat the recruitment and
use of children, be fully implemented. To that end, it
is important that justice capacities be strengthened.
The voices of victims must be taken into account. It is
therefore essential that all measures be taken to limit
their marginalization and stigmatization. In particular,
UNAMA could include in its reports additional
information on early and forced child marriages
organized by Da'esh in Khorasan. Finally, we must
do all in our power to meet the growing humanitarian
needs of 6.5 million Afghans in need and ensure safe
and unhindered humanitarian access throughout
the country.

Fourthly and lastly, with regard to the essential
role of the United Nations in continuing to support
Afghanistan at this pivotal time, I acknowledge the
outstanding work done by UNAMA and the various
United Nations agencies in Afghanistan, both in
support of peace efforts and the electoral process, as
well as development and humanitarian assistance. As
we prepare to renew the Mission's mandate in a few
days, we must not lose sight of the essential work it
does every day. In that regard, I recall the importance
that France attaches to the unity of international
partners and of the Council in support of Afghanistan.
We must remain more united than ever in support of
Afghanistan's path to peace, stability, democracy and
economic and social development.

I resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to Mr. Yamamoto to respond to
observations made.

