Ms. Khoulani (spoke in Arabic): I thank you,
Madam President, for inviting me to speak here today.
My name is Amina Khoulani and my story is one
shared by hundreds of thousands of Syrian families
who have endured the pain of having their loved
ones snatched from them and disappeared in brutal
underground dungeons.

Eight years ago, three of my brothers were taken
by the Syrian regime. Their only crime was peacefully
protesting for a free and democratic Syria - a vision
shared by millions across the country. For years, my
family and I hoped that my brothers would one day be
released but, sadly, that was not to be. When photos
of murdered, tortured detainees were leaked by the
military defector Caesar, the first image I saw was of
my brother Mouhamad's body. Mouhamad was not only
my brother, but my best friend and the person closest
to my heart. His wife was pregnant at the time that he
disappeared. He never got the chance to see his son, and
his son will never have the chance to know his father.

In July last year, the Syrian regime began releasing
death notices for people who died in its jails. Four years
on from learning of Mouhamad's death, I learned that
my other two brothers, Majd and Abdulsattar, had also
been killed in detention. I do not have enough words
to describe how it felt. Hope was wrenched from me
yet again. I could not stop imagining how they might
have endured before leaving this world. According to
the death notice we received from the regime, they were
both sentenced to death on the same day, at the same
minute, on 15 January 2013.

I myselfwas imprisoned for six months, after being
arrested by the Air Force Intelligence branch for my
peaceful activism. My husband was detained for two
and a half years. We were both lucky to survive, but
many others were not as lucky.

Today I am one of the founders of Families for
Freedom - a women-led movement launched in 2017
by families whose loved ones have been detained
and disappeared. The women in our group come
from diverse backgrounds, but we are united in one
mission - to demand an end to the crime of arbitrary
detention and forced disappearance, demand justice for
the disappeared and their families and ensure that those
responsible for their suffering are held accountable.

As I address the Council today, approximately
100,000 Syrian men, women and children remain
missing. The majority are detained by the Syrian
regime, but armed opposition groups and extremist
groups, such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham,
are also guilty of detention and disappearance. The
people detained may be sick, injured or dying. Many
endure barbaric torture on a daily basis. Some may be
scheduled for execution. Hardly any of them will have
had a fair trial. The Council can save their lives if it
chooses to act today.

As I speak here today, the cases of detention, forced
disappearance and torture in Syria are on the rise. I
am not telling Council members anything new. They
will no doubt have seen Caesar's photos and read the
reports issued by Syrian international organizations
with regard to the crisis of forced disappearance in
Syria and the brutal practice of torture. In spite of those
efforts, disappearances have continued to take place to
this very day, including to persons who tried to return
to Syria.

The Security Council has utterly failed Syrian
detainees and their families. It is its responsibility to
protect Syrians from a system that kills, tortures and
illegally detains its own citizens, in systematic violation
of international law, as concluded by the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian
Arab Republic and other relevant bodies. The Council
has let vetoes and excuses get in the way ofwhat is right
and just. It bears the responsibility of finding a way to
end impunity and stop that horror.

Today, I therefore ask the members of the Council,
for the Syrian families who have lost their loved ones,
to make the issue of detention and forced disappearance
in Syria a priority, to adopt a new resolution to pressure
not just the Syrian regime but armed opposition groups
as well for the names and whereabouts of all those in
detention and to allow humanitarian organizations
to visit the detention centres, especially the military
prison Sednaya. We further call on it to urge the Global
Coalition to Defeat the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham (ISIS) and the Syrian Democratic Forces to
uncover the fate of the disappeared by ISIS and give
answers to their relatives, so that those of us whose
loved ones have been executed or tortured to death can
know the location of their burial sites so that we can
grieve them properly.

The crimes of arbitrary detention and forced
disappearance have plagued my country for decades,
and they have become epidemic in the last eight years.
They are a horror that have impacted the lives of
millions of people, shattering them forever. The first
step towards sustainable peace and justice is truth, an
end to arbitrary detention and forced disappearance
and the release of the thousands of civilians arbitrarily
detained and denied their freedom.
