Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank David Stephen for his very useful introduction to
our discussion today and to welcome the Prime
Minister to the Security Council and to New York. It is
a real pleasure to see you here again, Sir.

I would like, as you did, Mr. Prime Minister, to
start my intervention with a reference to terrorism and
to the situation that we all face in the aftermath of the
11 September attacks. I know that Sir Jeremy
Greenstock was very pleased to hear from you directly,
not least in his capacity as Chairman of the counter-
terrorism Committee of the Security Council, about the
initiatives that you have taken to start moving towards
the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), which
you announced to us today. I think this is very
important, not least because, as Ambassador Levitte,
said, terrorists are going to get squeezed. And it is very
important to deny them havens where they can operate
somehow with impunity.

This has implications for us all, and it will be
particularly important to avoid pockets of vacuum
where they are able to operate because there is no
authority to stop them from doing that. That in turn
underlines to me the importance in the context of
Somalia of making sure that we do achieve peace and
reconciliation in a way that will bring into play all the
various elements and forces in the country on an
inclusive basis.

Sadly, in terms of the security situation at least,
the positive signals from the Somalia Reconciliation
and Restoration Council and from the Transitional
National Government, before the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) summit in Lusaka in July, do not
seem to have borne fruit. As Ambassador Wang of
China said - and I have a great deal of sympathy with
everything in his statement - fighting has increased,
and we are concerned in particular about the political
instability in "Puntland". We need to find a way to stop
this continuous cycle of violence, and that cycle of
violence will be stopped only through dialogue.
In this connection, Mr. Prime Minister, it was
very helpful to hear of your commitment to engaging
those outside the Arta process. Taken together with
what David Stephen had to say about the basis of the
Transitional National Government being a transition
towards the solution that we would all like to see, I
think that makes for an encouraging background. We
will be very interested to see how the independent
Commission to which you referred, Mr. Prime Minister,
performs in terms of providing a nucleus to bring
together all the forces in Somalia towards a final
settlement of the sort we all want.

David Stephen referred to "divide and rule" in the
context of external initiatives. I would only partly
agree with him. I think external initiatives, where they
can help, are useful, and we would encourage the
Ethiopian and Kenyan Governments to restart their
facilitation efforts, as mandated by the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development. It is
vital that Somalia's neighbours and other States in the
region play a constructive role in efforts to bring peace
and stability.

In this connection, we very much welcome the
recent meeting in Nairobi between academics from the
Transitional National Government, "Somaliland" and
"Puntland" aimed at exploring how federalism might
work in Somalia. We strongly believe that this
approach, drawing on local structures and encouraging
wider involvement in the reconciliation process, is a
realistic way forward. We should, I think, be seriously
looking at the idea of a federal devolved model for a
future Somalia as a realistic way of breaking the
political deadlock.

This brings me to the United Nations role. It
seems to me that the essential requirement, however it
is achieved in practice, is for the United Nations to be
able to contribute actively towards facilitating the sort
of future structures, future settlement and future
solutions to which we have all referred in this debate.
On the question of a peace-building office, I think we
have no option but to accept the Secretary-General's
advice that, for security and other reasons, the time is
not yet right to establish such an office. I have listened
carefully to those who have argued, like Ambassador
Levitte, that there should be a security assessment
mission to look again at the possibilities for this. We
would have no difficulties with that, but it is very
important, not least in terms of our own commitment as
a Council to the security of United Nations staff, that
the process should remain an objective, technical
process that correctly balances the risks. The pressures
to move in are understandable, but we must, I think,
respect the views of the professionals as we take
decisions in this tricky area.

On the proposal for a Committee of Friends,
again, we are prepared to look at this. But, as I think
the Prime Minister himself hinted in his statement, it is
important that the Committee of Friends should have
clear objectives and be able to demonstrate exactly
how it would advance the peace process.

Sustainable improvements in the humanitarian
situation in Somalia will be impossible without
political reconciliation. We note that development
programmes, though nascent, are active in Somalia.
The work of the United Nations Development
Programme in supporting good governance
programmes and in stimulating pro-poor economic
growth strategies are important elements in the long-
term peace-building process. We support them, and we
hope others will too. We also agree with the Secretary-
General's observations that further steps need to be
taken to assist in the building ofa sustainable peace.

The United Kingdom believes that the robust
framework that is needed must continue to include a
strong development perspective and to recognize the
fundamental contribution of development activities to
lasting peace in Somalia.

None of what I have just said should be taken as
detracting in any way from the statement which will be
made later on in the debate by the representative of
Belgium on behalf of the European Union, to which my
delegation, of course, fully subscribes.

