The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belgium, Brazil, Canada,
Colombia, Cuba, Cyprus, Djibouti, Egypt, Estonia,
Fiji, Georgia, Germany, Guatemala, Haiti, India,
Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Ireland, Italy,
Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mexico, Morocco, Myanmar,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, the Philippines, Portugal,
Qatar, Romania, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri
Lanka, the Sudan, Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine, the
United Arab Emirates, the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela and Viet Nam to participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: The Most
Reverend and Right Honourable Justin Welby,
Archbishop of Canterbury; and Ms. Mossarat Qadeem,
Co-founder of PAIMAN Alumni Trust.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite Her
Excellency Ms. Joanne Adamson, Charge d'affaires a.i.
of the Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations, to participate in this meeting.

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.

It is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document 8/2018/586, which contains
a letter dated 3 August 2018 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note
on the item under consideration.

I now wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-
General His Excellency Mr. Antonio Guterres and give
him the floor.

