Mr. Feltman: I would like to thank members of the
Council for this opportunity to introduce the report of the
Secretary-General on Mali (S/2012/894). As requested
by the Security Council in resolution 2071 (2012) of
12 October 2012, the report provides an overview of
developments in the country since January, and outlines
the efforts of the United Nations system, as well as
those of national, regional and international actors, in
responding to the crisis in Mali and in implementing
resolution 2071 (2012). The report also provides
recommendations on the way forward.

The Secretary-General fully shares the profound
sense of urgency of the Security Council and of
regional Member States regarding the crisis in Mali.
The political situation in Bamako has become more
complex, especially as a result ofdeep divisions between
Malian political stakeholders over how to implement
key national priorities. The national dialogue, which
is expected to serve as the forum to discuss and agree
on the implementation of those priorities, has not been
convened due to disagreement over the modalities and
objectives of the process. The national dialogue is now
scheduled to take place during the second week of
December.

Even before the national dialogue convenes,
regional partners are moving forward to address the
pressing need for a viable political process. Following
talks convened by the Mediator of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS),
President Blaise Compaore, on 6 and 16 November
in Ouagadougou, two of the armed groups based in
northern Mali - the Mouvement national pour la
liberation de 1'Azawad(MNLA) and Ansar Dine - have
confirmed their participation in negotiations facilitated
by him. On the basis of that agreement, President
Compaore wrote to the interim President of Mali,
Dioncounda Traore', on 21 November inviting him to
send a delegation of the Malian Government for a first
formal round of talks. On 4 December, the ECOWAS
Mediator facilitated a meeting between a delegation
from the Malian Government, led by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Tieman Coulibaly, and representatives
of Ansar Dine and MNLA in Ouagadougou. According
to a communique issued by the ECOWAS mediation
following the meeting, the parties agreed on some
principles, including the primacy of dialogue, respect
for the national unity and territorial integrity of Mali,
respect for human rights and the freedom of religion,
and the rejection of terrorism and extremism.

Our collective sense of urgency derives in part,
of course, because the security situation in the north
of the country has continued to deteriorate. On
16 November, the MNLA launched an offensive against
the Mouvement pour l'unicite et le jihad en Afrique de
l'Ouest (MUJAO) in the north-eastern region of Gao.
Clashes between the two groups also took place on
19 November in the town of Menaka, near the border of
the Niger. MUJAO has since claimed that it has seized
control of the town. Both groups have also reported
that Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM) backed
MUJAO in the clashes. Reports indicated that many
civilians have fled from the region of Gao and moved
closer to the border of the Niger or the surrounding
desert due to the fighting. Twelve civilians have
been reportedly killed during the attacks. As further
evidence of the increasing insecurity in the north, on
27 November, a spokesman for Ansar Dine announced
that the group had wrested control of the town of
Lere, south west of Timbuktu, from the MNLA. In the
meantime, there are continuing reports ofjihadists and
terrorist elements arriving in the north of the country to
join with the armed groups.

We share the alarm of the Council about the human
rights situation in northern Mali. Gross human rights
abuses continue to be perpetrated against the population
in the north of the country, including cases of summary
and extrajudicial execution, sexual and gender-based
violence, the recruitment and use of child soldiers,
and torture. Moreover, Ansar Dine has continued its
destruction of historical, cultural and holy sites in
Timbuktu. On the humanitarian front, over 412,000
persons have been forced to flee northern Mali, half of
them crossing the border into neighbouring countries.
An estimated 5 million people have been affected by
the conflict, the majority of whom are at risk of food
insecurity. About 600,000 children under the age of
five are facing severe malnutrition.

Since the adoption of resolution 2071 (2012), the
United Nations system, recognizing the urgency and at
the direction of the Secretary-General, has intensified
and accelerated its efforts in Mali along two main
tracks. The first is to give strong impetus to the Malian
political process. The second is to support ECOWAS
and the African Union in planning for an international
force to support the Malian authorities in restoring the
territorial integrity of the country, if this cannot be
achieved through the political process, and addressing
the threat posed by terrorist and affiliated groups.

With respect to the first track, the Secretary-
General's Special Representative for West Africa,
Mr. Said Djinnit, has significantly increased his
political engagement with the authorities in Mali and
key regional stakeholders to provide momentum to a
Malian-owned political process focused on three main
objectives: first, broad-based and inclusive national
dialogue aimed at formulating a road map for the
transition; secondly, negotiations with armed groups
in the north that renounce violence and terrorism; and
thirdly, preparations for the holding of elections.

The Secretary-General's Special Envoy for the
Sahel, Mr. Romano Prodi, has also been active on the
broader Sahel issues and will host a meeting of special
envoys to the Sahel in Rome on 7 December to discuss,
inter alia, the United Nations integrated strategy on the
Sahel and the division of labour among special envoys.
It is vital that we address transnational Sahel issues as
part of the solution to the crisis in Mali.

Moreover, in response to a request by the
transitional Government, a needs assessment mission
was deployed by the Secretary-General to Bamako from
19 to 30 November to make recommendations aimed at
addressing the challenges facing the electoral process,
including those related to developing a framework
for inclusive consultations and confidence-building
measures. The assessment mission is finalizing its
report. In the meantime, three high-level electoral
experts have also been dispatched by the Secretary-
General to work with the Resident Coordinator and the
United Nations Development Programme to assist the
Malian authorities in developing a detailed and realistic
operational plan, including a timeline and budget, for
the holding of transparent and credible elections.

Despite concerted international efforts, the political
landscape in Mali remains complex and fragmented. It
is critical that the key political actors arrive at a unified
vision as soon as possible ifthey are to effectively focus
efforts on the main transition challenges, in particular
national dialogue and negotiations with the armed
groups. The support of the international community
will continue to be critical in helping the Malians to
bridge differences and arrive at a national consensus. It
is in this context that the Secretary-General intends to
establish a full time United Nations political presence
in Bamako, which will be responsible for interacting
with key Malian stakeholders on a daily basis under
my direction, and who will report to both his Special
Representative for West Africa and his Special Envoy
for the Sahel.

As the Secretary-General notes in his report, a
military operation may be required as a last resort to
deal with the most hard-line extremist and criminal
elements in northern Mali. In this regard, United Nations
military and police planners have worked closely with
ECOWAS and the African Union, in close consultation
with the Malian authorities, in developing a strategic
operational framework for the proposed African-
led international support mission in Mali. Under the
framework, an international force would support the
Malian defence and security forces in operations to
restore the territorial integrity of Mali.

There are, however, remaining questions about
how the international and Malian forces would be led,
sustained, trained, equipped and financed. Moreover,
the division of tasks between the forces, command and
control, civilian oversight over the Malian forces and
timelines are issues that still need to be addressed.
While the operational aspects are being refined, we
envisage that the very existence of the military option
can provide useful and complementary leverage to the
political process, which remains the priority option for
Mali.

Should the Council decide to authorize the
deployment of the African-led international support
mission in Mali, any operations conducted by the
force will need to be well planned, coordinated and
implemented. Furthermore, if the effectiveness of the
operations and their minimal adverse impact on the
population are to be ensured, they must be carried out
in strict compliance with international humanitarian
and human rights law. The early deployment of human
rights officers as part ofa strengthened United Nations
presence in Mali, as proposed by the Secretary-General,
could provide an important capacity for monitoring
such compliance and help to ensure accountability.
Moreover, the Secretary-General's proposals that the
Council request the African Union and the Malian
authorities to use benchmarks in determining when
military operations would commence, and consider
requesting the African Union to report to it on the
activities of the international support mission once
it is established, would also be helpful in ensuring
accountability.

As the Secretary-General has proposed, benchmarks
for the commencement of military operations, could
include, first, the demonstrated operational readiness
of the international and Malian forces; secondly,
positive developments in the peace process, including
on the part of the leadership in Bamako; and thirdly,
the effective training of the personnel of both forces
on their obligations under international human rights,
humanitarian and refugee law. These benchmarks would
help address important questions that are intended not
to delay addressing Mali's security crisis but to make
sure that any military intervention can be successful
and in conformity with international standards.

Both the international support mission in Mali and
the Malian forces would need the requisite capacities for
carrying out operations against terrorist and affiliated
groups in northern Mali. That will require the timely
and well-coordinated provision of a significant amount
of support by international partners, including general
and specialized equipment, logistics and funding.

With respect to funding for the proposed force, the
United Nations has a limited ability to deliver a support
package in the near term to a combat force. Such
operations could be supported through contributions
by Member States. Once their objectives have been
achieved, the Council could consider the option of
the United Nations providing a logistics package
for stabilization operations undertaken by the force.
Consideration could also be given to the deployment of
a peacekeeping operation following the completion of
combat operations. The United Nations, drawing on its
comparative advantages and international experience,
could also support planning in key areas that need to
accompany or follow combat operations to ensure a
progressive extension of State authority. It is vital that
early preparations be undertaken for a stabilization
phase so as to prevent a security and administrative
vacuum as areas in northern Mali are recovered.

As members of the Council are aware, both the
President of Benin, in his capacity as the Chairman of
the African Union, and the President of the ECOWAS
Commission have sent letters to the Secretary-General
conveying their views on the report and expressing
certain reservations with respect to the approach adopted
by the United Nations concerning the authorization of
an African-led international support mission for Mali.
Both messages call for urgent action to be taken with
respect to the authorization of the deployment of the
African-led force to Mali.

The Secretary-General's position is clear. He
shares the sense of urgency about the horrendous crisis
facing Mali, and he believes, at the same time, that
the international response must be multidimensional
and well-conceived. With respect to the military
option, his report makes clear that the strategic
operational framework, which was endorsed by the
African Union, provides a good basis for the Security
Council to consider the African Union's request for
its authorization of the mission under Chapter VII of
the United Nations Charter. The Secretary-General's
report also encourages additional planning before the
actual deployment of any such force.

The Malian people, the victims of this crisis,
are, understandably, looking to the region and the
international community for help. As the Secretary-
General indicated in his report, Mali's complex crisis
requires a multifaceted and integrated response in
which the political, security, humanitarian, human
rights and stabilization dimensions are well coordinated
and mutually reinforcing, and whose challenges must
be seen in the broader context of the Sahel region.

As a first step, international support should
be focused on supporting the Malian authorities in
conducting an inclusive national dialogue aimed at
reaching a national consensus on a transitional road
map that addresses the full return to constitutional
order and the grievances of groups in the north.

Secondly, efforts to bring about a negotiatedpolitical
settlement with armed groups that have disavowed ties
to terrorist groups should continue in earnest. Finally,
a well-conceived and executed military intervention in
the north should be conducted as a last resort to address
terrorist and criminal elements, and planning should be
undertaken for stabilization efforts in recovered areas.

Finally, let me say that while there is, for obvious
reasons, a strong focus at this time on the international
response to the requests of Mali and the region, it bears
underscoring that the Malians themselves need to be
at the centre of any efforts to restore their democracy
to health and fully recover their territory. The Malian
leaders must shoulder their responsibilities and work
together, inclusively, for the interests of the Malian
people and the region. The international community
must with urgency do all it can to assist.

