Mr. Moubarak (Lebanon) (interpretation from Arabic): I am delighted, Sir, to express our pleasure at
seeing you presiding over the Security Council this month.
We are fully aware of your wisdom and your broad
knowledge, as well as of your country's commitment to the
cause of peace. We are therefore convinced that you will
lead the Council very effectively.

The Security Council is once again considering a
situation that some in the international community had
believed was on the road to settlement. A sector of public
opinion applauded the scenes on their television screens -
the scenes of celebration that accompanied the signing of
preliminary agreements between some parties to the
conflict. We had always been among those who sincerely
hoped that one day we would all celebrate a just, lasting
and comprehensive peace; the day when we would all stand
together to applaud a bright future for all our children.

However, we sadly warned not only that any partial
measure would be doomed, but that its failure would have
serious repercussions for the future of peace because it
would lead to the frustration of public opinion and the
entrenchment of the language of despair, which usually
turns into acts of violence and tragedies for civilians. On
that basis we stated the need to continue these endeavours
on the basis and principles to which we all agreed in
Madrid. We considered that it would be necessary for
Israelis to stop dreaming of an Eretz Israel, and to stop
believing that security could come before peace. We
stressed that peace entrenches security; not the contrary.
We said that a genuine peace is a peace that, based on the
resolutions of international legitimacy, would respect the
legitimate rights of all the peoples of the region, including
the Palestinian people, a people which has suffered for
many long years. They have suffered occupation,
repression, dispersal; they have sought to establish their
homeland, a homeland that would give them the identity
necessary to join the international community, to practice
and enjoy their natural human rights and to have civilized
interaction with others.

Today we witness the fruits of partial measures.
Despair generates violence; violence attracts violence; and
here we are once again in a vicious circle of Violence.
Violence has spread from the occupied Palestinian
territories to southern Lebanon to the western Bekaa;
indeed, to the suburbs of Beirut. The number of civilian
casualties is rising, and instead of meeting to hail the
results of the Madrid process and the return to the path of
true peace, the Security Council is here because the
drums of war are beating again - the drums of the
Israeli military machine bombarding from land, sea and
air, destroying dozens of Lebanese villages and towns,
causing dozens of civilian casualties and displacing
thousands of women and children.

We see the Palestinians protesting against the Israeli
policy of siege, the security cordon imposed on the West
Bank and the Gaza Strip and the reoccupation of regions
from which Israeli forces had withdrawn. They believe
that the cordon and the closure constitute a declaration of
war against the Palestinian people.

The Israeli Prime Minister, a Nobel Prize winner,
decided to take off the garment of peace and put on his
boxing gloves. He honestly declared that he would not
accept peace at the expense of security in his country. He
wanted to send a message to the Israeli electorate to
convince it that peace would come only on the terms it
desired. If the others accept, fine; if they refuse, the
alternative is the Israeli military machine. And we are
wondering if such logic can serve the cause of peace?

For a few weeks now, Israeli forces have been
engaging in collective punishment against Palestinian
inhabitants inside the occupied Palestinian territories.
Such measures, which come on top of the total closure of
the territory, have included the demolition of civilian

 

homes after the forcible eviction of their inhabitants. Israel
claims that those homes belonged to families of those who
perpetrated suicide acts in Israel or those who sympathize
with them. Such punitive measures go against all modern
civilized norms. We wonder what law, what logic, what
moral values can justify such punishments. We believe that
nowhere in the world, with the exception of Israel, can such
punishment be imposed.

Israel has also practised policies of the annexing land,
the expanding settlements and restricting the economic and
human activities of the inhabitants. We have all heard about
children and other innocent civilians who have met their
death because they did not have enough medicine or
medical care. We have seen television pictures, however
brief or limited, showing the terrible condition of civilians.
Now the picture is completed by the scenes of hundreds of
thousands of innocent Lebanese citizens facing continuing
bombardment and forcible displacement. Statistics from
yesterday and today show that more than 300,000 citizens,
in response to threats, warnings and Israeli bombardments,
have had to leave their homes and their Villages. Most of
the villages in the south and the western Bekaa stand
empty. Israel has made threats against the civilians living
in Tyre, on the coast - a city of 300,000 people. There are
genuine fears of another collective exodus. Israel continues
to blockade the entire Lebanese coast and to bombard the
coastal roads, usually aiming at civilian vehicles and
ambulances.

We recently witnessed the bombing of an ambulance,
killing four children. If those children had happened to be
Israeli, one wonders what the reaction of the world would
have been, and especially that of some permanent members
of the Security Council.

We have seen the bombardment of homes by the
Israeli Air Force. One such raid totally demolished a home,
bringing it down on the heads of its inhabitants, and an
entire family met its death. The bombardment has also been
striking civilian infrastructure, such as electrical plants. The
Israeli operations in Lebanon have led to the deaths of
more than 50 civilians and dozens have been wounded.
Hundreds of homes have been destroyed, as have hospitals
and houses of worship. Such operations, added to Israel's
continuing operations against inhabitants of the Palestinian
occupied territories, threaten international peace and
security and all possible foundations of peace in the future.
They lead only to further hatred, violence and tension
among the peoples of the region.

This has been going on for decades. It has not and
will not lead to a solution; it will only lead to tragedy for
all. Such policies are in flagrant violation of human
rights, international law and the United Nations Charter.
They are a clear challenge to civilized society, and they
show that Israel continues to disregard the United Nations
and the collective security system. They also confirm that
the rulers of Tel Aviv do not have any respect for the
Security Council and behave as if they were above the
law.

It is my duty to mention in my statement the
situation in Lebanon because we see a common Israeli
pattern in the occupied Palestinian territories and in
Lebanon. However, I shall reserve the details pertaining
to the situation in Lebanon for the meeting in which the
Security Council considers the question of Lebanon.

