Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like first of all to thank the Chairman-in-Office
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), Foreign Minister Karel de Gucht, for
his briefing on the priorities of his organization for
2006. I would like to recall the statement that his
predecessor made to the Council last year regarding the
work under way to adapt the organization to the new
security challenges (see S/PV.5134). We were pleased
to hear today that the institutional reforms are
continuing and that one of the priorities of the Belgian
chairmanship-in-office will be to balance the various
aspects of the OSCE agenda by strengthening the
economic dimension and according equal attention to
the human and political-military dimensions.

In this context, we believe that it was important
to emphasize that peace and stability must be based on
the principles of respect for democracy, civil liberties
and human rights, and that it is not possible to achieve
sustainable stability without according priority to
economic development.

We believe that it is crucial to highlight the
organization's work in encouraging and promoting the
rule of law and defending and promoting human rights,
particularly in countries and regions where there have
been armed conflicts in the past. Kosovo, Georgia,
Moldova and Nagorny Karabakh are some of those
areas where the OSCE is involved and is working
efficiently.

We would also like to highlight the organization's
role in combating organized crime and countering
terrorism, as I was able to see for myself in September
when I visited in my capacity as Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999). We believe that those are two
priorities for the organization and, through Mr. De
Gucht, we would like to commend the Secretary
General of the organization for the efficient work being
done in both of those areas.
Mr. De Gucht also spoke of his organization's
role with respect to the future status of Kosovo - one
of its priorities for 2006. We agree with him that the
OSCE can play a key role within the context of
negotiations, and it will continue to be an important
element in the international presence in Kosovo.

We were pleased also to hear of the Minister's
plans to visit the region next February, and we
welcomed his announcement that he would be in close
contact with the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General, Martti Ahtisaari, in order to ensure active
participation of the OSCE.

Lastly, we would like to hear how the Minister
views the future role of the OSCE and how it will be
coordinated with the work of the other organizations
involved in that process.

