I would like to thank His Excellency Mr. Ahmed Aboul Gheit for his presence and his briefing. I also thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing. We welcome the initiative taken by the United States, which has provided us the impetus to revive the Middle East peace process. The counterproposal submitted by the Palestinian Authority to the Middle East Quartet is a step in the right direction. It is essential that both parties take steps to engage in a constructive dialogue with the aim of achieving a negotiated two-State solution that takes into account the legitimate aspirations of both parties and Israeli security concerns. In order to maintain the current momentum towards peace, it is vital to refrain from any unilateral steps that would undermine it. A unilateral annexation of parts of the occupied West Bank would undermine the prospects of a negotiated two-State solution and threaten the stability of the region. We are also concerned about Israel's continued settlement activity in the occupied Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem. I would like to recall an important element of resolution 2334 (2016) - the prevention of all acts of terror, incitement, provocation and violence against civilians. Although in recent months the situation in Gaza has remained relatively calm, we stress that firing rockets from Gaza into Israel, as well as any other form of violence targeting civilians, is unacceptable. We are worried about the announcement by the Palestinian leadership regarding terminating all agreements with Israel and the United States, including those involving security cooperation. We call on the Palestinian Authority to reconsider that decision and remain committed to the Oslo Accords. In order to engage in direct negotiations, both parties need Governments with legitimate and democratic mandates. We encourage the Palestinian Authority to set a date for the holding of elections throughout the occupied Palestinian territories. Finally, we reiterate the important role of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) in supporting efforts to prevent a major coronavirus disease outbreak in the occupied Palestinian territories. We commend Jordan and Sweden for organizing the UNRWA Pledging Conference to raise funds for the Agency's needs, which took place yesterday. Estonia has been a long-standing contributor to UNRWA, with an annual core funding of €80,000. For the current year, we have already allocated an additional €200,000 to support UNRWA's activities.
