Mr. Nfifiez Mosquera (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to express my congratulations to Viet Nam
for its presidency of the Council for the month of
October and to welcome the presence in this Chamber
of His Excellency Mr. Riad Al-Malki, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Palestinian National Authority.

The situation in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, continues to be marked by
violence and instability. The lack of respect for
international law by Israel, the occupying Power, and
its ongoing illegal occupation of Palestinian and other
Arab territories remain the major obstacles to
achieving a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in
the region.

Cuba appreciates the presentation of the report of
the United Nations Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza
Conflict (A/HRC/12/48) - the Goldstone report. It is
an objective and legally rigorous document, drafted
with professionalism and impartiality.

Israel's rejection of the conclusions of the Fact-
Finding Mission and its reluctance to cooperate in their
implementation corroborate that Government's lack of
respect for the will of the overwhelming majority of
the international community and its disregard, once
again, for General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions and decisions. In addition, it continues to
enforce a criminal blockade against the population of
Gaza.

With its military aggression of last December and
January, Israel not only flagrantly violated
international law, including its legal obligations as the
occupying Power, but also perpetrated war crimes and
crimes against humanity. Those responsible for those
barbarous acts have not been prosecuted and remain
unpunished. Such impunity is possible only because of
the protection that Israel receives from the superpower
that continues to supply the financial resources and
armaments with which Israel carries out its aggressive
policy.

The Mission has confirmed that both the previous
blockade and the aggression against the Gaza Strip
constitute a form of collective punishment against the
Palestinian population in Gaza, and that they were
conceived for that very purpose by the authorities of
Israel.

The report not only provides evidence of Israel's
numerous violations of international humanitarian law,
including the principles of distinction and
proportionality; it also demonstrates that there was a
clear intention to attack civilian objectives, as
evidenced by the order given to soldiers to make no
distinction between military and civilian targets.

The devastating machinery of war of the
occupying Power destroyed everything in its path. In
addition to the more than 1,400 deaths - including
more than 300 children - caused by these acts of
aggression, schools, hospitals, houses, public
buildings, food supply facilities, water purification
systems, factories and the economic infrastructure in
general were irrationally destroyed. That was done
with the clear intention of making life increasingly
difficult for the Palestinian people, undermining their
dignity, plunging them into terror, radically reducing
their capacity for development and increasing their
dependence and vulnerability.

We must also not forget that this is not the only
report that very clearly documents the barbarity of the
occupying Power in Gaza. Suffice it to recall that the
report of the mission sent by the Secretary-General to
investigate the attacks on United Nations premises in
the Gaza Strip produced identical conclusions. Cuba
strongly condemns those acts and urges the international
15
community to ensure that those responsible are
prosecuted with the severity these crimes require.

Likewise, we once again call on Israel, the
occupying Power, to put an end to all its violations of
the rights of the Palestinian people in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, and to
scrupulously abide by its obligations under
international law, particularly international
humanitarian law and human rights norms.

In serious violation of international law and in
contradiction with the objectives of the peace process,
Israel, the occupying Power, continues its illegal
construction of settlements and of the wall along the
West Bank, especially in and around East Jerusalem.
That makes the present situation unstable and
dangerous, with the illegal acts of incitement,
provocation and aggression carried out by extremist
settlers against the population and sacred sites.

Cuba remains concerned about the huge physical,
economic and social devastation caused by these illegal
and destructive colonization practices, which have
grave ramifications for the peace process.

Cuba reaffirms that all measures or actions taken
or to be taken by Israel, the occupying Power, with the
purpose of modifying the legal, physical and
demographic situation or the institutional structure of
the occupied Syrian Golan, and Israeli measures to
impose jurisdiction and administration there, are null
and void and have no legal effect.

We also reaffirm that all those measures and
actions, including the illegal construction and
expansion of Israeli settlements in the Syrian Golan
since 1967, constitute violations of international law,
international agreements, the Charter, United Nations
resolutions - including Council resolution 497
(1981) - and the Fourth Geneva Convention, as well
as a challenge to the international community. Cuba
demands that Israel withdraw completely from the
occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of4 June 1967.

We hope that current and future efforts
undertaken by the international community put an end
to the Israel's occupation of all Arab territories since
1967. We are convinced that the independent State of
Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital, will
become a reality sooner rather than later.

