Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): We thank the Secretary-
General for his report (S/2016/768) and congratulate
Special Representative Yamamoto on his appointment.

The report of the Secretary-General paints a
bleak and troubling picture of the security, political
and economic situation in Afghanistan. We support
the Secretary-General's call on the Afghan leadership
to demonstrate a spirit of cooperation to achieve a
meaningful agreement on the path forward for the
benefit of the Afghan people. The unity of the Afghan
Government is imperative in order for it to effectively
address the multiple challenges that it faces.

The upcoming Conference in Brussels will be
another opportunity for the international community to
signal its sustained support to peace and development
in Afghanistan. Pakistan will continue to support
international efforts for the stability and economic
development of Afghanistan. But external support,
although critical, cannot be a substitute for internal
political stability. Among other factors, that is contingent
upon the successful implementation of reforms by the
Afghan Government and the active promotion of peace
and reconciliation.

The security situation in Afghanistan has continued
to deteriorate with the escalation in violence and a
significant increase in civilian casualties. That is a cause
of great concern not just for Afghanistan's neighbours,
but also for the entire international community.
The international community is unanimous in its
view that sustainable peace is achievable only through
a negotiated end to the war. Fifteen years of war waged
by the the world's most powerful forces could not yield
a military solution; a military solution is even more
unlikely now. Nor should anyone expect that Pakistan
will fight Afghanistan's war on its soil. Unfortunately,
the Afghan parties themselves appear to have moved
away from the international consensus that peace can
be achieved only through negotiations. Neither side
appears willing to talk, except on their own terms.
Meanwhile, new actors are being introduced into the
conflict. A dialogue between Kabul and the Afghan
Taliban remains the only way to end Afghanistan's long
night of suffering. Pakistan is willing to help in reviving
the dialogue, as we did in June 2015, at President Ashraf
Ghani's request. But that requires efforts by all four
members of the Quadrilateral Coordination Group on
the Afghan Peace and Reconciliation Process - namely,
Afghanistan, the United States, China and Pakistan.
This mechanism remains an important vehicle to assist
an Aghan-led and owned peace process.

Both sides are now threatened by the rise of Da'esh
in Afghanistan. Several elements of what is known
as the Pakastani Taliban - or the Tehrik-e-Taliban
Pakistan (TTP) - have declared their allegiance or
integration with Da'esh. It is therefore strange that some
of TTP elements, allied with Da'esh, continue to enjoy
the backing of Aghanistan's intelligence agency. Unless
peace is restored in Afghanistan, it risks emerging
again as a central source of global terrorism.

My country has paid an onerous price for almost
four decades of strife and conflict in Afghanistan.
Pakistan continues to play host to the largest protracted
presence of refugees anywhere in the world. Apart from
Afghanistan itself, it is Pakistan that stands to gain the
most from the restoration of peace across our western
border. Pakistan's counter-terrorism campaign - the
largest and most effective in the world, deploying a
180,000-strong force - has turned the tide of terrorism
in the country. Unfortunately, though, we continue to
encounter threats from TTP elements and its backers
from across the border.

We call upon Kabul to ensure that its territory is
not used by anyone to foment terrorism in Pakistan.
To prevent cross-border attacks, Pakistan will fence
extended parts of the border. Ifthe Afghan seeks an end
to such cross-border terrorism, it should support such
fencing and strict controls at the international border.
We will work with the Afghan Government through the
recently constituted high-level consultation mechanism
to address border and other concerns.

The path to peace in Afghanistan is arduous but
achievable. However, it is up to the Afghan parties
themselves to acknowledge that there is no alternative
path to peace other than through unconditional dialogue
and making necessary, although difficult, compromises
to arrive at a negotiated settlement. The people of
Afghanistan deserve no less.

The peoples of Pakistan and Afghanistan enjoy
age-old bonds of kinship, faith and a shared history.
Pakistan has offered unprecedented hospitality and
support to the Afghan people over the past several
decades of their travail and tragedy provoked by foreign
military interventions. We have delayed sending back
Afghan refugees yet again. We allow the transit of
Afghan goods through our ports and over our roads.
We also have displayed extreme forebearance in the
face of unwarranted accusations from certain quarters
in Kabul. We urge the Afghan Government to halt its
belligerent rhetoric. That is in the long-term interests
of its country and its people, as well as of the entire
region. We stand committed to work with the Afghan
Government for the improvement of this relationship
on the basis of shared interests and values, and for the
mutual benefit of our two peoples.

