Mr. Pedersen (Norway): I would first like to
express my heartfelt condolences to his family, friends
and colleagues at the Russian Mission on the passing
of Ambassador Vitaly Churkin. Ambassador Churkin
was a highly respected colleague who sought to find
solutions through compromise and great diplomatic
skill. I always appreciated our conversations. We have
lost an extraordinary diplomat and friend. May he rest
in peace.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the Nordic
countries: Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Sweden and my
own country, Norway.

Europe has seen much conflict but also
groundbreaking cooperation. A robust, comprehensive
and inclusive security architecture with the European
Union (EU), the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), NATO and the Council
of Europe has ensured peace in most of Europe since
the close of the Second World War. The United Nations
must cooperate closely with all those partners in order
to address ongoing conflicts and prevent future ones.
However, Europe is now facing serious challenges
and attempts to undermine that rule-based order.
Russia's aggression against Ukraine, as demonstrated
in its ongoing violations of Ukraine's sovereignty and
territorial integrity and illegal annexation of Crimea and
Sevastopol, constitutes a clear violation of international
law.

Apart from the unique role played by the OSCE
and the support provided by the European Union,
international efforts have not been sufficient. We call
on the Security Council, the Secretary-General and
the whole United Nations to assess what more can
be done to restore security and respect for Ukraine's
sovereignty, unity, independence and territorial
integrity within its internationally recognized borders.
We must see concrete steps taken to implement the
Minsk agreements. We commend and fully support the
Normandy format efforts.

Georgia's sovereignty and territorial integrity have
been severely compromised, in breach of the Charter of
the United Nations. We call for access for international
human rights mechanisms to Georgia's breakaway
regions of Abkhazia and South Ossetia. In many
conflicts, multilateral organizations are hindered from
fulfilling their role. In Abkhazia, the United Nations
Observer Mission in Georgia was terminated, and other
institutions have not been allowed meaningful access.
The Geneva international discussions must continue,
and the Security Council resolutions on Nagorno
Karabakh must be implemented.

The United Nations has been directly engaged in
Cyprus from the start of the conflict. The Secretary-
General's good offices and patient support have now
produced real prospects for genuine progress. We
commend him for his focus on diplomacy for peace.
We remain convinced that when allowed to fulfil its
mandate, the Security Council can play an important
role in conflict prevention and in upholding a rule-based
international order.

The OSCE is also playing a unique role in Moldova.
The resumption of the 5-1-2 negotiations on Transnistria
has demonstrated the value of an OSCE-led small-
steps approach. In the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, the international community intervened
successfully to assist national authorities after an
early warning from the OSCE High Commissioner on
National Minorities, which probably prevented a wider
conflict. An ounce of prevention was worth a pound of
cure. In Kosovo and Bosnia and Herzegovina, the active
presence of the United Nations, the EU, the OSCE,
NATO and others has provided security and facilitated
reconciliation between peoples. Regional cooperation
is the key to development and prosperity.

The Nordic countries will continue to promote
the effective participation of women and the agenda
on women and peace and security wherever there are
discussions of peace and security. We urge the Council
to work to ensure that gender equality and women's
rights are an integral part of its work, as they increase
legitimacy and the possibilities for lasting peace.

