The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Japan.

I thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman and Mr. Stephen
O'Brien for their important briefings.

The Lake Chad Basin faces growing vulnerability
at an alarming scale. Approximately 9.2 million
people - a population greater than that of New York
City - are in need of urgent humanitarian assistance
and face violence perpetrated by Boko Haram. That
will be compounded by the rainy season and a lean
crop intake. Japan is deeply concerned by the situation
on the ground, which requires a careful and dedicated
response. In addressing this situation, I would like to
take up two points.

First, regional military cooperation through the
Multinational Joint Task Force (MNJTF) is absolutely
vital to the Lake Chad Basin. That regional initiative,
through the Lake Chad Basin Commission (LCBC),
together with national ownership and leadership, plays
an irreplaceable role in regional stabilization. Only
through effective MNJTF operations can vulnerable
communities receive access to humanitarian assistance.
Once areas are liberated from Boko Haram insurgents,
many other activities can be effectively undertaken in
addition to the efforts of the MNJTF.

The second point I would like to underline is that
improved livelihoods are equally vital for stabilizing the
region. The United Nations, regional and subregional
organizations, national Governments and donors must
all work together to restore community livelihoods in
the long-term while also supporting the immediate
humanitarian response. The impact of the violence
caused by Boko Haram is wide-ranging. Jobs and
local economies are threatened, education and health
services have disappeared, community institutions are
undermined, and women and children have been major
victims. This impact leads to major challenges at the
local level. In Diffa, Niger, trade in the local specialties
of hot peppers and dried fish remains banned out of
concern that profits could fund Boko Haram. Corn
growing is also banned over fears that the corn fields
could provide safe haven to Boko Haram. Entire
community livelihoods are at stake without economic
and social development.

Tomorrow, the Council will hold an open debate on
peacebuildinginAfrica,focusingoninstitution-building.
Communities in the Lake Chad Basin need immediate
humanitarian assistance, but extending humanitarian
response is no substitute for rebuilding livelihoods and
institutions. People require extended State authority,
credible governance, improved public administration,
and expanded security. The international community
must stand ready to support both the region's immediate
needs and long-term efforts to sustain peace. Japan is
ready to do its part.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

The meeting rose at noon.
