Ms. Fore: I appreciate the steadfast commitment
of the members of the Security Council to the plight of
children affected by armed conflict around the world.
Today, one in every four children lives in a country
affected by conflict or disaster. Like the statistics
detailed in the Secretary-General's report (S/2018/465),
one in every four children is a number almost beyond
comprehension - almost, until you meet, as I have,
the children and young people whose lives are being
shattered by conflicts, for example in Yemen, Mali and
South Sudan; the children who are malnourished and
sick, at risk of being maimed or killed by a landmine
or by delivered attacks on schools and hospitals;
vulnerable to gender-based violence; recruited to
fighting; losing hope not only in their futures but in the
futures of their countries.

UNICEF is sparing no effort to support these
children. In Iraq, for example, we reached 1.3 million
children on the move with life-saving supplies like
water and ready-to-eat rations, and almost 400,000
with psychosocial support last year. In South Sudan,
we reached 780,000 children under the age of five
with health, nutrition, water and sanitation for health,
education and protection services. With our partners,
we are also making progress in releasing children
from armed groups and armed forces and supporting
their reintegration. Last year, 12,000 children were
reintegrated into their communities. For example, in
the Central African Republic about 3,000 children
received interim care, psychosocial support and family
reunification services. In the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, UNICEF worked with partners to release
and reintegrate over 3,200 children from armed groups,
and so far this year 806 children have been released
from armed forces and groups in South Sudan and are
receiving reintegration services.

Our work must continue. Last year saw 21,000
verified violations against children - a dramatic
increase from the year before - more children killed or
maimed; more young survivors of rape; more recruited
to the fighting; more abducted. And these are just the
verified numbers. Our teams on the ground know that
the number of violations is in fact much higher.

As a global community, we must ask ourselves
what will become of these young lives in both the short
and long terms. In the short term, children's lives are
in immediate danger not only from the violence itself,
but also as basic services collapse. In Yemen, I visited
hospitals staffed by workers who have nOt been paid in
two years; where there are not enough respirators and
medicine to go around; where mothers hold their frail,
acutely malnourished children; where psychosocial
workers counsel terrified children about the horrors
they have witnessed and remembered.

These immediate costs of conflict come with long-
term consequences. If we fail to prevent violations
against children today, we fail to prevent violence
against children tomorrow. Today's children will grow
up to see violence and conflict as normal, acceptable
and inevitable. We need only think of the children
who have grown up knowing nothing but war. In his
lifetime, a seven-year old Syrian child has never known
a peaceful Syria; an Afghan teenager has never known
a peaceful Afghanistan. And let us consider what the
children of South Sudan have endured and continue
to endure - as they mark their country's seventh year
of independence today. How can we prepare children to
shape peaceful futures if they do not know what peace
even looks like?

 

As we renew our call on these conflicts to stop,
we also call for zero tolerance of all violations against
children - violations that fuel grievances that enflame
and perpetuate conflicts across generations; violations
like attacks on hospitals and schools, which is why
we call again on States to endorse and implement
the Safe Schools Declaration; violations like the
deliberate targeting of children, which must stop;
and Violations like detaining children for associating
with armed groups or armed forces. We commend the
Council's strong resolution 2427 (2018) - proposed by
Sweden - on this issue. Too often, these children are
locked up with adults and without legal representation,
due process or contact with family members, all of
which is contrary to international humanitarian and
human rights law.

Progress is possible. Just today, the Nigerian army
released 183 children - 175 boys and 8 girls - to
UNICEF's care. These children had been detained for
alleged association with Boko Haram. Today's action
was the result of intense effort and engagement for
their release. As we work for many more children to
be released, we must also support these young lives as
they reintegrate into their communities. Stigma is often
the single biggest barrier. As we reintegrate a child into
a community, we face difficult questions. How does
a community view a boy who was part of a raid that
killed a member of that community, or a girl who was
abducted or abused by an armed group and has never
been to school? We must invest in local solutions that
address community fears and concerns, while giving
these children the chance at a normal life that they
deserve, including through quality education, training
in life skills and work skills and psychosocial support.

We also believe that child protection and upholding
children's rights are a fundamental part of any peace
process, which is why we welcome the Council's recent
request to launch a process to compile guidance and
best practices on weaving children's rights into peace
negotiations. In the Philippines, for example, over
the past decade UNICEF has worked closely with
commanders of the Moro Islamic Liberation Front
to release more than 1,850 children from its ranks
and begin the process of reintegrating them into
their communities. This includes raising awareness
with commanders and community members to end
recruitment and provide support, education and family-
intervention plans for the released. This process not
only led to the group's de-listing in the Secretary
General's 2017 report (S/2017/82l); most importantly,
it helped restart peace negotiations and it helped restart
young lives.

In Mali, children themselves are becoming agents
of peace in their communities and raising awareness of
the rights that every child has to protection, education,
birth registration and health. Last year, UNICEF trained
310 children as Peace Ambassadors who go door to
door in vulnerable communities to promote dialogue,
peacebuilding and the importance of keeping children
and young people - especially girls - in school.
And this year, as part of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali, we have helped train 2,500
young people to promote peace in pastoral and farming
communities through local meetings, debates, radio
broadcasts and social media. These are two examples
of how children and young people are not just passive
recipients of peace and reconciliation efforts, but how
they can lead them.

But as conflicts increase in number and ferocity,
thousands of children are slipping through our safety
nets worldwide. Civilians and communities are being
targeted on a scale not seen since the Second World
War. Consequences for violations are small, if they are
imposed at all.

As most major conflicts are driven and perpetuated
by political conflict, addressing them demands building
political will - political will to increase resources to
reach children and young people with the support they
need, and build the human capital that every society
needs to shape a resilient and sustainable future;
political will to end to violations against children
now; political will for all parties to conflict to adhere
to humanitarian law and principles, not as a distant,
utopian dream but as a practical and necessary pathway
to a better future; and most of all, political will to end
these conflicts, urgently, and to place peace first by
placing children first.

When faced with the escalating consequences of
conflict to a generation of children who have never
known peace, we - All of us - have a duty to act
for the children and for the future of our world. Once
again, I thank the Council for the opportunity to
shine a light on this important issue. I look forward to
its deliberations.

