Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, I would
like to thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen for his
comprehensive briefing. Let me also thank Ms. Sabah
Al Hallak for her input.

Let me start by welcoming the beginning of the
work of the Constitutional Committee on 30 October.
Poland has underlined many times that any sustainable
solution to the conflict requires a genuine political
transition, negotiated by the Syrian parties within the
United Nations-led Geneva process. That process has
finally begun. We agree with the Special Envoy that the
future Constitution belongs to the Syrian people alone.
The proceedings of the Constitutional Committee
should allow for a truly meaningful discussion on
Syria's future.
All parties to the conflict need to engage in
confidence-building measures. In that context, let
me stress the importance of safeguarding the humane
treatment of detainees, including abductees and
missing persons in Syria, by placing an emphasis on
their inherent rights derived from international human
rights law and international humanitarian law.

The Syrian war has brought unspeakable suffering
to the once peaceful country. Thousands of people
remain in arbitrary detention, where many are subject
to various forms of ill-treatment, including torture and
rape. At the same time, thousands remain missing, with
their relatives deprived of any information regarding
their fate. We call for their release, particularly the
release of children, women and the elderly. Some
progress in that area would help to raise the level of
confidence between the parties and greatly contribute
to the efforts aimed at reaching a lasting peace in Syria.
That is one of the most important confidence-building
measures, if not the most important, between the parties
to the conflict.

Unfortunately, apart from the political track, we
must also note the escalation of the conflict in Idlib.
Yesterday we learned that missiles fired on Wednesday
night into settlements for people fleeing conflict in
the country's northwest killed at least 12 people and
wounded dozens more, including children. The most
vulnerable groups, including the elderly, women and
children sheltering in the internally displaced persons
camps, must be under special protection.

We particularly condemn the attacks against
medical facilities and their personnel conducted
across the whole of Syria this year. We reiterate the
essential need to ensure safe and unhindered access for
humanitarian aid, as well as the free and unhindered
movement of civilians fleeing from Violence.

International humanitarian law is crystal clear.
It requires all parties to the conflict to strictly
distinguish between civilians and combatants and to
take constant care to spare civilians in the conduct of
military operations.

In conclusion, I want to recall that we fully support
the safe return of Syrian refugees who have fled their
homes. We believe that a lasting solution for Syria
should ensure the security of the sustainable, dignified
and voluntary return of Syrians to their country of
origin, in accordance with international law and the
principle of non-refoulement.

