Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I, too,
should like to wish you, Sir, every success in your
presidency, which is just beginning, and I should like
also to thank Ambassador Puri and his team for their
presidency during the month of August.

I should like to start by thanking Ambassador
Osorio for his 90-day report. Iran remains at the core
of our concerns. Currently the international community
is focusing its attention more closely elsewhere -
Syria and Libya - and Iran may believe that it can
profit from that state of affairs. It has redoubled its
efforts, it is increasing the number of centrifuges, and
it is making ever more provocative statements. But we
are not misled by all this, as was underscored by the
President of the Republic last week. Iran's military,
nuclear and ballistic ambitions pose a growing threat.

For a number of years, Iran has pursued, in
violation of international law, a policy of fait accompli.
After having for 20 years carried out a clandestine
nuclear programme, in violation of its safeguards
agreement, Iran has refused to cooperate fully with the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), and it
continues, despite six Security Council resolutions, to
enrich uranium, supposedly for peaceful purposes - in
spite of the absence of any credible electronuclear
programmes on its territory.

Alarming signs are increasing. The Iranian
regime is releasing information in small doses so as to
mitigate its impact and importance, but it is no less
serious. Thus in February 2010 Iran began to enrich its
uranium to 20 percent, thus bringing it even closer to
the military threshold, supposedly with the sole goal of
fuelling the Tehran Research Reactor. In June last, it
stated that it planned to increase threefold its 20 per
cent uranium production, and on 22 August it
announced the establishment of the first centrifuges at
the Qom facility - a facility whose existence was
hidden and was only revealed by the international
community in September 2009. Let us also recall that
the site's history and ultimate objectives remain
unknown, as Iran refuses to provide the Agency with
all of the clarifications that it is seeking.

Let us also recall that in 2009 Iran had announced
that the Qom site was to produce low-enriched 3.5 per
cent uranium. Now, however, we have been told that it
will be used to produce 20 per cent enriched uranium.
Finally, on 30 August, Iran declared that it was no
longer interested in an offer concerning the Tehran
Nuclear Reactor, because it had produced all of the
20 per cent uranium necessary to that reactor.

Fundamental questions therefore arise. Why is
Iran continuing to produce 20 per cent uranium, given
that the supply for the Tehran Research Reactor is
already guaranteed? Why is it transferring production
of 20 per cent enriched uranium to the Qom facility, a
bunkerized installation designed for military use - an
installation that was built secretly and that could be
easily and quickly reconfigured so as to produce
uranium enriched at a rate higher than 20 per cent.

On all those issues, Iran owes the international
community some answers. However, it has refused to
tell the IAEA the full truth. In that context, the most
recent report of the Agency, which we received on
Friday, only intensifies our concerns. The Agency has
indicated yet again that it is unable to confirm that all
nuclear material in Iran is being used for peaceful
purposes. Above all, the Agency underscores the fact
that it is increasingly concerned by the possible
existence in Iran of secret activities, past or present -
and I underscore the word "present" - related to a
possible military aspect of the Iranian programme
concerning the development of a nuclear payload for a
ballistic missile. The Agency has indicated that it
continues to receive data on that issue that are detailed
and exhaustive. Furthermore, they are for the most part
consistent and credible with regard to their technical
precision, the time periods during which the activities
took place, as well as the names of individuals and
entities that were involved.

The serious and worrisome data on activities
related to the design and fabrication of nuclear
weapons are a serious concern for the international
community. This is in addition to Iran's continued
undertaking of a ballistic and space programme, which
jeopardizes the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons. We call on the Director General of
the IAEA to continue ceaselessly his activities aimed at
investigating this key issue.

In view of the challenge posed by the Iranian
nuclear crisis, we have no choice but to remain unified
and resolute. The sanctions that have been adopted by
the international community have had an impact that
we should not underestimate. They have already led to
concrete results, as the final report of the Panel of
Experts explains in detail. We must therefore continue
rigorously to implement those sanctions in order to
persuade the Iranian regime to negotiate and to return
to the path of international law. That will require first
of all a firm response to violations. These are multiple
in nature and concern all categories of measures
adopted by the Security Council. I am thinking in
particular of the violations of the arms embargo. Iran is
producing flows of arms, with, in particular, the active
support of Syria, thus threatening the security of
neighbouring countries as well as countries in already
unstable regions.

Allow me to recall also that France, working
together with the United Kingdom, the United States
and Germany, has already notified the Committee of
the launching of the Rassad-l satellite on 14 June last.
That is a clear violation of paragraph 9 of resolution
1929 (2010). We must also enhance the implementation
of sanctions when necessary. The Panel of Experts has
issued several recommendations in that respect. We
hope that the Committee will follow up and that in
particular it will designate the individuals and entities
involved in the violations. We therefore once again
request that the final report of the Panel be published,
in accordance with the ongoing practice of sanctions
committees and for the legitimate reason of
transparency with regard to other Member States.

As the heads of State and Government of the
Group of Eight indicated in Deauville at the end of
May, we will determine, on the basis of Iran's conduct,
the need to take additional measures, in keeping with
the dual-track strategy that we have ceaselessly
pursued jointly with our partners in the group of six
States.

Iran affirms that its nuclear programme is
civilian, but it produces uranium at levels that are
increasingly near the military threshold in ever larger
quantities and in bunkerized facilities. Iran affirms that
its nuclear programme is civilian, but the IAEA itself
affirms its growing concern about the possible military
dimension of the Iranian programme.

In view of the serious facts pointed out by the
Agency, we need specific actions, not empty words or
promises that simply seek to gain time. Iran must
demonstrate to us its resolve for sincere negotiations,
to shed all possible light on the issues raised by the
IAEA, and to respond to the repeated demands of the
Council.

