Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): My country condemns and rejects in the
strongest terms any use of chemical weapons and any
other type of weapon of mass destruction as a crime
against humanity that is to be reviled, immoral and
unjustifiable in any circumstance. The target for such
weapons is the Syrian people, who are still the primary
victims of the crimes of armed terrorist groups that did
not hesitate to use chemical weapons against them. Let
me stress to the Security Council that my country is as
eager as ever to uncover the real criminal responsible
for the use of chemical weapons in Syria.

On the basis of these firm principles, my country's
Government acceded to the Chemical Weapons
Convention (CWC), implemented all its commitments
under the Convention, and has made an achievement
unprecedented in the history of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) by ending
the Syrian chemical weapons programme in record time
and irreversibly, as certified by the statement of the
OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism
that was presented to the Security Council in June 2014.

As I told the Council this morning (see S/PV.7921),
in the context of its ongoing transparent cooperation
with the OPCW, my country sent a letter yesterday to
the Director General of the organization, calling on
him to send a neutral, fair and professional mission
to Khan Shaykhun and the Shayrat air base to find
out the truth of what occurred - comprehensively,
transparently and fairly. My country, Syria, stresses its
readiness to ensure the mission's safe access to Shayrat
air base in order to ascertain whether sarin had been or
is stockpiled there.

As for the town of Khan Shaykhun, regrettably I am
forced to tell the Council that access to that town must
be guaranteed by the terrorist group Jabhat al-Nusra
and its associate terrorist organizations operating there,
via the Governments of States that support, guide and
direct that organization on the ground, foremost among
which are France, Britain, the United States, Turkey,
Qatar, Saudi Arabia and Israel.

My country is the primary stakeholder in

uncovering the truth. In principle, we support any action
of the Security Council to attain such truth. However,
we object to draft resolutions containing sly political
language, prejudging the results of any investigation and
leaning towards leading the investigation to indict the
Syrian Government a priori, as did my colleagues the
representatives of the Britain and France earlier here.
The three Western States on the Council have become
used to incorporating similar language in previous draft
resolutions, leading to their misues later on by those
States to justify intervention in the internal affairs of
other States and military aggression against them, as
was the case in Libya and other countries.

Whoever reads today's draft resolution (S/2017/315)
carefully will see that its true objective is not to
uncover the truth but to absolutely Violate Syrian
sovereignty and exploit any information that could
have been collected through the draft resolution, had
it been adopted, in order to help armed terrorist groups
supported by the three States and their proxies in the
region to target the personnel, sites and capacities of
the Syrian Government and army, under the pretext of
looking for the "chemical Godot", as was the case in
Iraq.

Ifthe sponsors oftoday's draft resolution do not see
any benefit in the mechanisms available at the OPCW.,
why do they not introduce another draft resolution to
end the work of the OPCW? They might, for instance,
clear out its archives and keep them in steel boxes that
will not be opened for 60 years, just as they did with the
archives of the inspection committees seeking weapons
of mass destruction in Iraq. My country did not use
atomic weapons against Hiroshima and Nagaski. My
country did not use chemical and biological weapons
against Viet Nam. My country did not use enriched
uranium against Iraq. My country did not test atomic
weapons against Algerians, alive, in the Algerian
Sahara.

On 31 March, in our talks in Geneva, I provided
Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura with early and
documented reports about the possession by armed
terrorist groupss in rural Damascus, Idlib and Hama of
toxic chemical materials to be used as weapons against
civilians. I also warned him that the facts were falsified
and that the evidence and accusations were fabricated
against the Syrian Government, as on previous
occasions. I related this information to Mr. De Mistura
five days before the incident in Khan Shaykhun. As I said
this morning, my country's Government has addressed
more than 90 letters, the latest only one day ago, to
the various relevant United Nations bodies, including
documented information on the possession by terrorist
organizations, led by Da'esh and Jabhat Al-Nusra, of
toxic chemical materitals, including sarin, which they
obtained from Libya through Turkish territory, with the
full knowledge of the Turkish authorities.

The sponsors of today's draft resolution know full
well that, since my country acceded to the CWC, the
resolutions of the Security Council and the OPCW
have been the sufficient and appropriate international
legal framework in that regard. I call on the rest of the
States members of the Security Council to use logical
and rational trial, seek clear and genuine responses to
the questions raised by this painful incident and by the
reactions of the United States, Britain and France. Let
us try to answer the following questions.

Why did the videos and photographs of the Khan
Shaykhun incident come only from organizations
claiming to work in the humanitarian field, whereas
they are directly linked to armed terrorist groups on
the ground. I refer here specifically to a group called
the White Helmets, which seems to have won an Oscar
for Best Actor. We have repeatedly provided the
Security Council with pictures, films and documented
evidence that members of that organization work under
the direction of the British intelligence services and are
funded by the United States and Britain. That is the
first question.

The second question is: Has anyone read the report
issued by the organization Swedish Doctors for Human
Rights, exposing the duplicity of the so-called White
Helmets?

The third question is: Is anyone here aware that
the British doctor of Pakistani decent, Shajul Islam,
who was with the armed terrorist groups on the
ground in Khan Shaykhun and was the main witness
in all the provocative media campaigns against the
Syrian Government, was imprisoned for 13 months in
the Britain, charged with terrorist acts, including the
kidnapping of British journalists in Syria? A terrorist
criminal becomes an eye witness, and this fabricated
media campaign is based on his testimony.

Furthermore, how can anyone who pretends to
seek the truth through international legitimacy assume
the right to perpetrate an act of military aggression
against a site that they claim to have been the origin
of aircraft that flew off to strike Khan Shaykhun with
chemical weapons?

I urge Council members to read the book entitled
The REAL Benghazi Story: What the White House
and Hillary Don't Want You to Know, by Aaron Klein,
which details the coordination and mediation role
undertaken by the late United States Ambassador to
Libya, Chris Stevens, in operations to export weapons
and sarin from Libya to the States sponsors of terrorism
in Syria, first and foremost Turkey. I also invite them to
read a scientific report published by Theodore Postol,
an American professor working at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology. It evaluates the White House
claims of the alleged events in Khan Shaykhun. He
believes that the information on which United States
officials based their allegations against the Syrian
Government points merely to a crater in a road north
of Khan Shaykhun. He concludes that these data seem
more consistent with the possibility that the munitions
were on the ground and notdropped from the air.

What does my colleague, the representative of
France, call the killing by French aircraft of 200
civilians in the village of Toukhan Al-Kubra in rule
Aleppo, on 19 July 2016? And what does my colleague,
the representative of the United States, call the killing
by American aircraft of 237 civilians in the town of
Al-Mansura, after they had fled Da'esh in the Raqqa
region.My delegation stresses that it is continuing to
implement all its commitments under the CWC and to
wage our war on terror, which will not stop regardless of
any political blackmail, media campaigns or shedding
of innocent blood.

In conclusion, my delegation thanks and expresses
its appreciation to the Russian Federation and Bolivia
for voting against the draft resolution today, as well as
those delegations that abstained in the voting, in their
conviction of the sinister objectives behind the draft
resolution, the most basic principles of international law
and the Charter of the United Nations, and their belief
that such texts affect the credibility of international
action and institutions and threaten international peace
and security.

The meeting rose at 4.30 pm.
