Ms. Wensley (Australia): I thank you, Sir, for
this opportunity to contribute to the Council's ongoing
consideration of East Timor. We very much welcome
your efforts to ensure that this meeting has taken place
in a timely fashion and under your own presidency.

The overriding interest of the international
community is to see the emergence of a stable, secure,
prosperous and democratic East Timor governed by an
effective administration. The United Nations, as
mandated by this Security Council, will continue to
have a clear and necessary role in the transition process
which will bring that about. Good progress continues to
be made, but as we once again assess this progress,
informed by the Secretary-General's latest report on
the United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET), it is clear that the task is still far
from complete.

I do want to thank the Secretary-General's
Special Representative, Sergio Vieira de Mello, for his
comprehensive presentation this morning. I also want
to extend Australia's continuing thanks to him and to
all of the members of UNTAET for their dedication to
establishing a solid foundation for East Timor. It is a
mark of the progress made so far that an increasing
number of East Timorese are involved in this process,
including through the East Timor Transitional
Administration. The commitment and determination of
the East Timorese to develop the skills and capacity
they need to govern and administer their own nation
are vital ingredients in the continuing transition
process. In this respect, we were delighted to see Jose
Ramos-Horta here today and I would like to pay the
tribute of my Government to him and to the
commitment and the effort which the East Timorese
people are investing in the establishment of their future
nation.

In his report, the Secretary-General has reiterated
the need for a continuing substantial international
presence if there is to be a successful long-term
outcome in East Timor. My Government fully endorses
this judgement. The solid start which has been made to
the transition process must be seen through to its
conclusion. The considerable investment in the process
must be protected and made to work for a peaceful and
sustainable outcome.

It is Australia's firm view that a continuing
United Nations presence after independence should be
provided through an integrated mission comprising
civilian, civilian police and peacekeeping components
under a single Security Council mandate and funded
from United Nations assessed contributions. This is the
most coherent and practical approach which can be
taken to handle the tasks and challenges which still lie
ahead.

As so many speakers have emphasized today, the
size of this successor mission will, naturally, be
substantially smaller than UNTAET. As East Timor's
capacity in government and administration increases,
and as security and stability on the ground improve, the
requirement for international support will diminish.
The overall costs of the international presence will be
considerably less than those which have been necessary
to establish the transition process to date. Nevertheless,
continuing consistent sources of funding for the three
components of civilian administration, civilian police
and peacekeeping will be needed if we are to achieve a
durable and fully functioning democratic State in East
Timor. This will require a flexible and creative
approach to the use of assessed contributions.

The costs of the continued use of assessed
contributions in the immediate post-independence
period will be far less than the potential long-term
costs if funding is withdrawn prematurely or if funding
gaps appear. While we await the details promised in a
further report in October, the Secretary-General's
report has indicated that the United Nations successor
mission will not be overly ambitious or costly. The
international community has a responsibility to deal
carefully with a situation that remains fragile and an
emerging nation that is clearly yet vulnerable. The
credibility of the United Nations, as my colleague
Kishore Mahbubani emphasized so eloquently this
morning, as the caretaker of East Timor's transition is
at stake.

Australia welcomes the outline in the Secretary-
General's report of the likely shape and size of the
overall international post-independence presence in
East Timor. This outline takes us a step forward in the
development of a clear exit strategy. The development
of an acceptable exit strategy must underpin, and
indeed will condition, the continuing post-
independence United Nations presence. Australia
strongly supports the Secretary-General's message that
a flexible approach to planning is needed for all
components of the post-independence presence.
Decisions on how and when to adjust the United
Nations presence must be guided by developments on
the ground in East Timor. Again, in our view, this
applies to all three components of the successor
mission: civilian, civilian police and peacekeeping.

On the civilian side, we note the Secretary-
General's advice that the United Nations presence after
independence should be significantly smaller than it is
now. We endorse the Secretary-General's assessment
that despite considerable progress in the recruitment of
East Timorese civil servants, the administrative
systems are new and fragile. In Australia's view, it will
be essential to provide further assistance at a senior
management level to complete effectively the work of
that word that Sergio Vieira de Mello does not like -
Timorization - and skills transfer in specific areas.
This will be critical to the long-term success of the
United Nations mission and will ensure the completion
of the original United Nations mandate in East Timor
to establish an effective administration. We note also
the view of the Secretary-General that this necessary
assistance will be limited in time. All these
considerations reinforce our view that a flexible and
creative approach to assessed contributions is required.

Careful management of the reduction of the
current level of United Nations involvement in the
successor mission is as important as is careful
management of the longer-term transition to a fully
functioning Government. This is an issue that requires
attention now and in the period after the 30 August
election. We encourage UNTAET to continue to focus
on its plans for the gradual transfer of responsibility
and functions to the East Timorese Administration and
the parallel reduction in its own role. It will be
important for UNTAET to decide, within the scope of
its agreed budget, which functions can be transferred to
the East Timorese and sustained in the long term
without incurring further costs. The transfer of assets
from UNTAET to the new Administration will also
require sensible decisions and careful planning well in
advance of independence. We look forward to
receiving more details on the planned reduction in the
civilian presence in the Secretary-General's October
report.
We note and welcome the steady progress in
UNTAET's phased plan for the development and
training of the East Timor Police Service, and we
support the gradual reduction of international
assistance, in line with the law and order situation on
the ground. We note the Secretary-General's advice on
plans for the phased transfer of the international police
force to a mentoring and monitoring role as local
capacity improves. I noted in particular Sergio Vieira
de Mello's emphasis on the mentoring side of things in
his presentation this morning. This must be based on a
clear strategy and a rationale for the development of
the East Timor Police Force as a stand-alone force
which will be sustainable financially in the long term.

The peacekeeping component of the current and
future United Nations presence remains critical to East
Timor's successful transition to independence. We
welcome very much the Secretary-General's clear and
candid assessment of current security conditions in
East Timor. It is also our firm view that the
maintenance of security on the border between East
and West Timor, by a United Nations peacekeeping
force, is vital and is linked to all other aspects of the
transition process going ahead smoothly.

We support the Secretary-General's approach to
management of the future size of the peacekeeping
force as part of the development of a clear exit strategy.
I want to reiterate what I have said before in this
Council and to many colleagues - that development of
this strategy and decisions on the peacekeeping force
must take full account of the security conditions on the
ground. We therefore endorse the Secretary-General's
decision to keep the security situation under constant
review to enable further recommendations on the future
size of the peacekeeping force to be presented in a later
report.

The 30 August election is a major step towards
East Timor's independence. Like others, we encourage
all parties to contribute to the peaceful conduct of the
elections and to a smooth and fair implementation of
the result, and to uphold the commitments they have
made in the pact of national unity.

The election and the implementation of its results
will also mark a very important new phase in this
Council's consideration of East Timor. While all
subsequent steps, and their timing, must be determined
by the political situation on the ground, it is Australia's
view that the establishment of the Constituent
Assembly, and further decisions on the future shape of
the East Timor Administration, should lead us to a
point at which concrete decisions on the mandate for a
future United Nations presence can start to be framed
by the Council. Timely decisions by the Council will
maximize the prospects of achieving a smooth
transition from the pre- to the post-independence
United Nations presence, including allowing troop-
contributing countries to make their plans on future
contributions and to facilitate the recruitment of
suitable civilian personnel. We would want the
Secretary-General's report in October to provide the
Council with the basis to begin to formulate, in a
substantial way, the mandate for the future United
Nations presence.

We continue to monitor closely the problems in
the West Timor refugee camps. These obviously affect
the security situation along the border and have critical
implications for the overall situation in East Timor as a
whole. We acknowledge the steps that have been taken
by the Government of Indonesia so far to resolve these
problems. We look forward to further intensified efforts
by the new Government of Indonesia to bring about a
comprehensive solution to the problems, including an
end to militia intimidation.

Justice, reconciliation and effective
accountability are essential elements of long-term
stability in East Timor. We continue to attach high
priority to progress in all of these areas, both in East
Timor and through the Indonesian justice system. We
urge the Indonesian authorities to use the recently
established ad hoc human rights court to prosecute
violations of human rights that occurred in East Timor,
both in the lead-up to and after the August 1999 ballot.
UNTAET's own investigation of human rights
violations is an important component in the
achievement of justice for the East Timorese affected
by the events of 1999. The international community
will need to work to support much-needed capacity-
building in the justice sector. We also encourage a
coordinated approach by UNTAET and the East
Timorese to the interrelated issues of justice and
reconciliation in order to maximize the prospects of
satisfactory results in both of these vital areas.

Australia continues to expend considerable
energy and resources, both through the United Nations
and bilateral channels, to support the transition and the
establishment of a viable independent State in East
Timor. The recent conclusion of the new Timor Sea
Arrangement between Australia, East Timor and the
United Nations, to govern petroleum development in
the Timor Sea, about which the Council heard this
morning, is a strong example of that. The Arrangement
should provide the future independent East Timor with
a very substantial and long-term revenue flow to
support its development. But, as emphasized by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General this
morning, that does not obviate the need for prudent
financial and economic planning. An early priority for
the incoming East Timorese administration should be
to engage donors and the international financial
institutions, which contribute to its overall budget, in
the development of a medium-term economic
framework.

In addition to its significant contribution to East
Timor's future through the Timor Sea Arrangement, my
Government is committed to a substantial bilateral
assistance programme to reduce poverty and to build
East Timorese capacity to govern a peaceful,
democratic, independent nation. A substantial
proportion of our bilateral assistance now and in the
future will be devoted to capacity-building in areas
which we see as critical to the future independent East
Timor administration. The sort of things I am talking
about are technical assistance to develop the central
fiscal authority, including the preparation of sound
budgetary and taxation frameworks; building capacity
to plan and manage future elections; and assistance in
developing legislative processes and support services
and in training senior civil service managers.

So far, the process of managing the East Timor
transition has been a conspicuous success for the
United Nations. It is our belief that, with continuing
commitment and careful and prudent management, the
United Nations can fulfil its substantial responsibility
to establish, beyond independence, a fully functioning,
democratic and viable State. If we maintain a steady
course and if we continue to make the right decisions
now and over the coming months, that will be the
result. And I would point out that if we succeed, that
outcome will have been achieved in a short space of
time, from the minimum imaginable starting point -
what Sergio Vieira de Mello described this morning as
such a bleak beginning - less than two years ago, and
in the face of very obvious and very considerable
challenges.

It is within our grasp and the grasp of members of
the Council to deliver that outcome to the people of
East Timor. The Council has delivered on its
commitments and responsibilities so far. It must not
fail the East Timorese in the coming critical phase.

