Mr. Sychou (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): As before,
the Republic of Belarus is extremely concerned at the
illegal aggressive military action that the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO) is carrying out against the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. It was because of the
primary responsibility that the Security Council bears for
the maintenance of international peace and security that the
Republic of Belarus was among the States that called for
the convening of an emergency meeting of the Council and
that joined in sponsoring the draft resolution that was
before the Council at this meeting.

The President and the Government of the Republic of
Belarus have repeatedly declared their commitment to a
peaceful settlement of this conflict. We are convinced that
even today opportunities for continuing dialogue can and
should be found. It is there that we see the key role of the
Security Council pursuant to its powers under the United
Nations Charter.

In that connection, we express our profound concern
and disappointment at the fact that the draft resolution was
not adopted. The Republic of Belarus considers that
decision by the Council to be utterly counterproductive. In
view of the continuing massive military strikes against a
sovereign State, in view of the civilian casualties and in
View of all the destruction, it is scarcely possible to accept
the arguments put forward by representatives of NATO
about the alliance resolving the humanitarian crisis in
Kosovo through the use of force. We are firmly convinced
that the use of force will not promote stability or put an
end to the confrontation between the parties. The decision
to use force, which is an extreme measure, may be made
only by the Security Council taking into account the views
of the States Members of the Organization.

Today, we are witnessing a negative turn of events:
the violation of basic principles of international law that
make no provision for military intervention for
humanitarian purposes. The consequences of these actions
cannot be predicted. They threaten to undermine the United
Nations system and, indeed, international relations as a
whole. The Republic of Belarus again calls on the Security
Council to take all necessary steps to put a halt to these
NATO military actions and to stop the bloodshed. We
also call for the resumption of the work of the Contact
Group on the former Yugoslavia, in the interest of the
resumption of dialogue between the parties to the conflict
and of advancing the peace process in the region. We
believe that the present events give the Organization a
historic opportunity to demonstrate to the entire world the
supremacy of the principles and ideals that are enshrined
in the United Nations Charter.

The Republic of Belarus reaffirms its position on the
settlement of the Kosovo conflict: it should be based on
unconditional respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Yugoslavia and on the non-use of force, in
keeping with the rights of all ethnic groups. Scrupulous
adherence to those principles alone will guarantee the
establishment of a solid, lasting peace in Kosovo.

