Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I wish
to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Annadif, for his most informative briefing
and his exemplary commitment. On behalf of France, I
wish to reiterate our full support to him and all his team.
I wish also to thank the Permanent Representative of
Sweden, Olof Skoog, for his briefing and for his work
at the helm of the sanctions Committee. I wish also to
warmly welcome the presence here of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Mali, Mr. Tie'man Hubert Coulibaly,
and to thank him for having travelled to New York to
take part in our work.

I wish to begin my statement by hailing the memory
ofthe three Blue Helmets who perished last week during
attacks against the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
France pays tribute to the memory of these warriors
for peace. Their sacrifice serves as a reminder of how
MINUSMA is evolving in a difficult environment and
of the key role it plays in promoting the implementation
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
and in protecting the Malian people from those who
oppose it and in so doing resort to actions that include
terrorist attacks and criminal acts. France, engaged
alongside the United Nations peacekeeping Mission, is
aware of this threat and itself has suffered therefrom, as
two French soldiers perished on 21 February last.

Today's meeting is of particular importance with
respect to follow-up to the implementation of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation. The members
of the Security Council made a collective commitment,
in their statement to the press of 24 January last, to seize
the opportunity to take stock of the implementation by
the parties of the commitments made in the framework
of the priority actions timeline adopted in January. At
that point, a decision was also taken that additional
measures would be considered under the sanctions
regime if the commitments taken were not met by the
set deadlines.

We welcome the efforts made by the Government,
since the most recent meeting of the Council on Mali
(see S/PV.8163), to foster the necessary consensus on
the electoral process and restore the Administration's
presence in central Mali. The Prime Minister's visit
to Kidal in particular marked a restoration of high-
level political leadership and cooperation as concerns
the implementation of the Peace Agreement, nearly
four years after the last visit by a comparable level of
authority to the region.

Unfortunately, it is clear that in the wake of the
deadline set by the Malian parties themselves under
the timetable of priority actions, a large part of the
commitments made have not yet been implemented.
The resulting delays are far from being inconsequential
on the ground for a number of reasons. Given the
lack of progress, all of the achievements to date and
the very relevance of the Agreement itself could end
up being called into question; the significant electoral
deadlines scheduled for the coming months make it
all the more necessary and urgent to move forward on
various aspects of the Agreement, which is imperative
to ensure the success of the elections to come; and there
can be no lasting stability in the Sahel absent the full
implementation of the Peace Agreement.

In terms of substance, it is still the same measures
whose implementation by the Malian parties we are
awaiting. It is particularly urgent that progress be
achieved, specifically in the areas of decentralization
and security. Specifically, I am thinking in terms
of the operationalization of interim authorities, the
establishment of territorial police and progress in
the process of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, and that of security sector reform. France
also encourages Malian authorities to pursue work
dedicated to combating impunity. It calls on all parties
to halt human rights violations.

We were pleased to note the adoption a few days
ago of a new road map, at the Prime Minister of Mali's
initiative, announcing the implementation of measures
awaited for by Malian parties according to the revised
schedule. We can only support that initiative and hope
for its success, which includes the upcoming holding
of regular meetings of the Agreement Monitoring
Committee in Bamako. But let us be clear: the new road
map, which is unfortunately not the first, cannot let us
forget the fact that the commitments undertaken this
past January failed once again to be respected, while
the Malian people, the countries of the region and the
entire international community has been waiting for
their implementation for almost three years.

In that regard, the responsibility of the
Council - pursuant to the very terms of the peace
agreement - involves taking steps necessary to
encourage the parties to honour the commitments
that they made within that framework. The adoption
of resolution 2374 (2017), in September 2017, which
established a sanctions regime concerning Mali, was a
first step in that direction. Today, subsequent delays in
the implementation of the agreement and the failure to
realize commitments according to agreed deadlines are
driving us to take additional measures. We no longer
have the time to wait. In the coming weeks, together
with its Council partners, France will undertake the task
of identifying those obstructing the implementation of
the peace agreement, through which their names will
be determined. We intend to focus initially on a list
of officials who are undermining the implementation
of the agreement on the ground, in particular through
their collusion with terrorist groups and trafficking
activities. All Malian stakeholders must be aware that
the Security Council takes their word as their bond with
regard to upholding their commitments.

Despite the challenges it faces, MINUSMA
remains today an essential instrument for ensuring
the stability of Mali, in addition to the other security
forces present on the ground. Its role in supporting
the electoral process will be decisive in the holding of
presidential elections in July and August. Fully aware
of the difficult environment in which the Mission is
deployed, France reiterates its call on all Member
States to ensure that the Mission is provided with the
capabilities and equipment commensurate with the
mandate that the Council has conferred upon it. In
our view, that is an absolutely crucial point, especially
in terms of strengthening the safety of peacekeepers
on the ground, which is the priority of all of us. For
example, the installation of early-warning devices in
all of the Mission's camps in the case of an indirect
attack would undoubtedly allow us to save lives, as
was tragically illustrated by the recent attacks on the
Kidal and Aguelhok camps, which were only a few
days apart. That is one of the areas in which we must
act urgently together with the Secretariat so long as
there are existing technical solutions that are moreover
available to us in the short-term.

We believe that the strategic review currently
being conducted by Ellen Margrethe Loj also affords
us a valuable opportunity to improve the performance
and outcomes of the Mission. We fully support that
process, which will be advantageous for all of us. We
will consider with interest the recommendations to
be made by the Secretary-General on the work under
way, in view of the upcoming renewal of the Mission's
mandate. We especially hope that they will enable us to
continue to move forward towards a better sequencing of
the mandate's tasks so that MINUSMA can contribute
as effectively as possible to the stabilization of Mali,
including in the northern part of the country, while
supporting the Malian armed forces in conjunction with
the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), Operation Barkhane and the engagement of the
European Union. We will also take that opportunity to
work towards achieving increased clarity with regard
to the role and responsibilities of each element of the
security architecture deployed in Mali and the region.

Lastly, France welcomes the signing ofthe technical
arrangement between the United Nations, the European
Union and the G-5 Sahel set out in resolution 2391
(2017) in record time. The next report of the Secretary-
General on the G-5 Sahel Joint Force will provide a new
foundation for responding to legitimate demands for
support by the G-5 Sahel countries in terms of security
and development. We will do that by considering the
pace of the Joint Force's operationalization on the
ground and by maintaining consensus on this issue
within the Council.

Today it is imperative to move forward quickly
towards the full implementation of the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. It is that message of
urgency and shouldering responsibility that we want to
convey to all Malian parties today. We hope that it will
bring about the awaited leap forward by those who hold
the key to move Mali and the region towards lasting
peace and stability. France will continue to stand with
all those who want to advance in that direction.

