Mr. Mukerji (India): Let me begin by thanking
you, Madam President, for organizing today's debate on
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). We thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Jan Kubis and Ambassador Zahir
Tanin for their briefings. We also thank the Secretary-
General for his quarterly report on the situation in
Afghanistan and its implications for international peace
and security (S/2014/656).

Afghanistan is at a historic crossroads, poised as
it is for its first-ever democratic transfer of power. We
must acknowledge the leadership and statesmanship
that have been shown by President Karzai and the
Afghan leadership over the past 13 years, which have
brought Afghanistan to this historic juncture.

I cannot hide the fact that we are concerned by the
present political impasse in Afghanistan surrounding
the election results. We must not forget that the Afghan
electorate braved threats from terrorist and extremist
elements to turn out in large numbers during the first and
second rounds of voting. There is no better testimony
to the strong popular support for democracy that exists
in Afghanistan and for preserving the valuable gains of
the past 13 years. We are confident that the two leading
candidates will respect that noble sentiment and the
wish of the Afghan people for a peaceful, stable and
democratic country.

The political transition that will be completed
with the inauguration of the new President will be an
important milestone in Afghan history. It will mark
not only the culmination of a process that is Afghan-
led, Afghan-owned and Afghan-controlled, but also a
process that carries the hopes and best wishes of the
international community. Recently, on 10 September,
our honourable Minister of External Affairs visited
Kabul. Her words in Kabul during the inauguration
of the flag monument describe our relationship in a
holistic manner:

"India will always be Afghanistan's first
strategic partner. We are committed to assisting
Afghanistan in whatever way is possible within our
means."

I would like to reiterate that we do not have the
luxury of an exit strategy in Afghanistan. We are
undeterred by the cowardly attack of 23 May on the
Indian consulate in Herat. That attack reflected the
deep designs of terrorist forces that want to eliminate
every institution that believes in the promotion peace
and stability in Afghanistan. We stand with the Afghan
people in assisting them on the path of growth and
prosperity.

The security situation in Afghanistan remains
fragile. The Secretary-General's latest report gives
details of that. The report mentions that security
incidents in the south, south-east and east accounted
for 65.3 per cent of total incidents during the reporting
period. Therefore, those areas must be accorded greater
resources and attention to ensure a better security
situation in the days to come. The international
community must render its full support to Afghanistan
to defeat the forces of terrorism, which do not want
peace in Afghanistan.

With respect to the reconciliation process, we would
like to reiterate that it must remain Afghan-led, Afghan-
owned and Afghan-controlled, while respecting the
agreed red lines. We would never endorse treating the

Government of Afghanistan on a par with the elements
of the erstwhile Taliban regime.

The Secretary-General's report further mentions
that Afghanistan's economic situation today is of grave
concern. In addition, the report mentions that tackling
Afghanistan's growing funding gap and ensuring that
recurrent budgetary costs can be met will also be an
immediate challenge for the new administration. It is
reported that the prolonged electoral process, which
saw senior Government positions vacated, months of
campaigning and the severe uncertainty of the post-
election impasse, contributed to a precipitous drop in
growth, declining investor confidence and poor revenue
performance. India stands ready to assist Afghanistan
on its path to economic recovery. We must not allow
our attention to be diverted from the equally important
issue of economic development in Afghanistan.

With respect to the role of UNAMA, we believe that
the Mission has an important role to play in supporting
the activities of the new political institutions of the
Afghan State. No other organization can represent in
full measure the international community's concern for
Afghanistan and its vision for a peaceful, sovereign,
independent and prosperous Afghanistan. But UNAMA
must also focus on the important role it plays in ensuring
the delivery of valuable humanitarian and development
assistance to Afghanistan. The Mission is uniquely
placed to deploy the professional and physical resources
required to deliver much-needed humanitarian and
development assistance to the remotest corners of
Afghanistan.

India's commitment to assisting the people
and Government of Afghanistan in consolidating
the impressive gains of the past 13 years to which
you referred, Madam - including political
reconstruction - remains unwavering. India shares
civilizational links with Afghanistan and will stand
by our Afghan brethren as they build a peaceful,
pluralistic, democratic prosperous Afghanistan.
To conclude, we would like to express our full
support for the political, social and economic transition
that is taking place. We sincerely hope that the political
impasse will be over without any further delay, and that
the acceptance of the results by the leaders will provide
a solid foundation on which a new chapter of Afghan
history will be written. We would like to reiterate our
unwavering commitment to the people and Government
of Afghanistan at this critical juncture.

