Mr. Kobler: First of all, let me take this opportunity
to congratulate the United Kingdom on its assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of August. I would also like to express my gratitude to
the United Kingdom as Council President for drawing
the attention of the international community to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

It is nearly five months since I last addressed the
Council (see S/PV.7137), and one year since I took up
the mantle of Special Representative of the Secretary-
General to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Much has changed over those 12 months. Developments
have taken place that seemed hard to imagine in August
2013. Those developments were achieved not only by
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
or the Democratic Republic of the Congo alone. They
are the result of a team effort that was led by a master
stateswoman, Special Envoy Mary Robinson. Without
her, truly, I could not sit before members today with
a positive balance sheet. Working hand-in-glove with
this special "Special Envoy" over the past year has been
a professional and personal privilege. I deeply regret
losing her as my partner in our joint endeavour to see
lasting peace in the Great Lakes region. But I equally
look forward to working with her successor, Said
Djinnit, a man well-versed in the intricacies of African
politics.

In August 2013, the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23)
was knocking on the gates of Goma. There were daily
reports of killings, rapes and displacement, which were
causing suffering among the population. The Council
had just condemned the bloody attacks by the Allied
Democratic Forces (ADF) on Congolese citizens, which
forced 66,000 Congolese to flee their homes. Activities
by the Forces democratiques de libe'ration du Rwanda
(FDLR) in eastern Democratic Republic of Congo
were on the rise, with reports of attacks on Rwandan
territory as well.

Today, through the joint efforts of Congolese
military forces and the United Nations force, the M-23
is no more. Today, the Forces arme'es de la Republique
democratique du Congo (FARDC), at great cost to its
troops, has reduced the ADF to a shadow of its former
self. Today, almost 4,000 combatants from a variety
of Congolese armed groups have surrendered. Today,
the FDLR appears to be starting to voluntarily disarm,
while almost 500,000 internally displaced persons have
returned to their homes.

In August 2013, we could merely imagine an end
to the M-23 conflict, let alone the agreement to disarm,
demobilize and reintegrate fighters. But today, thanks
to the declarations signed in Nairobi last December,
that process is well under way. I applaud the efforts
of the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to fulfil its Nairobi commitments by enacting
the amnesty law and by providing former M-23
combatants in Uganda and Rwanda an opportunity to
apply for it. However, the implementation of the Nairobi
declarations remains too slow. Ex-combatants and
their families continue to live in camps under difficult
circumstances. The Nairobi declarations clearly
stipulate reintegration on an individual basis under the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
scheme. We therefore pay great attention to reports of
the return of former M-23 elements across the borders
outside the DDR process. I welcome and continue to
encourage cooperation among the three Governments
to bring this episode to a definite close.

Cooperation between the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Rwanda is crucial to a sustainable
peace. The clashes on 11 and 2 June near Kibumba, in
which five FARDC soldiers died, highlight the dangers
of unclear borders. I salute the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Rwanda for revitalizing their joint
border commission, which should lay out a viable road
map to delineate that contentious border, which was
unfortunately put on ice with the emergence of the
M-23.

There can be no doubt that the security situation
has vastly improved since this time last year. However,
conflict persists. The situation is still fragile and not
irreversible. Early-warning mechanisms are in place.
Still, when a massacre of 33 people occurs, such as in
Mutarule on 3 June, we are often slow to react. It is true
the National Police and army were close to the place of
the massacre and failed to intervene. But MONUSCO
troops were also a mere nine kilometres away, but did
not leave the base. There must be accountability for
inaction. I am joined today by the Force Commander,
General Dos Santos Cruz. We share the same vision
and personal friendship. The Force Commander and I
visited Mutarule, and I publicly took responsibility and
apologized to the communities. At the same time the
United Nations commander of the base in Sange, who
failed to act, has been relieved of his duties while an
internal investigation is under way.

The incident brought to light the need for a paradigm
shift in thought and action on the part of United Nations
forces - from reaction to prevention, from static to
mobile and from a mindset of protection-by-presence to
one of protection-by-action. Both the Force Commander
and I have instructed our teams, military and civilian
alike, to follow one simple rule when lives are in
danger: "Don't ask, act." I call on all troop-contributing
countries to join in that robust peacekeeping approach
and in this instruction to actively protect civilians.

The first priority of the Mission has been to put
an end to the FDLR. Since 2002, over 11,000 FDLR
combatants in the Democratic Republic of Congo were
successfully disarmed, demobilized, repatriated and
reintegrated into Rwandan society. The Democratic
Republic of the Congo estimates that some 1,500
combatants remain in the country. That is all - 1,500
combatants and their dependents. We are now at the
endgame. It is time for those 1,500 to stop the fight.
It is time for those sought by justice to be put before
the appropriate tribunals. It is time for those who can
go back to Rwanda to do so. I do welcome Rwanda's
readiness to accept those who go through the DDR
process, as it has done with thousands of ex-FDLR
combatants before.

In January, I told the Council that military pressure
would be necessary to lead to disarmament - it has.
The FDLR declared its commitment to disarm, but let
us admit that it has done so many times before. It is
the declared intention of the Congolese Government
for the remnants of the FDLR to be resettled outside
the Democratic Republic of Congo. On 27 May, the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
presented a plan for voluntary disarmament within a
period of 22 days and requested MONUSCO's logistical
support. The plan envisages the regroupment of FDLR
combatants in two camps, in North and South Kivu,
followed by a quick relocation to a provisional camp in
Kisangani - outside the Kivus - until a final solution
is found. I made it the Mission's first priority. Overnight,
my team mobilized flights, trucks, food, tents, water,
mattresses and blankets and prepared the camps in
North and South Kivu. Since then, 186 combatants and
430 dependents have voluntarily disarmed. To date, we
have provided security, together with the FARDC, as
well as medical services, almost 46 special flights and
more than 20 tons of food.

A joint ministerial meeting of the South African
Development Community (SADC) and the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR) held
on 2 July in Luanda extended the timeline from 22 days
to six months, starting on 2 July. The FDLR interpreted
that decision as a call to stall the process. In addition,
the perceived absence of military pressure has thrown
the process into a freezer. Since 2 July, there has been
no movement to the provisional camp in Kisangani,
according to the plan of the Government. It is telling
that the week after the Luanda decision, the FDLR
cancelled three meetings. Since then, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, SADC and MONUSCO have
undertaken many missions to convince the FDLR to
move forward. Their leadership largely ignored those
delegations. It refuses to give the order to transfer the
first groups out of the preliminary camps, preventing
any further disarmament. That is a serious signal of
non-cooperation. Standing still means we are moving
backwards. Experience, however, has shown that only
a combination of political and military pressure has
led to disarmament and demobilization. I am therefore
grateful for the consensus among the SADC and ICGLR
members States, including the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, that the military option remains firmly on
the table should the process continue to stall.

I am furthermore concerned about the security of
those residing in the camps. The FARDC and MONUSCO
do their best to provide a secure environment. However,
the smaller the number of ex-combatants and their
dependents in those regroupment camps and the faster
they move to more secure areas, the better.

The SADC-ICGLR community calls for a
three-month review in October. That must be the
moment for a serious assessment of the credibility of
the disarmament process. It must also be the moment to
decide whether to proceed further. I applaud Minister
Tshibanda N'Tungamulongo for setting up coordination
meetings, bringing together the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, SADC, the ICGLR
and MONUSCO. I am confident that the mini-summit
in Luanda next week will bring about the necessary
decisions to move the process ahead.

I am also extremely grateful for the close cooperation
of the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo with us, bringing about a peaceful solution. I
am also very grateful for the commitment of President
Kabila Kabange to resort to joint military action should
peaceful means fail. Together we must agree on criteria
to assess the credibility of the current disarmament

process and converge on a common course of action if
it is deemed insufficient.

I suggest the following criteria: the number and
quality of surrendering combatants and their weapons;
the handover to international courts of those who are
indicted; the restoration of Government authority
over vacated areas; the immediate cessation of human
rights violations in the area; the disengagement from
illicit economic activities; and the cessation of new
recruitment.

Meanwhile, I suggest joint military action against
those FDLR factions not willing to disarm and to act
against those who continue to commit human rights
violations. The end of the FDLR will be a turning point
that will fundamentally alter the security situation
in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the region. If we get that right, the gains will be
evident: peace, stability and prosperity in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo for the benefit of the
population, which has suffered so much. But if we get
it wrong, the conflict will drag on. We must all commit
all we have to making this work.

My messages to the various groups are the
following.

To the FDLR, it must seize this last opportunity
and move forward with the process. All combatants,
including leaders, must disarm now. All human rights
violations must stop now. Those who are indicted must
face justice in international courts.

To the Congolese Government, this is also their
process. We are there to support them every step
of the way. But we look to them to bring all those
involved - regional and international partners and the
FDLR alike - into agreement on the way ahead.

To the SADC and the ICGLR, I want to express
my deepest appreciation and support. Success depends
on their sustained engagement and support. They must
do all they can to jointly pressure the FDLR to engage;
the three-month review must seriously assess the
credibility of the disarmament process.

To regional actors, they should use the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region and
the good offices of Angolan President dos Santos as
Chair of ICGLR to find sustainable compromises on the
competing interests that have brought instability to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo for decades.

Finally, to the international community, I ask
that they open their doors to offer a final destination
for ex-combatants unable or unwilling to return to
Rwanda - offer a peaceful future for their children and
the children of the region.
We have rapidly climbed a steep slope towards
stabilization in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo. I welcome the national disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration plan, finalized in July,
as a critical step in stabilizing the east. As it becomes
operational, more and more combatants may trade their
swords for ploughshares. But reintegration programmes
for ex-combatants have a price tag. I cannot emphasize
enough how important it is that donors quickly support
the Government's plan.

With the expulsions of various armed groups from
areas in North Kivu, islands of stability have begun
to emerge from a sea of volatility. State authority is
gradually returning. Nearly 1,000 national police have
either returned or were deployed for the first time. And
with them has come an improvement of security in
some areas and a return of the displaced. I encourage
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to prioritize the return of Congolese police and
civil servants to consolidate those gains.

In the markets, as travel throughout the province
has become easier, goods such as clothes, shoes, books
and medicines are increasingly available. Similarly,
farmers are able to safely work in their fields, traders
bring more goods to market, and prices of foodstuffs
have fallen 20 per cent, 30 per cent and as much as
50 per cent. A mother in Kiwanja Rutshuru buying
staples for her family would see her bill drop 25 per
cent.

However, gains remain fragile. Splinter groups and
remnant armed groups continue to harass the civilian
populations and remain involved in criminal activities,
including the illicit exploitation of natural resources,
smuggling and illegal taxation.

At the national level, elections dominate the
political discourse. Through good offices, I have
aimed to reconcile differences. Only through inclusive
dialogue can we hope to set the foundation for a free,
fair and credible electoral process, the outcome of
which will contribute to more, not less, stability.

It is important that the opposition be given space to
express itself. The MONUSCO electoral incidents task
force is closely monitoring the situation, in particular
with regard to the recent arrest ofMember of Parliament
Ewanga.

It is important that electoral decisions be based on
the Congolese Constitution, which aims at creating a
durable foundation for a new republic and to prevent
a return to the undemocratic practices of the past.
The publication in May of an electoral calendar for
local elections is a good first step. I understand the
Government's budgetary and legislative constraints
to publishing a global calendar. But donors clearly
understand that a road map through 2016, with adequate
financial commitment by the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, is a prerequisite for their support.

Security sector reform has gotten a bad rap in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. But behind
that imposing name lies a simple aim - to make
people feel safe to live their lives; to go to school, to
work or to market; to raise their families without fear;
and to trust that their police and military are there
to protect them. The reform of the security sector is
also the precondition for an exit of MONUSCO from
the country. Only an efficient rapid-reaction force can
replace the MONUSCO Force Intervention Brigade.

Progress is still slow. Nonetheless, I welcome the
recent Government participation in the security sector
reform task force and its readiness to work together to
define standards and to develop a road map for moving
forward. I have confidence that MONUSCO'S newly
reinforced security sector reform unit will build on
those developments.

(spoke in French)

I have been in this post for a year. I am pleased
to see some tangible progress. A sizable number of
armed groups has been relegated to the history books.
Others will follow them. Moreover, a growing number
of Congolese women and men are able to envisage a
better future. Nonetheless, those positive developments
are but the beginning of the establishment of a lasting
peace in the Great Lakes region.

Together, we continue to work on that each day.
Allow me to add that this progress is, among other
things, the result of daily commitment and unwavering
determination on the part of all United Nations
personnel in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
I would like particularly to recognize and highlight
the importance of the delicate, often invisible work
of the community liaison assistants. Those national
colleagues are the organic link between MONUSCO's
forces and the people they protect.

I also thank the President and my colleagues on the
Security Council, whose firm, decisive support gives
us heart and allows us to advance with confidence and
energy towards the fulfilment of our mandate.

