Mr. Mahiga: I thank the Security Council for the
opportunity to introduce the Secretary-General's report
on Somalia (S/2010/675). I will focus my statement on
developments since the issuance of the report. I take
this opportunity to welcome the presidency of Bosnia
and Herzegovina during this month. I welcome and
congratulate the new members of the Security Council:
South Africa, India, Portugal, Germany and Colombia.

Allow me also to thank the Council for having
adopted resolution 1964 (2010) on 22 December 2010,
which approved the expansion of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). In this final leg of the
transition, the gains of the Djibouti Agreement, modest
2
as they may be, remain the basis for advancing the
peace process and must be consolidated.

Last week, I travelled to Mogadishu, where I had
useful discussions with President Sheikh Sharif Sheikh
Ahmed and Prime Minister Mohamed Abdullahi
Mohamed, who is with us this morning. We discussed
the draft road map prepared by the Government for
ending the transition, which emphasizes good
governance, institution-building and the provision of
basic service to ensure its legitimacy. The draft road
map is being circulated for comments and refinement.
We look forward to its finalization.

Parliament has approved a budget for the first
time. A plan of action for the first 100 days for each of
the 18 ministries has also been prepared. Those are
unprecedented initiatives by the Government - no
previous Government has ever undertaken them. The
new Cabinet is also unique in other ways. It is lean and
technocratic and its members have distinguished
professional qualifications and experience.

During my discussion with President Sheikh
Sharif Sheikh Ahmed on 4 January, he reaffirmed his
commitment to the Djibouti Agreement, to moving
forward with the transition process and to
endeavouring, as much as possible, to accomplish the
priority tasks within the given timeframe. While
recognizing the importance of the constitution-making
process, President Ahmed is also of the View that the
process may not be sufficiently exhaustive or inclusive
owing to access and security limitations, especially in
the south-central part of the country. The President is
keen to ensure the participation of Somaliland,
Puntland, other areas of stability and the diaspora in
the constitutional consultative process.

The President recognizes the need to end the
transition and to engage in open and inclusive
discussions with all stakeholders, using the mechanism
of the high-level committee provided for in the
Djibouti Agreement, and in the newly reactivated
Coordination and Monitoring Committee. The United
Nations Political Office for Somalia (UNPOS) has led
extensive consultations on the composition and
functions of those mechanisms and on ways to ensure
effective monitoring and support for the Transitional
Federal Government (TFG).

We have reached consensus that the high-level
committee will act essentially as a vehicle for Somali-
Somali dialogue, with the participation, as appropriate,
11-20690
of some of the guarantors of the Djibouti Agreement.
The Coordination and Monitoring Committee will be
the platform for the TFG and all its partners to discuss
the implementation of the Djibouti Agreement and
transition issues. The discussions in the coming months
will focus on developing consensus on the transition
with all stakeholders and on the new political
arrangements after August 201 1.

The constitution-making process has reached the
public consultation phase. In recognition of the critical
role that the Transitional Federal Parliament is
expected to play in the public consultations, the
Independent Federal Constitution Commission and
members of the Parliamentary Constitution Committee
held a workshop in Nairobi from 14 to 16 December
2010 to build awareness among members of Parliament
and to discuss ways in which Parliament could support
the consultations in the constitution-making process.

In the coming weeks, UNPOS will more
proactively support the Transitional Federal
Government and institutions, groups and entities that
are open to a constructive dialogue and peace. As set
forth in the UNPOS political strategy, we will
coordinate international efforts to help the Transitional
Federal Institutions create a political platform to allow
as many Somalis as possible to participate in the
ongoing constitutional initiative. That will provide the
country with a viable alternative to the current
transition.

In the meantime, stabilizing the security situation
in Mogadishu is the key to paving the way for the
expansion of political space by Government forces and
AMISOM. beyond the capital. That will help the
Government to expand its outreach, deliver services
and create the political space required for the
engagement of other groups, starting with Mogadishu
and the adjacent Benadir region.

In that regard, the recent upsurge in violence by
insurgents to gain control of new territories and regain
areas under TFG control is a matter of concern. The
Government is seeking the assistance of the United
Nations and the international community in the
provision of basic social services in the areas under its
control and in other parts of the country. In that regard,
the expeditious implementation of resolution 1964
(2010) is essential to facilitating the implementation of
the political strategy and to addressing the
humanitarian challenges in Somalia.
11-20690

In recognition of that goal, the United Nations is
increasing its efforts to develop coherent and integrated
support to Somali institutions, including by
establishing a light footprint in some parts of Somalia.
Recent months have seen regular interactions between
UNPOS, the United Nations Support Office for the
African Union Mission in Somalia (UNSOA) and the
United Nations country team at both the senior and
working levels to ensure greater coherence and
coordination among United Nations entities.

As we move forward, conditions of service for
United Nations personnel in Somalia must be reviewed
and improved in order to attract staff members to serve
in this challenging and dangerous environment. I
intend to take up this matter with the relevant bodies of
the United Nations and would welcome the support of
Council members.

The increase in troop strength will provide
AMISOM. with much-needed additional personnel to
fully implement the first phase of military operations
and gain full control of Mogadishu. UNSOA is
working closely with AMISOM. to ensure that the
logistics package for the additional 4,000 troops is
made available once deployments begin.

However, as Council members are aware, critical
gaps remain in the United Nations support package to
AMISOM. In particular, the reimbursement of
contingent-owned equipment and self-sustainment
costs are not covered under the logistical support
package. It is essential for the success of the Mission
that these costs are fully covered from contributions by
Member States to the United Nations Trust Fund for
AMISOM. In addition, AMISOM. faces significant
equipment shortfalls that limit its ability to achieve its
mandated tasks. African Union member States may
also require assistance in mobilizing the specialized
enabling units that are required for the Mission.

While commending Member States for the
bilateral support extended thus far to troop-
contributing countries, I appeal for more assistance to
narrow equipment shortfalls, in addition to training and
further support for specialized enabling units.

I am also pleased to report that AMISOM. has
become increasingly aware of the need to protect
civilians in conflict areas. AMISOM. has also accepted
responsibility for investigating civilian casualties
caused by its troops.
3

The Government faces the daunting task of
building an army and other security organs in the midst
of a conflict. There is an immediate need to mentor and
establish a command and control structure by training a
capable officer corps. The continued lack of a
command structure affects troop discipline and morale.
Two countries in the region have offered to train both
commissioned and non-commissioned officers for
Somalia. I appeal to our partners to support those
offers. I thank all those who have contributed
bilaterally and through the Trust Fund to support
Somali security institutions, in particular the police,
which will be key to developing the sector.

In addition, the issue of receiving and
rehabilitating defectors requires immediate attention. I
encourage action by the Transitional Federal
Government to receive the growing number of fighters
who are defecting from the ranks of the insurgents. As
a matter of priority, we are still initiating and seeking
to coordinate an inter-agency response to the issue of
defectors from Al-Shabaab. I ask the international
community to support these efforts to weaken the
insurgents.

The unfolding situation of severe drought in
Somalia is cause for serious concern as the short rains
have failed in most parts of the country. Already,
2mi11i0n people are affected, and that number is
expected to rise as water supplies dwindle, livestock is
decimated and internal displacement escalates. To
support the drought-affected population, the United
Nations country team in Somalia released $4.5 million
from the Common Humanitarian Fund for emergency
response, focusing on water, sanitation, nutrition and
health, and called on all parties to facilitate
humanitarian access. A further $15 million from the
Central Emergency Response Fund has also been
allocated for drought response as the number of
affected is likely to increase. The World Food
Programme food pipeline will be depleted in three
months' time; it is facing an acute funding shortfall of
$40 million.

In our efforts at UNPOS to address the issue of
piracy, I held constructive discussions with the
Secretary-General's Special Adviser on Legal Issues
related to Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, Mr. Jack
Lang, whose report will be out soon. At UNPOS, we
have established a task force on piracy to support
international and regional efforts to combat piracy and
armed robbery off the coast of Somalia. However,
UNPOS still needs additional capacity to enable it to
play a meaningful role in this area. We shall seek to
pursue a comprehensive counter-piracy approach
through the pillars of deterrence, prosecution and root
causes on land. We intend to begin by reactivating the
Kampala Framework of cooperation between the TFG,
Puntland and Somaliland.

Finally, let me express my deep gratitude to the
international community for its continued support for
Somalia in its quest to achieve durable peace and
stability.

