I thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to brief the Council on the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013), on the elimination of the chemical weapons programme of the Syrian Arab Republic. I hope that today's format will enable a substantive, informative and civilized debate on this important international security issue. It is a pleasure to be joined here today, virtually, by the Director-General of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), Mr. Fernando Arias, who will update the Council on the elimination of the Syrian Arab Republic's chemical weapons programme. Since my last briefing, on 5 November (see S/2020/1088, annex I), the Office for Disarmament Affairs has continued to maintain regular contact with its counterparts at the OPCW on its activities related to this matter. On 2 December, we received information from the Permanent Mission of the Syrian Arab Republic concerning chemical issues for the current period. That information was studied carefully and was also forwarded to the OPCW Technical Secretariat. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic continues to affect the OPCW's ability to deploy to the Syrian Arab Republic. The Technical Secretariat has nonetheless continued with its mandated activities related to the elimination of the Syrian chemical weapons programme and its engagement with Syria in that regard. The Declaration Assessment Team (DAT) is continuing its efforts to clarify all outstanding issues regarding the Syrian Arab Republic's initial declaration to the OPCW. As I mentioned in my previous briefing to the Council, the DAT was deployed to Damascus between 22 September and 3 October to conduct the twenty- third round of consultations with the Syrian National Authority. As reported to the Executive Council through an addendum dated 18 November to the note by the Director-General entitled "Report on the Work of the Declaration Assessment Team" (EC-95/HP/DG.2), dated 1 October, and through a further note by the Director- General entitled "Report on the Work of the Declaration Assessment Team" (EC- 95/HP/DG.3), dated 18 November, some progress was made during that round of consultations, with three outstanding issues being closed related to the Syrian National Authority's initial declaration. However, as the Director-General also reported, 19 issues remain outstanding. It is therefore the continuing assessment of the Technical Secretariat that at this stage, owing to the identified gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies that remain unresolved, the declaration submitted by the Syrian Arab Republic cannot be considered accurate and complete, in accordance with the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction. During the September-October deployment, the DAT also collected samples to replace those taken during its previous deployment. I am sure that the Director-General of the OPCW will provide an update on the activities conducted by the Technical Secretariat, including in relation to the seventh round of inspections at the Barzah and Jamrayah facilities of the Syrian Scientific Studies and Research Centre between 8 and 13 November. Pursuant to OPCW Executive Council decision EC-M-43/DEC.1, dated 24 July 2014, the Technical Secretariat has been monitoring and maintaining the remote monitoring systems installed at four sealed underground structures within the territory of the Syrian Arab Republic. In accordance with the Executive Council's decision, the Technical Secretariat was deployed to the Syrian Arab Republic between 15 and 18 November to conduct its final visit to the underground structures and to observe the removal of the monitoring equipment. I understand that the Syrian Arab Republic was informed by the Technical Secretariat that the underground structures should remain sealed as part of the destruction plan agreed by the Executive Council. I note that the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission is still in the process of studying all available information related to allegations of the use of chemical weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic and is continuing its engagement with the Syrian Government and other States parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention with regard to a variety of incidents. As previously reported, further deployments of the Fact-Finding Mission will be subject to the evolution of the COVID-19 pandemic. The Investigation and Identification Team is continuing its investigations into incidents in the Syrian Arab Republic in which the Fact-Finding Mission has determined that chemical weapons were used or likely used and will issue further reports in due course. I would like to take this opportunity to once again reiterate my full support for the integrity, professionalism, impartiality, objectivity and independence of the work of the OPCW. With regard to the implementation of Executive Council decision EC-94/ DEC.2, of 9 July, entitled "Addressing the Possession and Use of Chemical Weapons by the Syrian Arab Republic" (see S/2020/724), I look forward to Director-General Arias's update on that matter. Before concluding, I wish to echo the Secretary-General's message on the Day of Remembrance for all Victims of Chemical Warfare, which was commemorated on 30 November: "The use of chemical weapons anywhere, by anyone, under any circumstances is intolerable and a serious violation of international law.... There can be no justification for the use of these abhorrent weapons. We must remain united and determined in preventing their use or the threat of their use.... It is imperative that those who use or have used chemical weapons are identified and held accountable. That is the only way to meet our moral responsibility to the victims of chemical warfare." As the Secretary-General urged, "[L]et us renew our unequivocal commitment to the Chemical Weapons Convention and our support to the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons."
