Mr. Vilovie (Croatia) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
and to wish you a successful month. We are certain
that, under your able leadership, the Security Council
will discharge its great responsibilities successfully.

I would also like to express our appreciation to
Presidents Robinson and Byron and Prosecutors
Brammertz and J allow for their detailed reports on the
work of the Tribunals (S/2011/316 and S/2011/317)
and the progress achieved in and the challenges facing
the implementation of the completion strategy.

(spoke in English)

Furthermore, we welcome Judge Khalida Rashid
Khan as the newly elected President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR),
and express our full confidence in her ability to
successfully master the tremendous task in front of her.

Croatia recognizes the efforts made by the
Tribunals to implement the previously elaborated
strategy for the finalization of their work and the
transition to the Residual Mechanism. Croatia actively
participated in the creation of the Mechanism and
looks forward to its future work aimed at helping
safeguard the Tribunals' legacy and successfully
fulfilling their residual functions, in particular
regarding the processing of remaining fugitives,
archives management, witness protection and the
serving of sentences.

At the same time, we are aware of the many
challenges facing the Tribunals, and we firmly believe
that their widely recognized legitimate objectives
should not be pursued at the expense of the mandate
under which they were established and that they should
not compromise full respect for due process standards.
The Tribunals' mandate cannot be considered
accomplished until all remaining fugitives accused of
the gravest crimes are brought to justice.

In this context, Croatia welcomes the fact that,
after 16 years, Serbia located, arrested and transferred
to The Hague Ratko Mladic, indicted for the worst
atrocities committed since the Second World War. We
also remember here the victims of the war crimes
committed against the civilian population in Croatia, in
particular in Skabrnja, Zadar, Sibenik, Kijevo, Vrlika,
Sinj and other towns attacked by the Yugoslav People's
Army (JNA) under orders of Ratko Mladie while he
was commander of the Ninth Corps of the JNA based
in Knin, Croatia; as well as his orders to launch
indiscriminate attacks against civilian objects, knowing
that such attacks would cause excessive loss of life or
injury to civilians, in particular his attempt of flooding
a large populated area by destroying the Peruca Dam.

Justice needs to be served in these cases as well.
In this sense, we would regret it if Ratko Mladic' were
not prosecuted in The Hague for the crimes committed
in Croatia. The arrest of Ratko Mladic', however, raises
the hope that Goran Hadzie, the last remaining fugitive
indicted by the ICTY for grave atrocities in Croatia,
will also soon be rendered accountable before the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.

Croatia remains strongly committed to its
cooperation with the Tribunal. This unequivocal
cooperation was clearly confirmed by the Prosecutor's
latest assessment, according to which

"Croatia continues to respond in a timely and
adequate manner to requests by the Office of the
Prosecutor's for assistance and provides access to
witnesses and evidence as required" (S/2011/316, annex 11, para. 56).

The special task force established by the Croatian
Prime Minister continues to actively pursue its
investigations. During the reporting period, the task
force produced three reports on current operations and
a separate report summarizing all its activities and
findings to date. Let me add that the task force's
professionalism and competence were also duly noted
and recognized by the Prosecutor in his previous
report.

With regard to the missing documents that are
still "unaccounted for" (S/2011/316, annex 11, para. 57), let me point out that, in its summarizing report, the
Task Force provided its professional assessment about
the fate of the missing documents and that Croatia
went on with its investigation in this matter and is
strongly committed to continuing to undertake all
reasonable and feasible measures at its disposal.
Over the reporting period, Croatian officials at
the highest level remained engaged in direct and open
dialogue with the Tribunal and the Prosecutor, who
visited Zagreb on 4 May and met with the Prime
Minister, the Minister of Justice, the State Prosecutor
and members of the Task Force. Furthermore, Croatian
judges and prosecutors participated in peer-to-peer
meetings and training sessions aimed at transferring the
Tribunal's institutional knowledge and specialized
skills to Croatian colleagues and at enhancing national
capacities and strengthening national institutions. In
addition, Croatia welcomes the Tribunal's efforts
focused on increasing national capabilities to handle
complex war crime trials by providing trial transcripts
produced in local languages to the countries of the
region.

In that context, let me also mention the fifth
regional conference of State prosecutors, which was
hosted by the State Prosecutor of Croatia - with the
participation of ICTY Prosecutor Brammertz,
prosecutors from Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Montenegro and the war crimes Prosecutor of
Serbia- and held on 26 and 27 May in Brijuni,
Croatia. The main goal of the conference was to further
discuss cooperation in war crimes cases between
prosecution offices from the region, the cooperation
between the Office of the Prosecutor and national
prosecutions and concrete cooperation projects to
facilitate the exchange of information related to war
crimes cases.

Let me reiterate that Croatia continues to fully
cooperate with the ICTY. Croatia is convinced that the
cooperation of Member States, especially those from
South-East Europe, remains crucial for the successful
accomplishment of the ICTY's mandate and for
meeting its completion strategy goals. War crimes are
not subject to statutes of limitations, which is why
regional cooperation and establishing the impartiality
of national courts in all the countries in the region,
even after the ICTY lifetime, is so important.

Determined to implement the strategy for the
investigation and prosecution of war crimes committed
from 1991 to 1995, Croatia has introduced measures to
reinforce and expand the positive impact of the four
existing specialized war crimes courts. With a view to
speeding up domestic trials, it has furthermore enabled
the evidence collected by the bodies of the ICTY to be
used by domestic courts.
Furthermore, in the context of the recently
rendered first instance judgement in the Gotovina et al.
case, allow me briefly to make a few additional
remarks.

First, in addition to Croatia's ongoing firm
determination to continue its full cooperation with the
ICTY and the Prosecutor's Office, which I have
already mentioned, let me also stress Croatia's
strongest determination to fully respect any verdict
rendered by the ICTY.

Secondly, Croatia particularly noticed the fact
that the Gotovina et al. judgement explicitly stated that
"Croatia's choice to resort to Operation Storm was not
on trial" and, consequently, that homeland war is not
criminalized.

Thirdly, since the Council represents a political
body par excellence, we do not have any intention of
discussing legal aspects of the Gotovina et al.
judgement. That discussion will continue in The Hague
between the relevant parties. At the same time, I have
to underline that we respectfully but strongly disagree
with some of its historical and political qualifications.
Yet, let me also stress here that both President
Josipovie and Prime Minister Kosor clearly stated,
immediately after the first instance sentence was
rendered, that Croatia is a democratic State based on
the rule of law, where judicial institutions are respected
and their verdicts adhered to.

Full cooperation with the ICTY and respect for
international justice is a lasting commitment, not only
in the context of our Euro-Atlantic integration process
but as a determination of Croatia's core values and its
present and future role in the international community
as a United Nations, NATO and, soon, European Union
member. In that sense, let me reassure you, Mr.
President, that Croatia will ensure that the parameters
for legitimate military action, derived from the ICTY
judgement and which present new jurisprudence in
international law, are fully considered and respected
while making decisions at the national level, as well as
in bodies of collective defence and security.

Fourthly, Croatia strongly supports the Tribunal's
main purpose and primary functions, which are,
according to relevant Security Council resolutions, the
establishment of lasting peace and reconciliation. The
constructive and objective reactions of all relevant
political actors in Croatia after the judgement in the
Gotovina et al. case was rendered clearly testify to our
determination in that regard. Our sympathy lies with
the victims, regardless of their nationality or religion.
Our allegiance is with the truth and the consequent
punishment of all war crimes, regardless of the
nationality or religion of their perpetrators. Our hope is
that peace based on justice is possible and will be
advanced by our joint endeavours.

