Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset
please allow me to express our appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for convening this quarterly open debate
on the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question.

I should like to thank the Special Coordinator,
Robert Serry, for his comprehensive briefing on recent
developments in the Middle East, particularly on the
Palestinian question. I should also like to join others in
welcoming the participation of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the observer State of Palestine, Mr. Riad
Malki, in today's debate and in thanking him for his
statement. I should also like to thank the Permanent
Representative of Israel for his statement.

Amid the unprecedented transformation of the
Arab world, the continuing stalemate in the Middle
East peace process is clearly not in the interests of the
region. There have been no direct talks between Israel
and Palestine for more than two years. The efforts of
the international community, including those of the
Quartet, towards the resumption of direct talks between
Israel and Palestine have yielded no results.

Against this backdrop, the overwhelming vote in the
General Assembly on 29 November 2012, upgrading the
status of Palestine to non-member observer State, was
a positive development. It was a decisive achievement
for Palestine in the history of its long and arduous
struggle to reach its final goal of an independent and
viable Palestinian State. India, which has always played
a proactive role in garnering support for the Palestinian
cause in multilateral forums, co-sponsored that
resolution. India will continue to support Palestine's bid
for full and equal membership of the United Nations.

Developments in the occupied Palestinian territories
since the historic vote in the General Assembly have
been most unhelpful to the Palestinian cause. The
intensification of settlement activities by Israel in the
West Bank and East Jerusalem, despite widespread
international condemnation, is creating new realities
on the ground, thereby threatening the very premise
of a two-State solution. We join others in urging Israel
to end the settlement activity in order to allow the
Palestinian side to come to the negotiating table.

Settlements, roadblocks and the related
infrastructure of occupation continue to cause severe
hardship to the Palestinian population. These are
also adversely affecting the normal functioning of
Palestinian State institutions. The Palestinian Authority
is facing a severe financial crisis. The financial crisis
could erode the significant progress made in building
Palestinian State institutions if immediate attention is
not given to the issue. There is an urgent need to support
the Palestinian Authority in meeting its budgetary
shortfalls.

The blockade of Gaza is in its sixth year. It is
affecting essential services, economic activities and
infrastructure development. While Israel has taken
several measures to allow the flow of essential goods
into Gaza, these cannot be a substitute for lifting the
blockade. Recent hostilities in Gaza are again a stark
reminder to the international community of the dangers
that a continuing stalemate in the peace process can
bring about. We hope that both parties will continue
to uphold the ceasefire agreement and implement its
provisions in good faith.

The recent rapprochement between various
Palestinian factions is indeed welcome. We hope that
efforts towards the promotion of reconciliation will
bear fruit soon, leading to the formation of a unity
Government, the holding of elections, the reunification
of Palestinian State institutions, and measures for the
reconstruction and development of Palestinian society.

India has a long history of solidarity with the
Palestinian people. In 1975, India was the first non-Arab
State to recognize the Palestine Liberation Organization
as the sole legitimate representative of the Palestinian
people, and in 1988 became one of the first countries to
recognize the State ofPalestine. India has also extended
material assistance to the Palestinian Authority
since its establishment, and has been a partner in the
socioeconomic development of Palestine in its quest
for a life of dignity and self-reliance. Our assistance
has been for humanitarian relief, development projects,
the establishment of educational and training facilities,
budgetary support, and so on.

This year, India has pledged $10 million in budgetary
support to Palestine. India also contributes $1 million
annually to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. Following the
three memorandum of understanding's signed during
the visit of President Abbas to India in September 2012,
India is in the process of implementing projects in the
fields of information and communication technology,
vocational training and the construction of schools. In
addition, India is implementing development projects
in Palestine, with Brazil and South Africa as partners
in the India-Brazil-South Africa Dialogue Forum.

India supports a negotiated settlement resulting in
a sovereign, independent, viable and united State of
Palestine living within secure and recognized borders,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, and side by side and
at peace with Israel, as endorsed in various Security
Council resolutions and the Quartet road map. Let me
also state here that progress on the Lebanese and Syrian
tracks remains critical for lasting peace in the region.
We remain hopeful that an environment conducive to
direct talks can be achieved in the near future. India
stands ready to play its part in our collective endeavours
to achieve a just and comprehensive peace in the Middle
East.

Lastly, we remain seriously concerned at the
deteriorating security situation and continuing violence
in Syria. We strongly condemn all violence and
violations of human rights, irrespective of who their
perpetrators are. We also condemn in the strongest
terms the terrorist acts that have been and continue to
be committed in Syria. We urge all the parties to stop
violence and engage in an inclusive national dialogue
in order to resolve the conflict through peaceful means,
based on the internationally approved political and
legal basis including the resolutions 2042 (2012) and
2043 (2012) and the joint communique of the Geneva
Action Group (S/2012/523, annex).

