I thank you, Madam President, for convening this briefing. I am especially pleased to be joined today by our Police Commissioners who are currently serving in United Nations peace operations in the Central African Republic, Haiti, Mali and South Sudan. This annual briefing is an opportunity to reaffirm the vital role United Nations police (UNPOL) plays across the spectrum of conflict prevention to peacekeeping to peacebuilding. It also serves as a forum to discuss our achievements, as well as what more needs to be done to advance the role of UNPOL as a service provider and focal point on policing and law-enforcement matters. Two and a half years ago, the Secretary-General launched the Action for Peacekeeping (A4P) initiative, calling on all stakeholders to collectively address the challenges facing peacekeeping, which remains an essential multilateral tool for preventing conflict and sustaining peace for millions of vulnerable people around the globe. A4P priorities are overarching. They guide the work of Department of Peace Operations and peacekeeping operations in the field, the implementation of Security Council mandates and our response to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) crisis. UNPOL, as a key component of United Nations peacekeeping, is strongly committed to advancing A4P priorities and to further strengthening the effectiveness of peacekeeping operations. Today I will speak about the results we are achieving through our ongoing efforts to reinforce peacekeeping. I will also highlight areas in need of greater collective progress and welcome hearing members' own plans in support of the A4P agenda. As we work to ensure political progress, partnerships with regional and subregional organizations as well as across the United Nations system are critical, particularly to facilitate transitions. In Darfur, for example, UNPOL has been working closely with the African Union on the drawdown of the African Union- United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and transition to the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan, with a view to sustaining peace and preventing a relapse into conflict by ensuring adequate interim policing capacities. UNPOL also plays a key role in all aspects of the protection of civilians, including physical protection. In the Central African Republic, UNPOL helps foster a protective environment through police capacity-building, including by assisting with the recruitment and training of 1,000 gendarmerie and police cadets, with an additional 1,000 cadets forthcoming. UNPOL has also been instrumental in raising awareness about preventing the spread of COVID-19 and has distributed personal protective equipment, hygiene products and medical supplies throughout our mission settings, particularly to the most vulnerable communities. To ensure the highest levels of performance and accountability, UNPOL, in close cooperation with Member States and other partners, has advanced the Integrated Peacekeeping Performance and Assessment Framework and the Comprehensive Performance and Assessment System, pursuant to which UNPOL has implemented standards to further evaluate the impact of deployed officers and to take action in cases of underperformance. Aligning predeployment training by Member States with the Organization's in-mission training is central to enhancing performance. The Department of Peace Operations Police Division, together with our Integrated Training Service, continues progress in developing standardized training modules under the UNPOL training architecture programme. In the area of women and peace and security, gender-responsive policing is essential for effective United Nations and host State policing, and to ensure that the different security needs of men, women, boys and girls are taken into account. That is why UNPOL is making gender-responsive policing a core priority of its work. In addition, UNPOL has continued to engage with police-contributing countries to surpass the already achieved intermediate gender parity targets for 2020, including at the command levels. Greater women's participation at all levels sends a strong message to host populations, which is amplified when those women occupy positions of leadership and authority. I am pleased that three of our police components are currently headed by women. UNPOL has continued to reinforce zero tolerance for sexual exploitation and abuse, including through predeployment and in-mission training. Conduct also relates to how we manage the environmental footprints of our missions, and UNPOL has refined its Environmental Management Framework by aligning initiatives of the police components in the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Missions in the Central African Republic and in Mali, the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and UNAMID with their missions' environmental risk-management plans. Climate insecurity, the devastating consequences of which have been laid bare by COVID-19, is a growing threat multiplier for our missions and host communities. I expect this, in line with the achievement of all the Sustainable Development Goals, to become a larger focus of United Nations policing going forward. A4P aims to refocus peacekeeping on realistic expectations, make peacekeeping missions stronger and safer and mobilize greater support for political solutions, and for well-equipped and well-trained forces. Through A4P, we are better able to address today's challenges to peace and security and ultimately improve the lives of those we serve. I thank all participants for their continued dedication to implementing their respective A4P commitments. Finally, we are grateful for the Council's commitment to supporting our efforts and hope we can continue to count on it.
