Mr. Bui The Giang (Viet Nam): My delegation
thanks Mr. Lajcak, the High Representative for
Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina, for the thirty-fourth report submitted to
the Secretary-General and for his briefing on the
situation on the ground. We also welcome to the
Council Mr. Nikola Spirie, Chairman of the Council of
Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and thank him
for his statement.

We take note of the efforts made during the
reporting period by Bosnia and Herzegovina in
restructuring its police and entrenching the rule of law,
as well as maintaining the overall fiscal sustainability
and macroeconomic stability of the country. However,
we remain concerned about the political situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina over recent months as
demonstrated, inter alia, by the continued domination
of nationalist rhetoric over the political atmosphere and
related attacks on said institutions, challenging the
country's sovereignty and territorial integrity, as
mentioned in the High Representative's report. We are
equally concerned about the potential economic and
financial challenges facing the country, in particular
due to the impact of the global food and energy crisis.

Against this background, my delegation believes
that, at this critical juncture, all stakeholders in Bosnia
and Herzegovina need to show a higher sense of
political responsibility and greater ownership of the
reform process. We therefore call on all the parties
concerned to work together in a reconciliatory spirit
and with patience towards a mutually acceptable
solution regarding an integral multi-ethnic State made
up of two entities with guaranteed rights for the
Bosniaks, Serbs and Croats living there.

It is important that the process of constitutional
reform continue under the ownership of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, be based on the principles set out in the
Dayton Agreement and that more determined efforts be
exerted to ensure good implementation of the federal
leaders' commitment to the European integration
process.

My delegation wishes to take this opportunity to
confirm our continued support for the role of the Office
of the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the European Union in facilitating the country's
regional and international integration process, as well
as promoting peace, security and development in
Bosnia and Herzegovina within the Dayton Agreement.

