Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate the President
and the delegation of Japan for having organized this
open debate to discuss the main achievements in
Afghanistan since the commencement of the Bonn
process, almost four years ago, as well as to consider
future prospects resulting from the elections to be held
on 18 September 2005.

I wish also to express my thanks to Mr. Jean
Arnault, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Afghanistan, for the detailed information
he has provided and for his comprehensive
introduction of the most recent report of the Secretary-
General on this item (S/2005/525). We commend him
for his courageous leadership of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA); through
him, we convey our appreciation to the rest of the
Mission staff.

The holding of elections to the Wolesi Jirga and
provincial councils in less than a month's time will
mark the completion of the political transition begun at
Bonn in December 2001. In that regard - and bearing
in mind what Mr. Arnault has told us about the nearly
$30 million shortfall in funding for the organization of
elections - we appeal to the international donor
community to do everything possible to make the
contributions needed to cover the shortfall.

Broadly speaking, we agree with Mr. Arnault's
assessment that progress made in the process of
political transition has not been matched in other key
areas such as security, stability and economic
reconstruction. Here, we are concerned that, nearly
four years after the start of the Bonn process, the
security situation - particularly in southern and in
parts of eastern Afghanistan - remains so precarious
and that, regrettably, current levels of violence exceed
those of past years.

I wish in that regard, on behalf of the
chairmanship of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities, to affirm that we will continue
to work actively with other members of the Committee
to combat Al-Qaida and Taliban terrorism, both within
Afghanistan and outside it.

As has been observed, this resurgence of violence
was foreseeable with the approach of the date of the
elections, since insurgent groups have constantly tried
to undermine the political process and impede the
building of democratic Afghan institutions. Yet we
must note with great concern that, notwithstanding the
military campaign that has been waged for some years
and the many national and international efforts in that
regard, the insurgency has increased in scale, its
weaponry has grown in complexity, its tactics have
become more brutal and effective and its sources of
financing remain.

The death of 17 Spanish soldiers a few days ago
provided further proof of the challenges we face in this
area. We take this opportunity to express our
condolences on these losses to the bereaved families
and to the people and the Government of Spain.

We recognize the scale of the efforts underway in
an attempt to control the situation, but we must stress
that any military response to such insurgent activities
must be carefully calibrated so as to avoid causing
greater suffering for the civilian population, which has
already endured many years of suffering.

Moreover, in our view, we should not lose sight
of the fact that a military response must not be the sole
approach to resolving the problems stemming from
extremist violence. We must also take firm measures to
cut off the sources of financing and to limit the capacity
of such groups to engage in training and to take refuge in
border areas. That requires the cooperation of all of
Afghanistan's neighbouring countries.

We consider that the situation related to narcotics
production and trafficking is equally worrisome.
Afghanistan continues, unfortunately, to be the world's
largest opium producer; 60 per cent of its gross
domestic product comes from the illegal drug trade. We
regret the fact that, despite the plans that have been put
into effect to date, the results in terms of eradication
have been modest. Clearly, money used to purchase
weapons also comes from this drug trade. Making
progress in this area too will be crucial for the
country's future, since the drug economy is another
factor fueling insecurity and violence.

The seriousness of the situation in the two areas I
have mentioned also explains the inadequate progress
towards reconstruction and economic development in
Afghanistan. Although Afghanistan's economic and
social indicators have risen, they remain low; this is a
matter of concern because it is the result of the decades
of conflict that has ravaged the country.

We must highlight the significant process that has
been made in the framework of the Bonn process,
which will come to a conclusion next month, notably
with respect to: the establishment of democratically
elected political institutions; civil administration
reform, at least at the central or national level; the
establishment of national security institutions; and the
near completion of the process of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration for members of the
Afghan military forces.

However, all those achievements do not seem to
be enough to attain lasting pace in Afghanistan. More
time is needed to improve security, build effective and
legitimate institutions and ensure Afghanistan's
economic and social development. For that reason, we
believe that the international community should
continue to provide assistance for the normalization of
the situation in Afghanistan in coming years.

In that regard, we consider that a United Nations
presence should continue beyond March 2006; we
support UNAMA's endeavours to prepare for the next
stage. It seems to us that the principles set out in the
report of the Secretary-General form a good basis for
defining a framework for such participation.

We look forward to receiving the specific
recommendations mentioned by Mr. Arnault before the
expiry of UNAMA's mandate so that the United
Nations can continue contributing to meeting the
objective of establishing lasting and sustainable peace
in Afghanistan.

I wish in conclusion to express our gratitude for
the second revision of the draft presidential statement
on the situation in Afghanistan, which my delegation
supports unreservedly.

