Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): I want to thank you, Sir,
for having convened this important debate on
peacekeeping. I should also like to thank Mr. Alain Le
Roy, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations; Military Adviser Lieutenant General
Chikadibia Obiakor; and the five Force Commanders
drawn from different operational fields who have
briefed us today. This is a most welcome development
in the interaction of the Secretariat with the Security
Council. Let me especially commend the field
commanders for their inestimable sacrifices in leading
the various peace missions.

Peacekeeping continues to evolve, and it has
grown in terms of both scope and complexity. I will,
however, limit my comments to six key points in my
contribution to this debate.

First, we welcome the meetings of the Council
with troop- and police-contributing countries. Since the
commencement of these meetings, value has been
added in terms of mandate-setting, planning and
operations in the field by peacekeeping missions. The
next step is for the Council to interact more closely
with Force Commanders in order to better understand
the operational challenges. Feedback from the field, we
believe, will enhance the Council's appreciation of the
results achieved and, indeed, will improve the
precision of peacekeeping mandates. In saying this, we
reiterate the need for all mandates to be clear, credible
and achievable. There should be an exit strategy, linked
to the core objective of each mission. Exit for its own
sake, without achievement of the set objective, would
be counterproductive.

Secondly, considering the gaps between
capabilities, capacities and mandates, there is a need to
strike the right balance between supply and demand.
Twenty-first-century peacekeepers face the challenges
of balancing the long-term outlook of a strategy with
the need to implement an effective exit strategy, as

well as to maintain goodwill among civilians in
incredibly demanding and complex crisis scenarios. To
balance this equation, the quality of personnel,
equipment and finance must be commensurate with
operational mandates and objectives. Moreover, the
cultural context of deployment should always be borne
in mind, to avoid unnecessary conflict with host
countries and communities.

There is also a need to provide pre-deployment
training to prepare peacekeeping personnel for their
missions. Pre-deployment training has been integrated
into the preparation of Nigeria's peacekeeping
personnel. In addition, we maintain a forward
operations base in Abuja to ensure the adequate
preparation of our peacekeepers. In fact, only last
month, the Nigerian Army Peacekeeping Centre in J aji,
Kaduna, was certified by the United Nations for
peacekeeping training purposes. It is our intention to
make it a centre of excellence and the training hub for
peacekeeping personnel from Nigeria, States members
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and other African countries.

Thirdly, forging partnerships within and outside
the United Nations system is imperative for effective
peacekeeping. It is not possible for the United Nations,
acting along, to meet the needs of all its peacekeeping
missions. Therefore, seeking bilateral and other forms
of assistance would complement the efforts to address
critical gaps in peacekeeping. The need to involve
regional and subregional organizations in this regard
cannot be overstated. Concerted efforts should be made
to enhance, diversify and update the roster of
peacekeeping personnel, giving consideration as a
matter of policy to geographical balance in the
appointment of senior peacekeeping personnel in
relevant fields.

Fourthly, achieving coherence and coordination
between the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and the Department of Field Support will have a positive
impact in the field. But coordination and coherence
should not be limited to Headquarters; it should,
ideally, also permeate United Nations country teams,
the donor community and other actors in peacekeeping.
Such coherence would result in better safety and
effectiveness and in the rapid deployment of
peacekeepers. A situation where peacekeepers continue
to live in substandard settlement conditions long after
their arrival at their duty posts does not augur well for
productivity or morale.
Fifthly, during its debate on 16 July, on
preventive diplomacy (see S/PV.6360 and S/PRST/2010/l4), the Security Council recognized the
increased material, human and financial resources
required by peacekeeping operations over the past
decade. The Council accordingly acknowledged
potential benefits and efficiencies that could be
achieved through an integrated approach to preventive
diplomacy efforts similar to the approach to
peacekeeping and peacebuilding methods. The nexus
between peacekeeping and peacebuilding was
embedded in the Council's acknowledgement of the
interrelationship between political, security,
development, human rights and rule of law activities.

At the heart of most conflicts are matters of
deprivation, injustice, inequitable distribution of
resources, bad governance and other forms of abuse.
Effective peacekeeping must therefore integrate
peacebuilding strategies. The Peacebuilding
Commission has an important role to play in that
regard.

Sixthly, there is no gainsaying that prompt and
adequate compensation for contingent-owned
equipment, apart from catalysing the participation of
other potential troop-contributing countries,
demonstrates recognition and appreciation of the
sacrifices which troop-contributing countries are
continuously called upon to make.

Finally, it is important to strengthen both the
mandates and the rules of engagement of peacekeepers,
with a view to increasing their safety. Situations where
peacekeepers are killed or obstructed by spoilers of a
peace process should be examined closely. Adequate
measures, including deterrence and severe targeted
sanctions, are needed to ensure the safety of all
peacekeeping personnel. The Council should declare
zero tolerance for impunity for acts committed against
peacekeepers.

Nigeria remains committed to the ideals of the
United Nations, and in particular to its peacekeeping
role. We will continue to make sacrifices to contribute
meaningfully to the maintenance of international peace
and security. While it is unlikely that the need for
peacekeepers will be extinguished in the very near
future, that hope remains. In the final analysis, durable
peace can be achieved only through inclusive dialogue,
reconciliation and integration. The United Nations
must play a central role in defining and promoting a

comprehensive strategy comprising operational and
structural measures for preventing or addressing the
root causes of armed conflict, in order to ensure
sustainable global peace. That is the ideal for which the
United Nations was created.

