Mr. Burian (Slovakia): At the outset, I would
like to affirm that the Great Lakes region represents
one of the major security challenges of the
contemporary world. We think it is high time to
address the problems of the region in all their
complexity, and to achieve a lasting peaceful
settlement that will contribute positively to the stability
and development of the entire continent.

In that context, we commend the United Republic
of Tanzania for taking this very relevant and timely
initiative. We agree with you, Madam President, that this
meeting of the Security Council is truly a historic event.

Slovakia associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Austria on behalf of
the European Union, and with the statement delivered
by Mr. Louis Michel of the European Commission.
That is why I will limit myself to a few points that we
feel strongly about. The full text of our statement will
be circulated.

In recent months we have witnessed encouraging
developments in the field of political consolidation in
the Great Lakes region: democratic elections in
Burundi and a successful constitutional referendum in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Those positive
moments provided proof of the political maturity of the
peoples of Burundi and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and can serve as a beacon of hope within the
grim reality of the current situation in the Great Lakes
region.

We are aware that there are possible spoilers who
could benefit from postponements in the peace and
national reconciliation processes. It is therefore crucial
to prevent such attempts and not to allow the
deterioration of the security situation to have a
destructive effect on political processes that have
proceeded well so far. Slovakia is deeply concerned
about the recent instances of renewed fighting in North
Kivu and Katanga, and especially about the attack
against the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) that
occurred on 23 January 2006.

In that context, we want to emphasize a problem
that has been overlooked by the international
community for a long time. I am speaking of the most
violent and cruel criminal activities carried out in the
region by the Lord's Resistance Army. In that
connection, we would like to stress two points. First,
we note the efforts made by the Ugandan Government
to tackle the issue. However, we cannot overlook the
fact that innocent civilians continue to die. There are
new patterns emerging in the campaign of the Lord's
Resistance Army, including attacks on humanitarian
workers and peacekeepers who are on the ground to
help refugees and internally displaced persons and to
safeguard peace. We think that decisive action is
needed to stop the destructive activities of the Lord's
Resistance Army and to bring perpetrators to justice by
executing the warrants of the International Criminal
Court.

Secondly, we agree that the primary
responsibility to protect lies with Governments.
However, it is the responsibility of the international
community to help and protect the most vulnerable if
the national authorities are not able to cope with the
magnitude of the problem. That is the reason Slovakia
is ready to support initiatives of the international
community that would, in cooperation with the
Governments of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Uganda and the Sudan, identify possible
measures that could then be taken by the Security
Council to eliminate the activities of the Lord's
Resistance Army.

Since the situation in the Great Lakes region is
extremely complex, the responses must be
comprehensive and far-reaching. There are three levels
on which the problems must be tackled: national,
regional and international.

On the national level, fighting corruption and
implementing the principles of good governance are
imperatives. Security-sector reform, demobilization
and disarmament processes must be further enhanced
and accelerated. Ownership of solutions to those
problems must be assumed by national Governments.

The regional level of cooperation has special
importance. Neither national, nor international efforts
can bear the desired fruit in the Great Lakes region if
they are not implemented in the regional framework.
We would like to encourage the countries of the region
and other regional stakeholders to accelerate their
efforts to prepare for the second Great Lakes Summit,
which should adopt the proposed Security, Stability
and Development Pact for the Great Lakes region and
enhance the existing forms of dialogue and
cooperation, with special regard to confidence and
security-building measures. The questions of
development and respect for human rights are clearly
issues that will need further attention from the
international community, since there is no security
without development and respect for human rights.

Last but not least, the international community
should bear a major responsibility with regard to
formulating and implementing post-conflict strategies
once the transition is complete. The establishment of
the Peacebuilding Commission could not be timelier.
There is already one suitable candidate in the Great
Lakes region for the Commission's attention: Burundi.
We believe that there will be another after 30 June.

Slovakia welcomes the draft resolution on peace,
stability and development in the Great Lakes region
(S/2006/51). We believe that it comprehensively covers
the complex issues that the Great Lakes region faces.
The draft resolution has our full support.

