The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Canada.
(spoke in French)

Today, Canada voted in favour of a mandate extension
for the United Nations Preventive Deployment Force
(UNPREDEP) in the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia. In Canada's opinion, UNPREDEP'S continued
presence in Macedonia is essential at this critical juncture,
given the continuing instability in the region, particularly in
neighbouring Kosovo.

As the Secretary-General indicates in his report of 12
February, UN PREDEP has played an important role to this
day in preventing the spillover of the wider Balkan conflict
into the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.
UNPREDEP has been an unquestionable success to date,
the first and unique example of preventive deployment
under United Nations auspices. It is our sole reminder of
the undeniable cost-effectiveness of prevention in all
aspects of international peace and security. The success of
the Force has been all the more impressive in light of the
situation in Kosovo. Given this success and the region's
instability, Canada strongly supports renewing
UNPREDEP's mandate. We worked hard - unfortunately,
to no avail - to convince the concerned parties to agree to
the Force's extension and to overcome the bilateral
concerns which threatened its continuation.

(spoke in English)

It is with keen disappointment that we note that,
despite solid support for extending UNPREDEP, the
Council was unable to do so as a result of the negative
vote cast by China. In our View, arguments that
conditions no longer warrant the presence of UNPREDEP
simply cannot be sustained by an examination of the
facts. We believe that China's decision, seemingly
compelled by bilateral concerns unrelated to UNPREDEP,
constitutes an unfortunate and inappropriate use of the
veto. In this same light, we deeply regret that actions
taken by the Government of the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia precipitated the bilateral dispute
leading to the present situation.

Canada is also deeply concerned that the inability of
the Council to agree to a mandate extension for
UNPREDEP, in spite of the clear need for such an
extension and despite the expressed will of the vast
majority of Council members, has set a negative
precedent at this critical juncture for peace and stability
in the Balkans. The credibility and authority of the
Security Council may, we fear, suffer just when they are
most needed in this region and beyond.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
The Council has thus concluded its voting procedure.

The next speaker on my list is the representative of
Germany, who will speak on behalf of the European
Union. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and
to make his statement.

