Mr. Sinirlioglu (Turkey): I would like to thank
Special Representative Yamamoto and the other
briefers for their briefings, and Ambassador Saikal for
his statement. We also thank the Secretary General for
his report. (S/2018/165)

As we mark International Women's Day today,
it is time to recognize and reflect on the enormous
achievements of Afghan women and girls. It is
truly heartening to see empowered women and
girls in Afghanistan who participate in different
spheres of life. They strive for and contribute to the
prosperous and peaceful future of their country.
They merit the admiration and full support of the
international community.

We cannot emphasize strongly enough the need to
consolidate the achievements of the past 17 years in
Afghanistan. This requires the sustained support of the
international community to the Afghan Government
and people. In that understanding, we applaud the
greater attention paid by the Security Council to the
situation in Afghanistan. We also commend the role
played by the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) in standing with the Afghan
people and coordinating the efforts of the international
stakeholders in Afghanistan. We will continue to
support UNAMA's activities and efforts. In this
context, we welcome the adoption of resolution 2405
(2018), renewing the mandate of UNAMA.

Afghanistan is at yet another critical juncture.
Addressing the challenge of establishing sustained
peace, stability and security in the country remains
central. In that understanding, Turkey was represented
at the second Kabul Process conference, held on
28 February. At the meeting, we reiterated that lasting
peace in Afghanistan could be achieved through an
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned process. We also made
a call on all the groups in Afghanistan to denounce
violence, recognize the Government of Afghanistan
and become part of the legitimate political life of the
country. We hope that the call made at the meeting
by President Ghani for peace negotiations without
preconditions will receive a positive response from the
Taliban. Meanwhile, we also believe that, the National
Unity Government needs to be more inclusive in order
to overcome ethnic tensions and garner the support of
all segments of Afghan society in this critical period.

Strengthened collaboration among the countries of
the region is crucial to the success of Afghanistan. Our
vision for Afghanistan is a peaceful and stable country
that enjoys good and cooperative relations with its
neighbours, while being at the centre of major regional
projects. We are confident that this cooperation could
be achieved through dialogue and stronger engagement.
Accordingly, Turkey will continue to contribute to
regional cooperation efforts, including through the
Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process.

In concluding, I would like to reiterate Turkey's
commitment to standing by our Afghan sisters and
brothers in their quest for a better future as long as our
help is needed.

