Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): I congratulate you,
Mr. President, for convening this debate.

I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Herve Ladsous for his briefing. I also convey to Special
Representative Leila Zerrougui our best wishes in her
new and very demanding job and thank her for her
presentation. I am also grateful to Mr. Anthony Lake
and Mr. David Tolbert for their informative remarks.

Attacks on children hurt the most vulnerable in
any armed conflict, and severely impact precisely
those who are key to fostering sustainable peace. The
international community needs to persevere in finding
ways to prevent children from bearing the brunt of wars
that adults choose to fight.

The Council has established a comprehensive
framework to protect children in situations of armed
conflict. The concrete results achieved through tools
such as the monitoring and reporting mechanism and
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict
must both be commended.

As indicated in the latest report of the Secretary-
General (S/2012/261), we have recently witnessed
significant steps towards greater accountability for
perpetrators of grave violations against children. The
verdict of the International Criminal Court condemning
Thomas Lubanga sent a powerful message to those who
commit crimes against children in armed conflict.
It attests to the international determination to fight
impunity and bring to justice those who commit such
horrific crimes. The increase in the number of sanctions
regimes that include designation criteria governing
grave violations against children also shows that the
Council is committed to acting against perpetrators
when their actions pose a threat to international peace
and security.

Although children have particular needs and
vulnerabilities, the development of a specific legal
regime for the protection of children in armed conflict
must remain within the scope of broader international
humanitarian law and should be consistent with
other legal mechanisms aimed at protecting civilian
populations as a whole.

In 2010, as Chair of the Sanctions Committee
on the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Brazil
organized the first briefing ever to such a committee
by a Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict. We were guided by Brazil's firm belief that
improving cooperation between the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
relevant sanctions committees would strengthen the
Council's response to persistent perpetrators.

However, the Council should be careful when
considering coercive measures in the field of children
and armed conflict in contexts for which no sanctions
regime exists. As we all know, measures under Chapter
VII of the Charter can be adopted only in cases that
constitute a threat to international peace and security,
as determined by the Security Council. It is therefore a
matter of concern for Brazil that some situations that
are not armed conflicts are being mentioned in reports
on children and armed conflict.

While we strive to improve accountability for
grave violations committed against children in
conflict situations, attention should also be given to
the imperative of ensuring that States receive resolute
support and cooperation for strengthening the rule of
law.

We often hear calls for the Council to take bolder
decisions. The plight of innocent children surely
amplifies that call. Nonetheless, we must avoid the
temptation to associate "bolder decisions" with a
merely punitive approach.

There is only so much that can be achieved through
naming and shaming mechanisms and the imposition of
sanctions. We must not lose sight of the importance of
cooperating with Governments and parties to conflicts
in order to find sustainable solutions for the protection
of children.

In the same spirit, Brazil fully endorses the
Secretary-General's call for support to the sustainable,
long-term reintegration needs of children in the context
of the implementation of action plans, including
economic reintegration. To ensure that children
affected by conflict are able to participate in efforts
to build peaceful and prosperous societies, we need to
offer them the opportunity to be fully reintegrated.

Furthermore, as rightly pointed out by the former
Special Representative of the Secretary General in
her last annual report to the Human Rights Council
(A/HRC/2l/38), it is also necessary to tackle the
structural causes that lead to the recruitment of
children by armed groups. Evidence suggests that there
is a strong association between recruitment into armed
forces and poverty. In fact, social exclusion has been
found to stir frustration among youth and to create
significant incentives to join armed groups.

Improving children's living conditions and
providing them with alternatives, particularly through
education, can significantly contribute to preventing
their recruitment by armed groups, thereby breaking
the vicious cycles of conflict.

