Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese): First of all, I would like to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General La Lime for her briefing. We also listened carefully to the briefing by Ms. Gilles. Today is the first time that the Security Council has been briefed on the situation in Haiti since the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH) was established. China appreciates the work of BINUH in helping Haiti to restore stability. Despite the extensive support of the United Nations to maintain peace and promote development in Haiti, the political crisis in the country is yet to be resolved. As the Secretary-General notes in his report (S/2020/123), the political crisis in Haiti has led to increased political polarization and a vacuum in the functioning of national institutions. Amid the rampant gang violence and frequent violent incidents, the security situation has become of even greater concern. The deteriorating economy has posed enormous challenges to people's livelihoods and has exacerbated the humanitarian situation, about which China expresses its concern. China calls on the Haitian authorities to commit to resolving differences properly through consultation, strengthening the rule of law and its own development capacities, settling the current political crisis as soon as possible and creating conditions conducive to necessary reforms. All those involved in the Haitian issue should put the interests of the Haitian people first, respond more vigorously to their demands and try to regain their trust. The international community, particularly countries with significant influence on Haiti, should step up attention to the political, economic and humanitarian situations in Haiti and help it to maintain stability, promote economic growth, improve people's livelihoods and implement the 2030 Sustainable Development Goals. Haiti still has a long way to go to achieve stability and development. We hope that the Haitian Government will chart a course towards greater self-reliance and effectively assume responsibility for maintaining national security and stability and promoting economic and social development.
