Mr. Gusmfio: I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for the invitation to address this
important meeting devoted to East Timor. The
Secretary-General has already presented a
comprehensive review of the latest developments, and
the Chief Minister, Mr. Mari Alkatiri, is also here to
complement this report with an update.

Before talking about the current stage leading
towards formal independence, allow me to touch on
some earlier key events pertaining to the question of
East Timor. They are well known to everyone here, of
course, but I wish to briefly reflect on where we came
from before we reached this phase, where formal
independence is about to be granted.

The process towards a peaceful solution for East
Timor was clearly defined 20 years ago, when the
General Assembly adopted resolution 37/30, in 1982.
The Secretary-General was given the authority to
initiate the necessary measures, including calling upon
all interested parties to work together towards the
implementation of the spirit and the letter of the
resolution.

After 18 years, in May 1999, the United Nations
and the Governments of the Republic of Indonesia and
the Portuguese Republic signed the 5 May accord. That
accord enabled the United Nations Mission in East
Timor (UNAMET) to be set up to implement the first
phase, which was the popular consultation held on 30
August 1999. The referendum finally allowed us to
exercise our right to self-determination. As expected,
our people opted overwhelmingly for independence,
for freedom and for democracy. The 5 May accord
envisaged that, regardless of the outcome of the vote,
the United Nations would take over administration of
the territory.

The violence that followed the announcement of
the results of the vote was beyond belief. As a nation
and people, over a period of 24 years of occupation we
endured extreme and systematic violence, but nothing
prepared us for the violence of September 1999. Within
a short period, people were killed and our country was
looted and burned. Thousands of people fled from their
villages and towns to the mountains, and many more
were forced to cross the border into Indonesia.

For our people, that was an eclipse of freedom.
The international community witnessed the violence
and destruction and acted forcefully to stop it. We are
particularly indebted to the Security Council and to all
the countries that helped to take that decisive decision.
The diplomatic and military actions taken by the
international community proved to the world that it had
the capacity to end widespread violence against a
defenceless people. Through the International Force in
East Timor (INTERFET), many countries came
together under the overall command of Australia to
help control the situation. Operation Stability was a
success.

INTERFET was not envisaged in the 5 May
accord, but it was necessary to save the accord itself.
By doing so, it also helped to honour the
responsibilities and the undertakings of the
Government of Indonesia based on the 5 May accord.
INTERFET allowed the second phase of the accord to
be implemented. The United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) was formed
to carry out the second phase on behalf of the Security
Council. With the support of the peacekeeping force,
UNTAET's mandate was to create the democratic
institutions of Government.

In the last two years, UNTAET has given primary
emphasis to the maintenance of security and the
establishment of the rule of law. The development of
the East Timor Police Service and the East Timor
Defence Force has been an extraordinary achievement.
We are now certain that we are heading in the right
direction, but we acknowledge that much more needs
to be done, especially in the administration of justice.

Other areas of critical importance, such as
education, health, agriculture and fisheries, still require
strong support in terms of finance and human
resources. The civil service is evolving, but many
challenges still exist, especially at the senior level, in
building the capacity of our people to maintain
effective, transparent and accountable government.

We are now about to become independent. As
reported by the Secretary-General, a constitution was
adopted by an elected Constituent Assembly and, on
the basis of that constitution, we have just held
presidential elections. We now have the three basic
institutions of sovereignty: the executive, the
parliament and a president.

Our second Transitional Government was set up
after the election of a Constituent Assembly on 30
August 2001. With very limited resources, the
Government is likely to face extreme difficulties in
implementing its programmes unless financial support
and the appropriate expertise from the international
community are forthcoming. The Chief Minister, Mr.
Alkatiri, can explain the details of those matters. There
is a plan to provide international experts for 100 core
functions, which have been identified by UNTAET and
the Government as critical to the viability of the
Government and to political stability. That support is
important.

The Government has been actively involved in
the process of preparing the first national development
plan for East Timor. Civil society has also been
involved in that process through the Civil Society
Consultative Commission, which administered a
countrywide consultation. The aim of the consultation
was to ensure that the national development plan would
reflect the needs and aspirations of our people. I was
personally involved in the exercise, as the Head of the
Commission. That particular exercise enabled almost
40,000 people to participate directly in planning for the
future. They presented their own vision and
expectations and outlined their own priorities. The
report on the aspirations and priorities identified by the
people is now in the hands of the Government.
Education and health were identified as areas of major
concern and will be at the top of the list of priorities.

The development plan will be released before
independence. It will be an important document not
only to guide the Government and civil society in
developing the nation, but also to guide the
international community on how best it can continue to
help us support our major goals of reducing poverty
and promoting economic and social development.

We now have a constitution. It provides
guarantees of human rights for our people. In terms of
the philosophy of the United Nations, our constitution
provides an example of how the fundamental elements
of human rights can be incorporated into a constitution.
For a nation in the making, delivering those guarantees
to individuals and to the nation is a gigantic challenge.

How are we going to respond to the basic needs
of our people in terms of employment, basic health and
the right to education? How are we going to respond to
basic human rights in terms of employment, working
conditions and equal opportunities for both genders?
How are we going to nurture and sustain integrated
democratic processes? Those are all real challenges,
not only for us, the Timorese, but also for the United
Nations.

Our struggle for freedom was a litmus test for the
process of resolving conflict through peaceful means.
Our freedom, won through years of sustained resistance
on many fronts and finally becoming a reality through
the 5 May accord, was sealed in the ballot box in the
popular consultation held on 30 August 1999. That was
a turning point in our history. I wish to reiterate the fact
that the successful implementation of the popular
consultation was a product of the United Nations
working creatively with the people of East Timor. The
commitment of the entire Security Council to East
Timor and the personal commitment of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Kofi Annan, were certainly a force in that
process. Our people will never forget the Council's
help.

The experience of the administration of UNTAET
holds rich lessons for the future. Future United Nations
administrations in post-conflict situations will be much
richer if the lessons from East Timor are incorporated
into the design and implementation of United Nations
plans.

The successor mission, the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET), has a
mandate-implementation plan with defined benchmarks
to be achieved within a certain time frame. For this
plan to succeed, it will need the support of Member
States. We welcome those plans and shall work
together to make sure that the objectives assigned to
the successor Mission will be successfully
implemented.

The building of democratic institutions has also
been a process led by the United Nations through
UNTAET, working with the Timorese leadership, as
envisaged in the Security Council resolutions. So far, it
has been a success.

The challenge now for the Timorese, and also for
the United Nations, is how to consolidate the core
democratic institutions. The need to enhance the
capacity and transparency of political institutions and
of the administrative apparatus is a critical challenge.
Appropriate development in the areas of law and order
is another. To maintain and sustain security and
stability, which are the most important conditions for
national development and democracy, are two
intertwined processes that must be carefully nurtured.

We will face a real test after the declaration of
independence on 20 May. That is when capacity-
building begins in earnest. A central issue is how are
we going to manage the legislature in order to
elaborate laws to regulate an environment conducive to
sustaining economic development. The other real
challenge is how the United Nations and the people of
East Timor can continue to work together in the post-
independence era to enhance the capacity of the
institutions of East Timor after it becomes a democratic
State. Support from the international community,
including technical advisers to support key
Government functions, will be essential for some time
to come.

In short, our struggle for freedom and
independence evolved from the cold-war era into the
new millennium. Our independence is the product of
the sustained determination of our people, combined
with active cooperation with the international
community at all levels. Our future success will also
depend on the continuation of that determination and
cooperation. I appeal to the Security Council and to the
Secretary-General to continue to support us in the
challenging years ahead. Our success is your success.
For our part, as a people and a nation that emerged
from the ashes to look forward to becoming a State
Member of the United Nations, we shall continue to
embrace the principles of human rights, mutual respect,
good citizenship and cooperation at all levels between
States and peoples. Our actions will always be oriented
towards sustained peace and stability. Those are the
best assets we have.

Lastly but not least, I should like to thank the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, for his personal
commitment over many years to helping us, as a people
and a nation, to succeed in the struggle for peace and
freedom.

