Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): I thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this very important
meeting today. Let me start by thanking the Secretary-
General, the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) Goodwill Ambassador,
Ms. Blanchett, and the Associate Administrator of the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP),
Mr. Gettu, for their strong briefings.

This week marks one year since the report of
the Annan Advisory Commission on Rakhine State
was issued. Last week, we mourned the passing of
Mr. Kofi Annan in the Security Council, and we
remembered his legacy. Today, we should honour his
legacy by encouraging Myanmar to implement all the
recommendations of the Annan Commission in full.
There is no greater tribute than the implementation of
the pathway that Mr. Kofi Annan, who cared deeply
about Myanmar, provided us for an inclusive future in
Rakhine state.

It provided hope for a solution to the complex
challenges of Rakhine state - hope that was destroyed
by the terrorist attack by the Arakan Rohingya
Salvation Army and the violent response of Myanmar's
security forces. They were meant to protect the
Rohingya. Instead, they violently chased more than
700,000 women, men and children from their homes
to neighbouring Bangladesh, where the Government
and people have opened their homes and land to those
in need.

One year later, virtually none of the Rohingya
refugees has felt safe to return. That has become one
of the largest humanitarian crises of the twenty-first
century. It is in that sobering reality that we meet today.
I will reflect on the following: first, the urgent need
for accountability; secondly, the return of the Rohingya
people to Myanmar; and thirdly, the Security Council's
further engagement.

First, I will speak on accountability. In Kutupalong
camp last April, the Council saw the devastating effects
of the crisis. I will never forget the large number of
persons who had been physically and psychologically
wounded. Small children had deep scars on their heads
and limbs. They did not play. They did not dream. We
met a woman holding a l6-day-old baby. She did not
know how to bond with the child. She did not know who
the father was. She was raped by Myanmar soldiers on
the night her husband was murdered. That was not an
isolated incident; sexual violence perpetrated against
Rohingya women and girls was used to instil fear in
the Rohingya to force them to flee. The effects of those
horrendous crimes will last for generations.

Justice is not only a means to ensure that the
Rohingya feel safe enough to return voluntarily to
their homes in Rakhine state. Ensuring accountability
is an end in and of itself. The report of the Human
Rights Council Independent International Fact-Finding
Mission on Myanmar (A/HRC/39/64) highlights the
need to prosecute crimes against humanity, war crimes
and genocide and to hold those responsible to account.
The shocking findings of the Fact-Finding Mission's
report need follow-up and should be included in legal
procedures to establish accountability.

The Myanmar authorities announced the formation
of a commission of inquiry. While we are encouraged
that Myanmar is taking a step towards justice,
intentions are meaningful only when followed by
concrete steps towards full accountability. It is up to
the Myanmar Government to show that it meets those
standards. If there is no progress at the national level,
the international community has to take responsibility
and provide alternatives, and then the Council needs to
refer the situation to the International Criminal Court.
There can be no impunity.

Secondly, I will address the safe, voluntary,
dignified and sustainable return of the Rohingya people
to Rakhine state. The memorandum of understanding
signed by Myanmar, UNHCR and UNDP was a first
step in the right direction, but we have serious concerns
about its implementation. If Myanmar is serious about
its willingness to let refugees return safely, the best
way to show that is by allowing the United Nations
unfettered access to northern Rakhine to assist and
fulfil its mandate; by addressing the issue of severely
restricted freedom of movement for the Rohingya
people in Rakhine state; by making sure that internally
displaced persons can return to their places of origin;
and by offering a credible path to citizenship for those
who are entitled to it by law.

Thirdly, I will focus on the Council's engagement.
It was in response to a letter from the Secretary-General
that the Council decided to give that human tragedy the
attention it deserves. We thank the Secretary-General
for his leadership and commitment to the Rohingya
people from day one. The Council has constructively
engaged with the Myanmar authorities both during and
following its visit. We have to conclude, however, that
this approach has yielded minimal results. I hear a call
for patience, but time is pressing.

The international community cannot rely on the
generous hospitality of Bangladesh forever. New realities
on the ground make it more difficult for people to return
to their homes or places of origin. Traces - essential
to truth-finding and accountability - are erased. The
role of the press is crucial in that regard, as a free
press serves the governed instead of the Government.
We therefore call for the immediate release of the two
Reuters journalists. The Myanmar Government needs
to pick up the pace. It needs to create an environment
conducive to return and to sustainable peace, as well as
ensure accountability. We expect results.
The Security Council will have to continue its
engagement, working side by side with other United
Nations efforts, including those of the Special Envoy,
the Human Rights Council and its Fact-Finding
Mission, and funds and programmes to move the
situation towards progress. All of us, and Myanmar
above all, need to work without delay, using all tools
at our disposal, to achieve the same objective - a
democratic Myanmar in which all ethnic, minority and
religious groups, including the Rohingya, can live
together peacefully throughout the territory.

