Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
Bolivia would like to thank Mr. Taye-Brook Zerihoun
and Mr. Stephen O'Brien for their briefings this morning
on the humanitarian and security situation in the Lake
Chad basin region. We would also like to particularly
thank Ms. Fatima Yerima Askira from the Borno
Women Development Initiative for her testimony.

As I listened to the statements of my colleagues,
I took notes on some of the words that impacted me
personally, but I can only assume that they had a similar
effect on everyone gathered here: famine, slavery,
captivity, abduction, forced marriage, brutality, extreme
crisis, horror, fear, disease, killings, suicide attacks,
displaced persons, destruction and extreme poverty.

We, too, are concerned about the humanitarian
and security crisis that has beset the Lake Chad basin
region for several years now. Boko Haram continues to
pose a threat to the subregion, the African continent
and international peace and security. We commend
the progress made in combating that extremist group
thanks to the enhanced cooperation over the past two
years among Nigeria, Chad, the Niger, Cameroon and
other countries through the special Multinational Joint
Task Force.

The Plurinational State ofBolivia firmly condemns
the acts committed by the Boko Haram terrorist group,
which poses a serious threat to international peace
and security and exacerbates the region's already
fragile humanitarian situation. The actions of that
terrorist organization are reprehensible and include the
kidnapping of girls, boys and young men and women, as
well as the destruction of civilian infrastructure, such
as schools. We express our solidarity with the victims
of Boko Haram's criminal activities, including the
most recent deadly attack in Madagali on 9 December
2016, in which 57 people died from two suicide bomb
attacks and the attack described by Mr. O'Brien that
occurred on 8 January. We demand the immediate and
unconditional release of those who were kidnapped,
including those who were forcibly recruited.

The humanitarian disaster affecting the region is
a source of great concern. As many members of the
Council have already pointed out, the crisis in the
Lake Chad subregion has had little media coverage
but is one of the greatest challenges faced by the
Security Council and the international community.
According to information released by Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, in December
2016, 11 million people in the Lake Chad basin region
required humanitarian aid and 2.6 million people were
displaced. As I read those figures, the same sentiment
as that expressed by my Uruguayan colleague crossed
my mind. Bolivia has a population of 10 million, and the
tragic situation before us today affects an even greater
number of people than my country's entire population.

The Plurinational State of Bolivia reaffirms that
defeating terrorism once and for all does not depend
on military action alone. As Ms. Askira stated, in order
to make headway on the problem of addressing its root
causes, it is essential to develop a long-term response
not only to the military and political challenges, but
also, and most important, to the economic and social
challenges. Bolivia will support initiatives to bolster
the efforts of the countries on the front line of that fight,
while respecting their sovereignty and independence.
Similarly, we call upon regional organizations to
enhance their efforts to address that tragic situation.

