Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): I thank you,
Mr. President, for having organizing this important
debate. Lithuania aligns itself with the statement made
on behalf of the European Union.

Today's debate is a reminder once again that an
ample knowledge base exists on what is needed to
improve the protection of civilian populations by
peacekeeping missions, including as reflected in the
recommendations of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations (S/2015/446) and last year's reviews
on peacebuilding and women and peace and security.

As noted by many delegations today, clear, credible
and achievable mandates matched by the reliable and
readily availability of the necessary materiel, equipment
and critical enablers; strong mission leadership and
personal responsibilty; the pre-deployment training
of troops, including on the protection of civilians;
inclusion of thematic advisers on women, children and
the protection of civilians in peacekeeping missions;
a more robust, proactive protection posture; and the
existence of specific protection-of-civilians strategies
for each peacekeeping mission with a protection
mandate all play an important role in the protection
of civilians.

Furthermore, information obtained through
modern technologies can greatly enhance a
mission's situational awareness and intelligence-led
decision-making. It provides advance warning of
armed groups' movements and imminent attacks, thus
enabling a faster response and pre-emptive action,
which in turn helps to save civilian lives as well as the
lives of peacekeepers themselves.

Against the backdrop of this extensive knowledge
base and our experience on the ground, we believe that
a sharper focus is needed on how existing norms are
translated into more effective protection. Obstacles
may vary, including a weak chain of command; lack of
air lifts or capacity or fuel shortages that immobilize
patrolling vehicles; insufficient support for human
rights units; some 200 peacekeepers being sick with
malaria at any given time, as was the case in the
Central African Republic; protracted staff shortages;
and lack of analytical or intelligence capacity within
a mission. As a consequence, even the best resolutions
and recommendations will be no worth no more than
the paper they are written on if implementation falters
for these various reasons.

The hurdles that missions face as well as good
practices and the dissemination of lessons learned
should be given greater attention in the Council's
deliberations. Real interactive dialogues with force
and police commanders, going well beyond once-a-
year formal meetings, would facilitate the removal
of existing obstacles and a better understanding the
situation on the ground.

The protection of civilians, a difficult task in
itself, will be even more complex without the buy-
in of local authorities and populations. The effective
protection of civilians and, for that matter, the safety of
peacekeepers themselves depend also on close ties with
and the trust of local communities, including women,
youth and marginalized groups. Such trust-based
relations provide peacekeepers with much-needed
local intelligence, enable a better understanding of the
specific vulnerabilities and needs of local communities
and facilitate the crafting of specific, targeted and
effective responses to the threats such communities face.

Nothing breaches this trust more than abuses
perpetrated by peacekeepers themselves. Protectors
turned into predators tarnish the good name of
the thousands and thousands of United Nations
peacekeepers who have served with dedication and,
increasingly, at a risk to their own lives, including those
who have paid the ultimate price for protecting others.

Those guilty of abuses should not be allowed to
hide behind national jurisdictions to avoid justice. The
onus is on the troop-contributing countries to bring the
perpetrators to account.

We welcome the Secretary-General's strong
response to the latest sexual exploitation and abuse
scandalconcerningtheUnitedNationsMultidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic and the concrete steps that have been taken
to tackle the problem. The Council should also do its
utmost to put an end to impunity. In this respect, we
welcome the adoption of resolution 2272 (2016) in
March this year and call for its full implementation.

At the same time, let us not forget that this
particular ill is not new. The first widely publicized
sexual exploitation and abuse cases date back to 1992,
in Cambodia, and others followed. In March 2005, a
a comprehensive strategy to eliminate future sexual
exploitation and abuse in United Nations peacekeeping
operations was released, and yet here we are again.
What use are reports if they are not implemented? We
have to make sure that our attention span lasts well
beyond the occurrence of a specific incident, and that
reports and recommendations are put into action in a
consistent and comprehensive manner. That is the only
way we can ensure that 10 or 15 years from now United
Nations peacekeeping will not go through yet another
cycle of scandal and shame.

