Mr. Own (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, allow me to say what a pleasure
it is to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the current month. I wish
you every success in your work. I would also like to
acknowledge the tremendous efforts made by your
predecessor, the representative of Germany, during his
presidency of the Council last month.

Once again, for the third time, we are meeting in
the Council Chamber, which represents international
legitimacy, to take up the Iraqi crisis. This is the single
most serious crisis faced by the world since the end of
the cold war. We are also witnessing for the first time
since then the emergence of a clear will by the
international community to reject the methods that
were applied throughout that period of imposing
decisions on this Council and using it as a cover for
actions that run counter to the purposes and principles
of international legitimacy.

The international community has spoken
unambiguously, at the State and Government levels -
at the high-level meetings of Non-Aligned Countries,
the Organization of the Islamic Conference, the League
of Arab States, the African Union and the European
Union - or at the grass-roots level, through mass
demonstrations, especially in Europe and America, and
has thus shown that it rejects war or the threat of war
against the people of Iraq. It has done so, because it has
found the case for war unconvincing and views it as
unjust and unwarranted. This is particularly true given
that Iraq has accepted resolution 1441 (2002)
unconditionally and without restrictions and with clear
political will - a will expressed at the highest level -
and begun to implement it in full. Iraq has provided
effective cooperation, as is borne out by the reports
submitted by Mr. Hans Blix, Executive Chairman of
the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Commission, and Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei,
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency. Those reports affirmed the importance and
benefit of continued inspections and called upon the
Council to provide more time - not weeks or years,
but months.

I would like to take this opportunity to appeal to
Mr. Blix to promptly supply a list of the outstanding
questions with regard to weapons of mass destruction
in Iraq, given the substantive importance of this
question.

In spite of these positive developments, it seems
that some States are still marching - indeed,
rushing - towards war. They are carrying out an
unwarranted media campaign aimed at distorting the
facts and providing information to justify such an
approach - information that has been shown to be
invalid by the inspections. Such States are also acting
outside the scope of international law when they
declare their desire to change the regime in Iraq. Such
an objective is outside the purview of resolution 1441
(2002). That resolution did not set out a specific time
frame for the monitoring and inspection process; that
process will eventually lead to the peaceful disarming
of Iraq of its weapons of mass destruction.

This is a historic moment; it is the first time since
the end of the cold war that the international
community has firmly stood up to those who have gone
against its collective will. In this regard, we express
our appreciation for the States members of the Security
Council that have refused, despite blackmail and threat,
to acquiesce to the orders that some States have
become accustomed to issuing in the Council whenever
they want the cover of legitimacy for acts aimed at the
preservation of their and their allies' economic and
political interest, even at the cost of causing
devastation and suffering for other peoples. We are
certain that history and the international community
will not forget this brave and sincere stand on the part
of those States in the interests of consecrating
international legitimacy in the service of the principles
and purposes of the United Nations Charter and the
promotion of international peace and security.

While strongly affirming the decisions taken at
the summit meetings of the Non-Aligned Movement in
Kuala Lumpur, of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference and of the Arab League, as well as the
declarations by the African Union and the European
Union regarding Iraq, we strongly reject war as an
option for eliminating proscribed Iraqi weapons. We
would like to issue a warning about the tragedies and
human suffering that would result from such a war for
all parties and the repercussions that would widen the
circle of violence and terrorism and create instability,
not only in the Middle East but throughout the world.

Such a war would have adverse effects that would
undermine the strength and coherence of the
international alliance established to combat global
terrorism. The fact that some are insisting on moving
towards war, even without a mandate from the Security
Council, sets a dangerous precedent for the United
Nations and endangers the very survival of this great
international Organization, which has maintained
international peace and security for the past five
decades.

In conclusion, we are confident that the
promotion of peace and security in the Middle East
region and neighbouring areas can be achieved only
through a just and comprehensive settlement of all
outstanding problems and issues through resort to
reason, which has been given by God to man alone of
all His creatures; the renunciation of the use of force
and the voluntary and full renunciation of all weapons
of mass destruction; the transformation of the region
into one free from weapons of mass destruction,
through effective international arrangements and
actions without discrimination or exception; the
granting to the Palestinian people of their full rights,
the establishment of an independent State on all their
national soil and the withdrawal of all forces from
Arab territories under Israeli occupation; support for
the inspections and the efforts of the inspectors, whose
success is undeniable; and the immediate lifting of the
sanctions imposed against Iraq since 1991.

