The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of New Zealand.

We have heard today from the Deputy Secretary-
General and the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights about the events in Srebrenica, which
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
and the International Court of Justice determined
involved acts of genocide. New Zealand joined with
others in remembering the victims of that genocide. We
express our deep condolences to the victims' friends
and families.
The devastating effects of the war in Bosnia
and Herzegovina are still felt today, not least in the
memories of those who lost loved ones in the conflict.
We offer our sympathy for all victims of that conflict,
many ofwhom perished in mass killings that still shock
our collective conscience today.

Thankfully, 20 years on the situation on the
ground is, of course, very different. However, after two
decades reconciliation remains a live issue that requires
continued nurturing. We have seen important steps
taken by all sides towards reconciliation. Pledges have
been made to move further down this path to peace and
friendship. New Zealand encourages all involved to
walk this path together.

In his 1999 report on the Fall of Srebrenica, then
Secretary-General Kofi Annan asked

"how will the United Nations ensure that no future
peacekeeping operation witnesses such calamity on
its watch? (A/54/549, para. 469)"

More than 15 years later, that is a question which is still
looking for a comprehensive answer. It is a question to
which the memories of all victims of genocide and mass
atrocities deserve an answer. We as a Council have a
duty to remember the past in order to do everything
possible to avoid history repeating itself.

New Zealand deeply regrets that the efforts that we
and others made over a considerable period to try to
ensure that this commemorative event would be marked
by a united Council did not prove possible. While
acknowledging the relevant provisions of the Charter
of the United Nations, since 1945 New Zealand has
consistently opposed the veto. New Zealand regrets that
despite achieving the support of a majority of Council
members, the draft resolution was not adopted because
of the exercise of a veto by one of the permanent
members. At a commemorative event, it strikes us
particularly inappropriate that a veto was used. While
it was only one negative vote, the outcome reflects on
all of us. It once more demonstrates how we must all
find better ways of working to ensire that the Council
can reach agreement and act when it should.

The United Nations and the Council failed many
victims of the conflict in the former Yugoslavia,
not least those in Srebrenica. Those failures came at
a horrific cost to innocent people on all sides, and
are still felt strongly all these years later. Today, the
Council has failed those innocent victims. Looking to
the future, in order to avoid another event like that at
Srebrenica, or indeed another Rwanda, we must do more
than just strive to design better mandates and work to
improve the capabilities of peacekeeping missions that
the Council authorizes, although of course that is an
important place to start. But beyond that, it is clear that
the Council should be more active in trying to prevent
violent conflict before it begins.

But let us also be honest enough to admit to each
other and to ourselves that the only guarantee of
preventing the horrors witnessed at Srebrenica from
happening again is if we as Member States live up to
the Charter commitments we took on as a condition
ofjoining thd Organisation. We all - all Members of
the United Nations - have to own this responsibility,
irrespective of race, colour, creed or history, or state of
development. This is fundamental to our common and
shared humanity.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement. I would
urge him and any others who ask to take the floor to
remember the solemn spirit of the commemorative we
are celebrating today.

