Mr. Pleuger (Germany): Let me first address the
Russian delegation in condemning the terrorist bomb
attack in Grozny and in expressing our sympathy and
our condolences to the Government of the Russian
Federation and to the victims and the bereaved
families.

My delegation is grateful for the comprehensive
briefing by the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Timor-Leste, Ambassador Kamalesh
Sharma, and for the report of the Secretary-General of
29 April on the situation in Timor-Leste (S/2004/333).
In that connection, I would like to welcome the
presence of Senior Minister Ana Pessoa Pinto as she
participates in this Council meeting. I would also like
to say that Germany aligns itself with the statement to
be made later in this discussion by the representative of
Ireland on behalf of the European Union.

Germany commends the tremendous progress
achieved by the people and the Government of Timor-
Leste and by the United Nations Mission of Support in

East Timor (UNMISET). The Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Kamalesh Sharma, deserves our
special tribute. We also welcome the excellent
communication and goodwill that have characterized
relations between Timor-Leste and Indonesia. Timor-
Leste can rightly be described as a success story and as
a true model for nation-building. Over the past five
years, significant progress has been continuously
achieved in all relevant areas.

Whereas the security situation has generally been
calm and peaceful, certain deficits remain. The Timorese
police unit - the Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste -
continues to suffer from a number of institutional
weaknesses. Reports of the presence of armed groups
are still a matter of concern. Unfortunately, we must
acknowledge that the development of indigenous
Timorese security capabilities remains at an early
stage. We must also acknowledge the concern of the
Timorese Government that an early withdrawal of the
international security presence could lead to a
deterioration of the situation. It is important that,
during the consolidation phase, UNMISET retain some
residual security-related elements to support Timor-
Leste's ability to maintain its security and stability. We
must make sure that the progress achieved so far will not
be lost. Germany therefore supports the recommendation
of the Secretary-General to extend the mandate of
UNMISET, including its military component.

The development of relations between Timor-
Leste and Indonesia continues to benefit from the
commitment to cooperation at the highest political
level. However, as the report of the Secretary-General
points out, some problems remain. We therefore call
upon both parties to finalize the agreement on the
border line, to conclude an arrangement for
management of the border - including in the areas of
cooperation and security and the regulation of
economic activity - and to solve other outstanding
issues, such as bringing to justice those responsible for
serious crimes committed in 1999 and the return of
refugees. Despite considerable efforts, 300 unresolved
cases of Timorese children separated from their
families in 1999 still demand attention. Progress in
those areas will be crucial for the internal and external
security of Timor-Leste.

National reconciliation is a key factor in
successful nation-building. We therefore commend the
work of UNMISET also with regard to the other two
areas of its mandate: first, support for the public
administration and justice system, and for justice in the
area of serious crimes; and, secondly, support for the
development of law enforcement.

We support the recommendation of the Secretary-
General to continue this Mission. The envisaged
configuration of 5 8 civilian advisers could help Timor-
Leste cross a critical threshold of self-sufficiency in
terms of developing key skills and capabilities while
helping to ensure that essential tasks are discharged.

The international community's peacekeeping
activities in Timor-Leste have provided a window of
opportunity for progress. The extraordinary
achievements that have been made offer an occasion
for pride for the Timorese people and for the
international community. We call on the Governments
of Timor-Leste and of Indonesia to take the
opportunity to resolve the outstanding issues before the
final termination of UNMISET. We highly support and
recommend the assistance of UNMISET in this
endeavour upon request from both parties.

There is good reason to believe that further joint
efforts will enable the Timorese people to achieve the
objective of a truly self-sufficient State, which they
have pursued with such determination. The
international community should stay committed to
achieving that goal.

