Mr. Rupel: I do not know whether I shall be able
to respond to all the questions in the way that is
expected, but I will try my best. I will try to answer
them one after another, as they were put to me.

Regarding frozen conflicts and their effective
handling, let me say first that, in general terms, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) is at its strongest in conflict prevention, but it
also has a role in conflict settlement. The obvious
locations, or destinations, are in South Ossetia,
Transdniestria and Nagorny Karabakh; as Council
members know, we have been active in those places. It
is less a case of what the United Nations can do for the
OSCE than of what the OSCE can do for the United
Nations. That was the starting point, or presupposition,
of my statement today and also a motive for my
coming here. Effective conflict settlement through the
OSCE would first be attempted without burdening the
United Nations. Generally speaking, we could do more
to increase the sharing of information on early warning
so that it is followed by early action.

Regarding the further steps - how to combine
and how to promote and achieve synergy between the
OSCE and the United Nations - I have already said
something, but this is a question that was addressed to
me not only by the representative of Romania, but also
by other colleagues. The OSCE attaches great
importance to its links with the United Nations, and I
am really thrilled to be able to meet with the Council
today. As a regional organization, the OSCE
contributes substantially to the maintenance of peace
and security in its areas of responsibility and to the
actual implementation of United Nations documents
and principles. I am glad to see that the cooperation
between our two organizations - one larger and more
important and the other representing its 55 members -
is close and continues to be strengthened. On many
issues, our two organizations work in close synergy. In
particular, we work very closely with the Council's
Counter-Terrorism Committee and the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime in the fight against
terrorism. We have strong links with the United
Nations Economic Commission for Europe - I
mentioned that in my presentation - and we work
closely with the United Nations in the field,
particularly with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees. I hope that that
cooperation will be reflected in a General Assembly
resolution on cooperation between the United Nations
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe; such a text was not agreed upon at the
Assembly's fifty-ninth session. We are currently
working on finding consensus on such a decision. We
are very pleased with initiatives aimed at deepening the
relationship between the United Nations and regional
organizations. We also note the calls in the report of
the High-level Panel on Threats, Challenges and
Change (A/59/565) for closer cooperation with
regional organizations, especially in the areas of early
warning and conflict prevention. We are interested in
exploring that further.

I now turn to Transdniestria, which must be
addressed in the near future, because it is a dangerous
source of instability not only for Moldova, but for
Ukraine as well. The changes in Ukraine and the new
line of the Moldova leadership enable us to look for
solutions. Control of the Ukrainian-Trandniestrian
border - or, if you will, the Moldovan border - on
the Ukrainian side, if implemented rigorously, could
convince Tiraspol within months that the current
situation is not sustainable. I believe that
decentralization and strong self-government would not
only offer a chance for Transdniestria to reintegrate,
but would also contribute to the democratization of
Moldova.

I thank the representative of the United States for
his questions regarding the relationship between the
United Nations and the OSCE; I have tried to respond
partially to them.

Regarding our experiences in going beyond our
standard area of operation, we would, of course, have
to enhance our technical abilities and deal with the
problems that are on the table, such as the budget and
the scale of contributions. We also have a small
management crisis regarding a new Secretary General.
But I certainly believe that the OSCE should regard
itself as an organization meant to work closely with the
United Nations and actually to do United Nations
work - or work that is in complete harmony with the
United Nations - wherever possible and perhaps in
places where the United Nations cannot work on its
own.

I would now like to respond to the questions
posed to me by the representative of the Russian
Federation. I agree completely with what he said
regarding the problem of balancing. I myself - so to
speak - introduced the Slovenian chairmanship of the
OSCE by saying that we need three R's: reform,
revitalization and rebalancing. By "rebalancing", I
meant creating more balance among the three
components of our organization: the economic and
ecological dimension, the human dimension and, of
course, the political and military dimension. We need a
more equal relationship, or attitude, towards all those
components.

In that respect, I have proposed a couple of steps;
we have also had discussions with representatives of
the Russian Federation about conferences, workshops
and working groups that have been proposed by that
delegation. I have found the discussions to be
extremely interesting and very important, relating, for
instance, to conferences dealing with energy security
and military doctrines. So, I think we should
occasionally pause briefly and try to see what is in
everyone's - or the majority's - interest.

I would certainly hope that we can resolve our
differences regarding the scale of contributions so that
we can deal with the problems in the outside world,
and not be so preoccupied with internal problems. I
think it would be wrong to conceive of the OSCE as an
organization that is able to discuss only its own
problems, rather than doing its work in the outside
world where, indeed, it is very necessary and
sometimes helps to solve serious problems, save lives
and so on.

On the subject of Serbia and Montenegro and
Kosovo, I am in complete harmony with what Council
members have said regarding the protection of human
rights in Kosovo. I have visited Kosovo on a couple of
occasions: after the events of March 2004 and again a
few weeks ago. I must say that I was impressed by the
progress I saw regarding the attitudes of the
provisional leadership of Kosovo. I guess that my
interlocutors in the leadership - and here I include
everybody: the Prime Minister, the Speaker of the
Assembly and the President - realized that there can
be no good solution for Kosovo without taking
everybody in Kosovo on board, meaning the Serb and
other minorities, and without taking on board
everybody in the international community that has
been involved in the resolution of the conflict in
Kosovo in the past. Here, I am referring to the Group
of Seven countries and, of course, to the United
Nations and the OSCE specifically. We should try to do
our best to prevent the events of March 2004 from
being repeated, or even attempted. I think that
Mr. Soren Jessen-Petersen, the Special Representative
of the United Nations Secretary-General, is doing very
good work in Kosovo on this specific matter.

I have my worries, as I suppose everyone else
does. These worries relate to the possible consequences
resulting from the indictment of Ramush Haradinaj, the
present Prime Minister of the provisional Government.
I hope that the indictment will not result in mass
Albanian uprisings. I do not think it will. It is certainly
not in the interest of the Kosovar people to go in that
direction. I hope that this or some other tense situation
will not be used for provocation from some other side.
I do not think that anybody has an interest in
heightening the situation in Kosovo. I have the feeling
that the status quo does not really suit anyone there. I
think that there are some radical elements in the
political life of the region that would like to maintain
the status quo; there are also some criminal structures
in Kosovo itself that would like the same. Therefore,
we should be very careful when we deliberate on those
issues.

Regarding cooperation between the OSCE and
the United Nations, I would like to mention briefly that
we feel that the role of the United Nations is key, as a
new Security Council resolution would be necessary.
Of course, I would be very happy if a decision by the
Secretary-General to appoint a special envoy for
Kosovo were coordinated with Brussels and
Washington; those capitals are considering appointing
their own envoys as well.

We are now in a precarious and difficult situation,
but I think that there are plenty of good ideas and
concepts. Thus, we should not see a repetition of the
events of 2004.

Regarding the questions of the representative of
the United Kingdom, I have already said that I feel that
synergy should be promoted in the relationships not
only between the OSCE and the United Nations, but
also between the OSCE and the European Union (EU).
I think that, as far as conflict prevention is concerned,
we have common interests and many similar concepts.
I am thinking, for instance, about Georgia. We have
had a problem with continuing our border monitoring
operation in Georgia. And, as I understand it, that
project will be stopped, or has already been stopped,
because there is no new mandate. In Vienna, we are
now discussing a similar or related idea of training
border guards. But, I also hear of interest on the part of
the European Union to help us with some ideas of its
own. If the EU can step in in this situation, that would,
of course, be of great importance to Georgia; naturally,
there would be no jealousy as far as the OSCE is
concerned. In this respect, there would be no problem
on the part of the OSCE, because I think that we are a
project- and effect-oriented organization rather than
one in competition with other organizations in
processes like forum-shopping, if I may put it that way.

I think I have now responded to all the questions.
I was delighted to have had the opportunity to answer
those questions.

