Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): First of all, I welcome
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), and thank her for her briefing.

Nigeria takes due note of the twenty-second report
of the Prosecutor, pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005),
and the judicial activities undertaken by the Court and
the Office of the Prosecutor over the past six months.
According to the report, the Office of the Prosecutor
is currently monitoring several trends in Darfur that
could constitute crimes under the Rome Statute. Those
include alleged sexual crimes. We are appalled by the
widespread nature of the sexual crimes outlined in the
report. We condemn in the strongest terms all forms
of sexual violence against women and girls, including
underage girls. It is important that the perpetrators be
identified and brought to justice.

Humanitarian workers and peacekeepers continue
to face great challenges in the course of their work
in Darfur. Abductions and attacks are complicating
what is already a difficult operating environment.
We deplore all hostile acts against peacekeepers and
humanitarian workers. Some of those acts have,
unfortunately, resulted in loss of life. We offer our
deepest condolences to the families of peacekeepers
and humanitarian workers who have lost their lives in
Darfur. We look forward to seeing a determination as to
whether these hostile acts constitute crimes under the
Rome Statute.

The impact of intercommunal clashes on the lives of
the civilian population in Darfur is a matter of concern
to us. The fact that these clashes accounted for half of
the 760 deaths in the reporting period underscores the
urgent need for measures to prevent them. We are aware
of the efforts of the Government of the Sudan to contain
the effects of fighting between different ethnic groups.
We believe that more needs to be done to address the
root causes of the tensions, and by so doing facilitate
permanent reconciliation among the communities.

There can be no military solution to the conflict
in Darfur. The path to lasting peace, stability and
security in the region lies in dialogue and negotiation.
The Doha Document for Peace in Darfur provides
a viable framework for achieving this. We welcome
the efforts of His Excellency President Omar Hassan
Al-Bashir to seek a political solution to the conflict. His
recent announcement of the Sudanese Government's
commitment to extending the cessation of hostilities
to a permanent ceasefire if the armed groups lay
down their arms and join the national dialogue is a
clear demonstration of the President's commitment in
that regard. We encourage the armed groups to stop
fighting and work with the Government of the Sudan,
the African Union and the international community to
end the conflict in the region.

