Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
welcome Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk to the
Security Council today. The United Kingdom stands
side by side with the Ukrainian people in this time of
cr1s1s.

We commend Mr. Yatsenyuk, his Government
and the people and armed forces of Ukraine for the
remarkable restraint they have shown in the face of
repeated provocation. Because of their strength of will,
there is still a chance for a peaceful diplomatic solution.

Over the past week, we have heard in this Chamber
and elsewhere an attempt to cast doubt on the legitimacy
of the transitional Government in Ukraine. That is
entirely unwarranted. Mr. Yanukovych deserted his
office and his people in the midst of a crisis. Rather
than work to implement the 21 February agreement, he
abandoned his post. He was disowned by his own party
and his removal was approved by an overwhelming
majority of Members of Parliament.

The transitional Government that replaced him has
already taken important steps - steps which uphold
the spirit of the 21 February agreement and which
lay the foundations for the future of Ukraine. They
have restored the 2004 Constitution, they have begun
the process of constitutional reform, and they have
scheduled elections for 25 May. Those forthcoming
elections will enable all Ukrainians to choose their own
leaders. Internationals monitors stand ready to ensure
that those elections are free and fair. We urge all parties
to support that effort.

We all agree that Ukraine needs our support in this
time of transition. We all acknowledge that Ukraine
has a pressing need for reform, for improvements to its
political culture, for political stability and inclusiveness,
and for an end to corruption. We all support the call
for investigations into the violence of the past three
months, we all back fresh elections under international
observation, and we all agree on the importance of
protecting minority rights. Those points of agreement
could form a basis around which we can coalesce to
find a way forward.

But in order to move away from confrontation,
the Russian Federation needs to accept that the cause
of current instability in Ukraine lies not in Kyiv or
in Donetsk. It comes from the actions of the Russian
Federation in the Crimean peninsula where, against the
express wishes of the Ukrainian Government, Russian
military forces have taken control of a large part of the
sovereign territory of Ukraine. We utterly condemn that
blatant violation of the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Ukraine and the flagrant breach
of international law.

Russia claims that it is acting to protect its citizens.
We have heard claims of Russian speakers and nationals
under threat, the Russian language outlawed, rampant
anti-Semitism, and hundreds of thousands of refugees
fleeing Ukraine. All those claims have been shown
to be unfounded. The only part of Ukraine where
minorities are under threat is in Russian-occupied
Crimea, where Ukrainian forces are besieged in their
bases and hundreds of members of the Tatar community
are fleeing Crimea in fear, and where, as we heard just
now from Mr. Feltman, Assistant Secretary-General for
Human Rights Simonovie has been denied access and the
opportunity to investigate the disturbing developments
taking place in Crimea. But those international
observers who have Visited Crimea, including Astrid
Thors, the High Commissioner on National Minorities
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, have found no evidence of any violations or
threats to the rights of Russian speakers. They have,
however, reported that, as a consequence of Russian
actions, tensions between ethnic communities have
increased.

We are deeply concerned by the decision of the
so-called Crimean Government, installed by an armed
putsch accompanied by Russian military intervention,
to hold a referendum on 16 March to ascertain whether
Crimea should become part of the Russian Federation.
We are equally concerned by the legislative steps Russia
is taking to facilitate that referendum.

It is absolutely clear that the proposed referendum
would violate the Ukrainian Constitution. Article 73
sets out that any alteration to the territory of Ukraine
must be resolved by an all-Ukrainian referendum.
This is manifestly not an all-Ukrainian referendum.
Moreover, a free and fair referendum cannot possibly
be held while Russian troops and Russian-backed
militias dominate Crimea, where there is no electoral
register, where there are restrictions on press freedom,
and where voters will be casting their ballots under the
barrel of a gun. Under such conditions, it is clear that
any referendum vote in Crimea this weekend would be
farcical. Worse, it would reopen ethnic divisions and
risk a serious escalation in tension. Such a referendum
will not be recognized by the international community.

A window of opportunity remains to find a
peaceful resolution to the crisis. The window is narrow,
but it exists. But finding that solution requires Russia to
take a number of important steps. It must de-escalate.
Its forces must return to their bases in Crimea and to
the force level stipulated in the Black Sea Fleet basing
arrangements. International monitors must be allowed
into Crimea. Their presence will ensure that the rights
of people belonging to minorities are fully respected
by all parties. Russia should distance itself from the
proposed referendum, clearly indicate that it will
not seek to use the result as a pretext for annexation,
and publicly reaffirm its commitment to the unity,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine. And
Russia must agree to proposals for a dialogue with the
Ukrainian Government, either directly or through a
meaningful international diplomatic process.

The Council is meeting today in the gravest possible
circumstances. A referendum is set to take place on
Sunday that is illegal under Ukrainian law and the
consequences ofwhich will clearly be inflammatory - a
destabilization with serious implications for the United
Nations Charter and international norms.

There is no need for this. What we have just
heard from Prime Minister Yatsenyuk confirms what
many of us have been repeatedly emphasizing in the
Council - that there is a clear willingness on the part
of the Ukrainian Government to address Russia's stated
concerns through peaceful dialogue, discussion and
negotiation. When there is a readiness for dialogue, it
makes no sense - indeed, it would be dangerous and
irresponsible - for Russia to take unilateral actions
or collude with unilateral actions of the Crimean
authorities. The United Kingdom urges Russia to
refrain from such unilateral actions and to distance
itself from the referendum set to take place on Sunday.

And the United Kingdom urges the Security
Council to make clear that Ukraine's sovereignty, unity
and territorial integrity must be respected and that any
attempt to modify Ukraine's borders through unlawful
means will not be tolerated.
