Mr. Barro (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to express my condolences to the
delegation of Burkina Faso following attacks yesterday
evening that led to many dead or injured, which we
condemn in the strongest terms. I would also like to
congratulate the delegation of the Russian Federation
on its initiative to organize this timely debate, in that
it provides us once again an opportunity to deepen our
reflection on the challenges facing the international
community within the peacekeeping agenda. I also
thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his very
enlightening briefing.

While the launching of the Secretary-General's
Action for Peacekeeping (A4P) initiative and the
subsequent Declaration of Shared Commitments
on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations was
an important step that is to be welcomed, it must
be recognized that there are still many challenges
to overcome in the reform of the United Nations
peacekeeping system.

In the light of the Secretary-General's recent
reports, the objectives of that initiative are still far from
being achieved. By way of proof, despite improvements
seen in political and administrative reforms, the
security situation in some countries, such as Mali,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Somalia and
the Sudan, remains volatile, in particular owing to the
upsurge in asymmetric attacks and intercommunal
tensions. In that regard, given the increasingly
multidimensional nature of peacekeeping operations, it
is important to continue efforts to make the mandates
of such operations more focused, clearer, more realistic
and more achievable.

However, such an admirable ambition necessarily
reflects the need to allocate predictable and sustainable
funding for each such operation. In that regard, my
delegation further calls on the Council members to work,
in the spirit of report of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) and resolutions
2320 (2016) and 2378 (2017), to continue consultations
on the issue of the financing of African Union peace
operations authorized by the United Nations in order to
contribute to the effectiveness of the African initiative
to silence the guns by 2020.

Another fundamental aspect to which we must give
attention is training and capacity-building in order to
provide peacekeeping operations with well-trained,
adequately equipped and troops instructed on the
basics of humanitarian law. In addition, it is necessary
to ensure the safety and well-being of those troops, who
are often called on to operate in very large and volatile
security environments with limited resources.

We must also continue to prioritize the participation
of women in peacekeeping operations even though
significant efforts have been made in that regard, in
line with resolution 1325 (2000) and the Department
of Peace Operations gender strategy. Similarly, our
various actions must take the fight against sexual abuse
and exploitation fully into account, in accordance with
resolution 2272 (2016) and the Secretary-General's
policy of zero tolerance in that regard.

In addition, given the increasing commitment and
quality of French-speaking countries within peace
operations and the presence of such operations in
such countries, in particular in Africa, my delegation
reaffirms the need to promote multilingualism in the
context of such missions.

As a major troop-contributing country, Senegal
has prioritized all such requirements and remains
ready to share its unique experience in peacekeeping,
particularly through its specialized training centre,
established in line with United Nations standards.

However, the success of our efforts requires the
renewal of our shared commitment to multilateralism,
as I have just said, as a key mechanism for maintaining
international peace and security. To achieve that,
it is essential to foster ongoing dialogue among all
stakeholders, in particular the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations, as well as
contributing and host countries.

Senegal remains committed to continuing its
efforts, in concert with the United Nations, the African
Union and the Economic Community of West African
States, to strengthen its contribution to initiatives to
improve peacekeeping operations.

