Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We would like
to thank you, Sir, for convening today's meeting and for
the useful briefings by Mr. Ibrahim Thiaw, Ambassador
Ion Jinga, Mr. Hafez Ghanem and Mr. Remy Rioux.

Peru remains concerned about the ongoing
deterioration in the level of security and the fragile
humanitarian situation in the Sahel, in particular
on the borders of Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger.
We deplore the spread of violent extremism and
transnational organized crime and condemn ongoing
terrorist attacks. We believe that it is imperative to
address the manifold and complex challenges that
lie in the root causes. Political crises, inequality, the
lack of access to basic services, the effects of climate
change, lack of opportunities, population growth and
the presence of criminal organizations have all created
a breeding ground for conflict in the region.

In that context, we wish to highlight the important
role played by the Joint Force of the Group of Five for
the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) in the fight against terrorism
and transnational organized crime, with the support
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali and other committed
actors, as well as the need for the international
community to provide predictable and sustainable
funding. In addition, and within the framework of a
multidimensional and integrated strategy, we believe
that it is essential to build and strengthen capacity
and the institutions required to defend human rights
and promote the rule of law and sustained economic
growth, which is all consistent with the sustaining peace
approach, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
and Agenda 2063 of the African Union. The various
efforts, initiatives and mechanisms deployed on the
ground must remain consistent at the political and
operational levels. To that end, we highlight the role
played by the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the
Sahel as the comprehensive framework for promoting
greater coherent and integrated international support to
meet national and regional needs and priorities, in line
with resolution 2391 (2017).

We also underscore the establishment of the United
Nations Support Plan for the Sahel as an instrument
fostering greater efficiency and results under the
Integrated Strategy. It is encouraging that the Plan is
designed on the basis of six priority areas that cover the
root causes of conflict in the region in greater detail.
We would like to stress the importance of promoting
gender equality and the empowerment of women and
of creating greater employment opportunities, in
particular for young people. Women and young people
are called upon to play a central role in building a better
future for their societies.

We welcome the efforts of the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel in implementing
the Strategy, in close coordination with the countries of
the Sahel, the African Union, the Economic Community
of West African States, the G-5 Sahel and financial
institutions. such as the World Bank and the African
Development Bank. We also highlight the role of the
Peacebuilding Fund in implementing projects aimed
at achieving sustainable peace in the Sahel within the
framework of the United Nations Integrated Strategy.

I would like to conclude by stressing the need for
the international community to continue to support the
Integrated Strategy and its Support Plan in order to
address the critical situation in the Sahel.

