I thank you, Mr. President, and good afternoon to everyone from London. Mr. President, you are a dear friend of the United Kingdom and I thank you for convening today's debate. It is indeed timely ahead of our adoption vote in the Council, and, indeed, in the General Assembly, of the critical twin resolutions on peacebuilding and sustaining peace - texts that Saint Vincent and the Grenadines has so expertly shepherded. I also, right from the beginning, wish to thank our three briefers, Ibrahim Mayaki, Sir Hilary Beckles and Mr. Munir Akram. And, of course, it is always very heartening to have the expert insights of the Deputy Secretary-General, my dear friend Amina Mohammed, who set an excellent scene with today's update. As the United Kingdom's Minister for the United Nations and the Commonwealth, I am deeply grateful for countries' close partnership with us, especially in these global institutions. While power politics, aggression and oppression remain very real factors behind many of today's conflicts, we are increasingly aware of new and emerging threats to our peace. One of the contemporary drivers of conflicts is exclusion - the exclusion of vulnerable communities, religious minorities and women from civil, political, economic and social processes and exclusion that leads directly to poverty, desperation, violence and extremism. And it takes no great leap to understand how the strains placed on societies grappling with public health emergencies or the impact of climate change can exacerbate these threats. Indeed, 2020 is certainly testament to that very fact. Those strains make violent conflict more likely and threaten to roll back hard-won development and peace gains - especially, but not only, in the poorest countries and those already affected by insecurity and conflict. The sustaining peace agenda has brought home to all of us the importance of understanding that peace, security and sustainable development are not independent; they are interconnected. Based on this agenda, we have begun to refine our collective approach, while building and sustaining peace. And, if I may, I would just like to make three very brief points. First, tackling the impact of climate change is critical alongside broader efforts to sustain peace. Secondly, good governance and inclusion are fundamental. And thirdly, we must coordinate our collective efforts to build effective partnerships in order to prevent conflict in the first place. On my first point, climate change creates structural conditions that multiply conflict risks in countries around the world. The erosion of fertile land is increasing food scarcity and intercommunal tensions. In small island developing States, hurricanes and rising sea levels threaten whole communities and the very existence of some countries. I saw this myself as Minister for the British Overseas Territories through our relationship with the Caribbean. We must address the man-made causes of climate change, and the upcoming twenty-sixth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change to be held in Glasgow in the United Kingdom next year, I believe, presents a great opportunity for all of us to agree collective and real concerted action. With regard to my second point, I have already referenced the problem of exclusion as a key driver of conflict. Even advanced economies are susceptible to shocks. Development and peace gains can be undone if large parts of the population are marginalized or if human rights are not respected, sustained or, indeed, strengthened. And let us be absolutely clear. Countries that protect the rights of the most vulnerable - the rights of the socially excluded, the rights of minority communities and the rights of women - are stronger. Those are the progressive nations. It is a sign of the strength and unity of a nation when all rights are equally respected. Strong and inclusive institutions, respect for human rights, access to services, healthy democracy, the rule of law and the empowerment of women are all essential to building resilience and building sustainable peace. With regard to my third point, better analysis provides for better national and international responses. Coordinated planning among national stakeholders, the United Nations and other international partners can focus preventive efforts and ensure they are appropriately resourced. This includes the United Nations and international financial institutions working in a more coordinated manner to support peacebuilding objectives. In New York, the Peacebuilding Commission has increasingly demonstrated its value as a forum for countries and organizations to come together in the pursuit of shared peace and development objectives. It is these approaches that are paramount to more effective conflict prevention and they must be owned by each and every one of us. The Council can, of course, play an important supporting role, but it also has a key obligation. Where threats to international peace and security emerge, we cannot simply sit back or stand back. The Charter of the United Nations, as we have already heard from other contributors, together with international treaties, places obligations on States to respect human rights and international humanitarian law. And it is the Security Council, which has an obligation to call out violations for what they are - threats to fundamental peace and security around the world. In conclusion, the need for international cooperation is arguably greater than it has been for a generation. And poignantly, the United Nations, in its seventy-fifth anniversary year, can celebrate the unique role it has played in the past in building, sustaining and strengthening peace. But, most important, we, the Security Council; we, the United Nations; we, who define the United Nations, must look forward to seeing what we can do collectively in building, sustaining and strengthening peace around the world.
