Mr. Caballeros (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
I am pleased that my presence in New York to attend
to matters unrelated to the Security Council has also
given me the opportunity to join you for the third
time since I became Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Guatemala five months ago. I also take this occasion
to thank the Secretary-General for the presentation of
his ninth report on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict (S/2012/376). I would also like to thank Valerie
Amos, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, for her
briefing today, as well as, Navi Pillay, the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, for her statement, as
read by Assistant Secretary-General Ivan Simonovic'. I
would also like to thank the Director for International
Law and Cooperation of the International Committee
of the Red Cross (ICRC), Mr. Philip Spoerri, for his
briefing. Their presence underscores the tremendous
importance of the strengthening of informal alliances
among the United Nations, the ICRC and the
community of non-governmental organizations that
deal with humanitarian issues and, more concretely, the
protection of civilians in conflict situations. The same
is, of course, true of more formal alliances in this area
among the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations.

The protection of human life in general and the
protection of civilian populations from the appalling
consequences of armed conflict are at the core of the
raison d'etre of the United Nations and were the main
sources of inspiration for the adoption of the Charter
following the horrors of the two world wars of the
twentieth century.

The majority of the reports that we have seen
regarding the protection ofcivilians in conflict situations
and its related aspects, including the protection of
women and children as well as humanitarian workers,
point to resolution 1265 (1999) as the starting point of
a new and prolific stage of the work of the Security
Council in that area.

However, it could be argued that the prevention of
conflicts before they erupt - which is the core mandate
of the Security Council - is the most effective manner
of protecting civilians from the scourge of war. Thus
the issue has underpinned the Council's activities from
the outset.

Having said that, it is undeniable that starting in 1999
a qualitative leap took place in the work of the Council
when it added to its generic mandate - to preserve peace
and security at the international level - tangible and
specific actions aimed at protecting innocent civilians
from armed conflicts when, unfortunately, such
conflicts occur. In the not-too-distant past, peacekeepers
participating in stabilization or peacekeeping missions,
unable to intervene, were forced to be the passive
witnesses of serious violations inflicted by the parties
to a conflict on civilian populations.

Today an increasing number of the Security Council
resolutions establishing such operations contain very
explicit mandates on the protection of civilians. Unlike
in the past, the conflicts in question tend to be of an
intra-State, not inter-State, nature. Unfortunately, the
main victims of those conflicts are always innocent
civilians: often boys and girls, and especially women,
who suffer the most grotesque abuses against their life,
dignity and fundamental human rights.

We find intolerable the images of the dead, the
wounded, the crippled, the mutilated, the tortured,
those who have been stripped of all their belongings
and the displaced. In many cases such people have been
the victims of high-powered explosives, mines or direct
attacks. But such barbaric acts occur every day in
different parts of the world. This is not only a disgrace
to humanity; it also reflects a serious failure on the part
of sovereign States that do not comply with one of their
primary obligations: to protect their citizens. Speaking
from my country's perspective, I would like to say that
such images offend us. That is why we have participated
actively through our troops in peacekeeping operations
that have strong mandates to protect civilians, such as
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Our Government aligns itself with the policies that
the Council and the Secretariat have been developing
over the years. Many of those policies are set out
in the presidential statement (S/PRST/2010/25), of
22 November 2010, especially in its detailed annex.
We also support the conclusions and recommendations
contained in the Secretary-General's ninth report
(S/2012/376), presented to us today. We appreciate
the updating and further development of the five core
challenges identified in previous reports.

Looking ahead, we will continue to participate in
the work of the informal Expert Group on the Protection
of Civilians. We are also pleased to see certain issues
broughtintothemainstreamofourdeliberations-issues
that had been insufficiently elaborated on in previous
reports, such as the limited access to humanitarian
assistance by people in need of food, water and medical
supplies; attacks on humanitarian personnel, health
centres and ambulances transporting the wounded to
such centres; the kidnapping of humanitarian workers;
the difficult situation faced by migrant workers and
their families in situations of conflict; and the theft
of equipment and provisions intended to be used for
humanitarian assistance.

Now that we have acceded to the Rome Statute, we
will insist even more forcefully on accountability for
Government officials and for non-State armed groups
who, in conflict situations, flagrantly violate the relevant
provisions of international law and humanitarian law
by deliberately attacking civilians.

Furthermore, we align ourselves with paragraph
21 of the Secretary-General's report, which basically
proposes that we not politicize the noble task of
humanitarian assistance. We have made no secret of our
support for the norm of the responsibility to protect,
which overlaps and has some aspects in common with
the issue of the protection of civilians. However, we
believe that the continuing debate surrounding the
so-called third pillar of the responsibility to protect
should not affect the integrity of the broader concept
of the protection of civilians, which is rooted in
humanitarian law and which is the subject of today's
meeting.
In conclusion, I should like to make two points.

First, we welcome the training modules for the
protection of civilians developed by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field
Support, and the fact that these are being offered to the
military and police personnel assigned to missions with
a mandate to protect civilians. That will allow us, inter
alia, to develop further the considerable achievements
made by the United Nations in the area of the protection
of civilians in conflict situations.

Secondly, we pay tribute to all those involved in
peacekeeping operations, past and present, who have
undoubtedly been directly responsible for saving
millions of lives. It is, however, regrettable that this
task is far from being completed.

