Mrs. Halchenko (Ukraine) (spoke in Spanish):
Ukraine reiterates its support to Colombia's efforts to
implement the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict
and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace. We congratulate
the Government of Colombia and the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia - Ejercito del Pueblo
for reaching, on 27 June, another historic milestone in
the peace process with the successful completion of the
laying down of individual weapons. At the same time
it is a source of pride for us that the United Nations,
through its Mission in Colombia, contributed to the
implementation of the agreements on the laying down
of weapons and the ceasefire. We would like the United
Nations to have more of this kind of achievement.
That is why we believe that the United Nations should
carefully study the lessons of Colombia so as to apply
its best practices in other parts of the world.

Effective reintegration is the key to lasting peace.
During its visit to Colombia in May, the Security
Council clearly demonstrated that in order to guarantee
a stable and lasting peace, it is essential to ensure
reintegration and reconciliation, with special attention
to the needs of the most affected and vulnerable groups.
In that context, we commend today's historic adopt of
resolution 2366 (2017), establishing the second United
Nations mission in Colombia. At the same time, we
express our appreciation and gratitude to the British
delegation for its leadership and intense work, which has
culminated in the successful adoption of the document.

The Security Council should continue to play a
proactive role in supporting the parties on their path
towards the implementation of the Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace. Today's decision will contribute to strengthening
the United Nations role in peacebuilding in post-
conflict situations, and provide the necessary support
to strengthen peace, human rights and development for
the benefit of all Colombian citizens.

