I would like at the outset to thank you, Mr. President, for the great honour afforded me of addressing the Security Council on the issue of advancing political solutions through United Nations policing. The twenty-first century has been marked by the resurgence and multiplication of increasingly complex conflicts in the world, particularly in the region where I am working. That is indeed the case in Mali, which is why the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) was set up to work for the restoration of peace and stability. It is therefore timely to ask about the contribution of each of its three components - civilian, military and police - to achieving the strategic objectives defined in resolution 2531 (2020). In that regard, today's theme is of particular importance, as it will allow me to underscore the contribution of the police component, as indicated in resolution 2382 (2017), which, while emphasizing the need to give priority to political solutions to resolve conflicts, highlighted the role that United Nations police components can play in facilitating the transition from peacekeeping to development and peacebuilding and, while recognizing that the strengthening of United Nations police action can contribute to the success of peacekeeping mission exit strategies, resolved, in paragraph 2, "to include ... policing as an integral part of the mandates and decision-making structures of United Nations peacekeeping operations and special political missions". This recognition of the central and cross-cutting role of police is reinforced by the Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations, which emphasizes the primacy of politics in conflict resolution and the supporting role that peacekeeping operations play in that regard. United Nations police (UNPOL), a continuum force par excellence, operates at all levels of decision-making across the entire spectrum of the mandate, from the tactical to the political-strategic and operational levels. Thus, within MINUSMA, the police component participates in the process of analysing the security context, planning within an integrated strategic framework and decision-making in the Mission's governing bodies, as well as in the statutory and ad hoc thematic groups. Cooperation with host country partners is essential. Cooperation instruments, such as the memoranda signed with the Government, the sectoral strategic plans signed with the heads of each of the security services and the periodic meetings held with those partners make it possible to provide technical assistance and create the opportunities needed to take the most appropriate decisions. In addition, cooperation with other technical partners provides another framework for harmonizing the conditions for access to aid to the defence and security forces. Police contribute to the promotion of peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development through advocacy for inclusive recruitment into the security forces, with the introduction of a quota system by region, which enables better representation of the population, including women. As part of the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation on Mali, in partnership with the United Nations Development Programme and the Malian Security Sector Reform Commission, we are working on the implementation of community policing and the operationalization of the Security Advisory Committees, which serve as a framework for consultation among representatives of the State, the security services and the local population with a view to ensuring the inclusive management and proper conduct of any local crime prevention and security strategy. In order to provide access to justice for all in the framework of a common approach to the rule of law, UNPOL contributes to capacity-building in the penal system. Although there is still room for improvement, the important and positive actions taken by MINUSMA through its various components, including UNPOL, are a source of hope. The coronavirus disease pandemic has had a strong impact on the implementation of our mandate. That situation has been further exacerbated by the political crisis, which has led to the implementation of a political transition. Regarding the police, after explaining the importance of UNPOL's mandates, resolution 2382 (2017) stresses the need to provide sufficient resources to achieve the defined objectives. However, it is clear that human, logistical and financial resources are inadequate to successfully carry out our mandates. With regard to the authorities of the host country, special emphasis must be placed on the governance of rule-of-law institutions. The security forces must enable the conditions and environment conducive to the redeployment of State representatives, the restoration of State authority and the fight against impunity, all of which should contribute to social and economic development. Security, peace and stability depend on it.
