Mr. Park (Republic of Korea): The humanitarian
plight of the Iraqi people has been a source of continuing
concern to us. We are especially concerned by the report of
the Secretary-General that serious nutritional and health
problems, in particular for vulnerable groups, persist in
Iraq, despite the efforts made by the international
community under resolutions 986 (1995) and 1111 (1997).
My delegation firmly believes that the oil-for-food
programme envisaged in these resolutions should continue
in an uninterrupted and smooth manner.

It is for this reason that we support the Secretary-
General's recommendation to extend once again the
relevant provisions of resolution 986 (1995) for another six
months. We also take note of his suggestions to re-examine
the adequacy of the revenues envisaged by resolutions 986
(1995) and 1111 (1997) in due course, and look forward to
his supplementary report in this regard.

Indeed, the oil-for-food programme is unprecedented
and unique in its nature. Its implementation process is
bound to be complex, given the magnitude of all the
attendant political, commercial and humanitarian
dimensions. Since the beginning of the programme a year
ago, enormous efforts have been made by the international
community to set up the modalities for its effective
implementation and refine them on an ongoing basis. In this
regard, we acknowledge with appreciation the efforts made
by the Secretary-General as well as the sanctions
Committee thus far to improve the efficiency and
effectiveness of the overall implementation process of the
programme.

The Secretary-General has taken a number of
measures to address problems identified through the
workings of the three tiers of United Nations observation.
In particular, we welcome the Secretary-General's recent
initiative to establish the Office of the Iraq Programme
and entrust it with the task of better coordinating and
facilitating overall aspects of the implementation of the
programme. The Office will play a catalytic role in taking
stock of the experiences gained through phases I and II
and in moving the programme ahead. We have full
confidence in the leadership of the Secretary-General to
guide the implementation of the oil-for-food programme
towards greater effectiveness, equitability and adequacy.

The sanctions Committee on Iraq also continues to
define its working methods and procedures and we expect
it to conduct a thorough review of all aspects of its work.
It is our sincere hope that through these continuing
efforts, the delivery of humanitarian supplies to the
civilian population in Iraq will be expedited in the coming
months, so that we can see the humanitarian purpose of
the oil-for-food programme fulfilled to the fullest possible
extent.

My delegation finds that the draft resolution before
us addresses the aforementioned points well and in a
comprehensive and balanced manner, and therefore we
will vote in favour of it.

