Mr. Jinga (Romania) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the French presidency
of the Security Council for having convened today's
high-level open debate on the protection of civilians
in the context of peacekeeping operations. That is
an extremely important topic that touches upon the
responsibility of the United Nations in international
security. Today, the protection of civilians is a major
challenge because 93 per cent of victims of armed
conflicts are civilians. That is a horrific figure. The
need to find the best ways to ensure such protection
has been addressed in several debates and backed by a
series of reforms launched in 2015.

Romania associates itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
I would, however, like to make some remarks in my
national capacity.

Given the many ongoing conflicts in the world, we
must reiterate that the responsibility to protect civilians
in conflict situations devolves upon States. States
must prosecute the perpetrators or those responsible
for violations of international norms, in particular
international humanitarian law. In situations where
States do not have the will or capacity to fulfil their
responsibilities, the international community is called
upon to intervene. That is why Romania will join the
French-Mexican initiative for limiting the use of the
veto by the five permanent members of the Security
Council in cases involving mass atrocities. We
recently also supported the code of conduct regarding
Security Council action against genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes, proposed by the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency Group.

Peacekeeping missions must play a key role through
the support they provide to host States in carrying
out the responsibility to protect. In that regard, it is
absolutely key that United Nations personnel be trained
and equipped to interact with local communities
and civil-society organizations. Nothing is more
detrimental to the legitimacy of peacekeeping missions
and the re-establishment of confidence among local
populations than Blue Helmets who abuse those whom
they should protect.

We think that mixed teams can be quite useful.
Women in peacekeeping operations can facilitate
contact with women and with the most vulnerable
members of local communities. Training courses
should be well grounded in respect for human rights.
There should be complementarity at the national and
international levels with a View to providing personnel
in peacekeeping operations with the necessary tools
to detect early-warning indicators in cases involving
mass atrocities. In that regard, the Secretary-General's
Human Rights Up Front initiative is already part and
parcel of the Organization's efforts along those lines.

Romanians who participate in missions under
the United Nations flag are given very strict training
prior to deployment, including with regard to respect
for civil and human rights, with particular attention to
the protection of women and children. Over the past
25 years, more than 10,000 Romanian Blue Helmets
have contributed to peace and security everywhere
in the world and have never been implicated in
incidents reflecting non-respect for the local civilian
populations, because we apply a zero-tolerance policy
for all violations.

The deliberate targeting of civilian schools and
hospitals is increasingly common in conflicts. That
must cease immediately. Humanitarian access remains
a major challenge in many armed conflicts. The recently
held first World Humanitarian Summit in Istanbul was
an opportunity to reaffirm our support for the principles
of independence, neutrality and the impartiality of
humanitarian action. Romania supported the statement
proposed by the United States of America on the
protection of civilians, which reaffirms the importance
of upholding international humanitarian law.

At the same time, conflict prevention is crucial. It
requires additional efforts to reach negotiated political
solutions in order to ensure the implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1) and deal with the root causes
of conflict. That also requires the strengthening of the
preventive role of justice and early-warning mechanisms.

Romania has always felt that the effective
protection of civilians in armed conflicts was
strengthened through cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations. Last month, the open
debate of the Security Council on that topic showed
the importance of enhanced cooperation on the part
of the United Nations with the African Union (see S/PV.7694). This past Monday the Council focused on
cooperation with the European Union (see S/PV.7705).
Both organizations are strategic partners of the United
Nations in peacekeeping efforts.

In conclusion, the protection of civilians in
peacekeeping operations is extremely important for
the reputation and credibility of the United Nations.
Upholding the Kigali Principles on the Protection of
Civilians is essential. They should form the core of
all peacekeeping mandates. Romania has endorsed the
Kigali Principles, and that decision bears witness to the
commitment of my country to global efforts to bring
peace and security to countries affected by conflicts,
while recognizing the primordial importance of the
human dimension of protection.

