Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My delegation thanks Mr. Jeremiah Mamabolo,
Joint Special Representative for Darfur and Head of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID) for his excellent briefing on the
implementation of UNAMID's mandate. It also thanks
Ambassador Joanna Wronecka, in her capacity as Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan, for her briefing on
the work of the Committee.

My statement will centre on the following issues:
developments in the security, political and humanitarian
situation in Darfur and the implementation of
UNAMID's mandate.

Concerning the security situation, Cote d'Ivoire
commends the progress made in terms of security and
notes with satisfaction the commitment ofthe Sudanese
Government to working towards establishing a stable
and secure environment for the people of Darfur. Cote
d'Ivoire welcomes the fact that the weapons-collection
campaign initiated by the Government has contributed
to a decrease in crime and intercommunal conflicts.
My country therefore urges the Government to pursue
that initiative by encouraging inclusiveness and respect
for human rights and prior commitments aimed at
ensuring stability in the Kalma internally displaced
persons camp. The Ivorian delegation welcomes the
extension of the ceasefire effected and agreed upon by
the Sudanese Government and rebel groups, and calls
on the latter to show a greater willingness to reach a
permanent ceasefire through dialogue.

Concerning the political context, Cote d'Ivoire is
concerned about the stalemate in the implementation
of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. My
country encourages stakeholders to fully implement

the terms of the agreement with a View to finding a
lasting solution to the root causes of the conflict in the
interest of the Sudanese people. While we welcome
the initiatives taken by the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel for the Sudan and South Sudan in
resuming the national dialogue and implementing the
Doha agreement, Cote d'Ivoire calls on non-signatory
armed groups to prioritize the interests of the people
of Darfur and join the agreement. Similarly, owing to
the importance of land management in the Sudanese
conflict, Cote d'Ivoire encourages the Government of
the Sudan to implement the "Right to land restitution
policy" so as to provide a solution to one of the root
causes of the conflict as quickly as possible.

With regard to the humanitarian situation, my
country welcomes the improvement of humanitarian
access in Darfur, including in Jebel Marra. It is
nevertheless concerned about the recent displacement
of persons during the reporting period, as registered
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/154),
as well as the heightened risk of food insecurity.
My delegation therefore calls on the international
community to provide assistance to those people in
need, and urges the Sudanese authorities to continue to
work to establish an environment that is conducive to
the return of people to their areas of origin. Likewise,
Cote d'Ivoire encourages UNAMID to maintain its
assistance in strengthening the capacity ofjudicial and
human rights institutions so as to address allegations of
human rights violations more effectively.

Concerning UNAMID, my country commends
its efforts to stabilize Darfur and congratulates the
Mission on the scheduled launch of phase two of the
reconfiguration pursuant to resolution 2363 (2017).
Accordingly, Cote d'Ivoire welcomes improved
cooperation between the Sudanese Government
and UNAMID. The opening of the G010 team site
demonstrates the Government's willingness to assist the
Mission in that important process towards establishing
lasting peace in Darfur. C6te d'Ivoire therefore calls
on the Sudanese authorities to pursue their work and
ensure that the terms of the status of forces agreement
are respected so as to enable UNAMID to carry out its
mandate without hindrance.

In conclusion, my country congratulates
Ambassador Joanna Wronecka for the work she has done
in her capacity as Chair of the 1591 Sudan sanctions
committee, and reaffirms its support for her upcoming
visit to the region. It also congratulates the Sudanese
Government on its work in improving the security and
humanitarian situation in Darfur.

