Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I thank
President Meron and Prosecutor Brammertz for their
letters (see S/2018/347 and S/2018/47l) and briefings.

Six months after the closure of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and more than two
years after the closure of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals has demonstrated
that it is fully independent and capable of effectively
implementing the mandate entrusted to it by the
Security Council in resolution 1966 (2010).

France welcomes the respect of the timetable for
legal proceedings, with its April 2018 decision on
the Seselj case and an expected appeal judgement in
the KaradZic' case in December 2018, well ahead of
schedule. France thanks the staff for their work and
reaffirms the temporary nature of the mechanism,
which must innovate, simplify and adapt its procedures
and working methods, giving due consideration to the
diversity of legal systems, and complete all the trials in
progress within the set time limits.

France also welcomes the transfer to Senegal
and Benin of persons convicted by the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda to serve their sentences
there. We recognize the importance of a commitment
by all Member States to assisting the Mechanism
in the implementation of its mandate, in particular
with regard to the enforcement of sentences. It is a
decisive contribution to the work of justice that we are
pursuing, which must be welcomed and encouraged.
France also recalls that States are required to cooperate
with the Mechanism, in particular in the pursuit and
apprehension of the eight fugitives indicted by the
ICTR, for which the Mechanism is responsible. Their
crimes cannot go unpunished.

During the period under review, the United Nations
Office of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS) assessed
the working methods of the Mechanism and issued its
report on 8 March. In that regard, France welcomes
the Mechanism's cooperation and the submission of
the progress report (see S/2018/471) on its work, in
accordance with presidential statement S/PRST/2018/6,
of 19 March.

We call on the Mechanism to implement the
recommendations of the Office of Internal Oversight
Services in order to continue to meet the austerity and
efficiency requirements, as identified by OIOS in its
report. In that regard, we welcome the adoption of a code
of conduct and a disciplinary mechanism for judges.

Our semi-annual debate is an opportunity to
recall the major work of the international community
in the service of the fight against impunity and
reconciliation, and the responsibility incumbent on the
States concerned to ensure that this work is ongoing
and on people's minds by continuing their tireless
efforts to prosecute the perpetrators of crimes within
their jurisdiction. Those are the conditions for genuine
national and regional reconciliation.

France welcomes the assistance provided by
the Mechanism to national courts responsible for
prosecuting the perpetrators of international crimes
committed in former Yugoslavia and Rwanda. On the
other hand, the feeble cooperation among the Balkan
States in the prosecution of middle-level criminals,
noted by Prosecutor Brammertz, is worrying. For
France and the European Union, cooperation with the
Mechanism and regional cooperation remain a priority.
I would also like to echo the concern expressed by
Prosecutor Brammertz regarding certain persons,
convicted by international criminal tribunals, denying
their crimes and their responsibility as soon as they
are released.

We wish to reaffirm here that judicial decisions
on war crimes, genocide crimes and crimes against
humanity committed in the former Yugoslavia and
Rwanda are based on facts and responsibilities
rigorously established through fair trials. Those
judicial decisions, like all judicial decisions, as well
as the duty to respect victims, are binding on all. We
encourage the Mechanism to continue its discussions
on the introduction of early release conditions.
In conclusion, I would like to thank the
Ambassador of Peru, Chair of the Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals, his entire team,
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, the Office of Legal Affairs and the Office
of Internal Oversight Services for their efforts to
implement resolution 1966 (2010).

The resolution that the Security Council will adopt
by the end of this month should allow this work, which
is obviously not yet complete, to continue. More than
ever, the fight against impunity and for an independent
and impartial judiciary must be at the heart of the
Council's action, given that justice is a prerequisite for
lasting peace and security.

