Mr. Corr (Ireland): At this critical juncture in the
Middle East peace process, when trust has broken
down, when a corrosive cycle of violence in the region
at times appears to be almost out of control, when a
political settlement seems ever more elusive, it is more
than ever necessary for the international community to
recall to the parties the commitments they made at the
outset of the peace process. My delegation therefore
welcomes this Council debate today.

My delegation fully supports the comments made
by the representative of Belgium in its capacity in the
presidency of the European Union.

Ireland considers there is a clear route back to the
peace process through the Tenet plan and the full
implementation of the recommendations of the
Mitchell report. We urge the parties to bring an end to
all acts of violence and provocation and to return as
quickly as possible to the path of negotiations based on
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973) and the principle of land for peace.

My authorities have given very careful
consideration to the draft resolution before us. We
welcome the amendments that the sponsors have made
to the text.

The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ireland, Mr.
Brian Cowen, has condemned in the strongest terms the
recent appalling acts of terrorism carried out against
innocent Israeli civilians, as well as acts of reprisal that
have caused the deaths of many innocent Palestinian
civilians. Ireland considers that the terrorist networks
within Hamas and Islamic Jihad must be dismantled.

My delegation recognizes that the current
impasse has deep roots, including not only
reprehensible acts of terrorism, but at the same time
excessive use of force, extrajudicial killings and
attacks by Israel on the institutions of the Palestinian
Authority, its interlocutor in the peace process. There
has also been the corrosive effect of Israeli settlements
on the peace process, carried out under successive
Israeli Governments.

The draft resolution before us demands an
immediate cessation of all acts of violence, provocation
and destruction. It specifically condemns all acts of
terror, in particular those targeting civilians. The draft
resolution also calls for the immediate implementation
of the recommendations of the Mitchell report and for a
resumption of negotiations. It encourages all concerned
to establish a monitoring mechanism to help the parties
implement the Mitchell recommendations. Ireland has
long believed that such a mechanism, under terms
agreed by both sides, would be helpful in the
restoration of confidence necessary for a smooth
resumption of negotiations.

We would have wished it to be possible for the
Council to speak with one voice on the issues before us
today. On balance, however, Ireland believes that the
draft resolution before us is deserving of support as an
expression of the Council's deep concern at the grave
situation that now exists in the region. For this reason
we intend to vote for the draft resolution.
