Mr. Araghchi (Islamic Republic of Iran): Madam
President, I wish to begin by congratulating you on
your assumption of the Council presidency for the
month of June. I congratulate Ambassador Ikouebe of
the Congo and the Congolese delegation for their able
stewardship of the Council in May. I also thank you,
Madam President, for convening this open meeting on
an issue which truly threatens international peace and
security.
Once more, the international community is
witnessing yet another military invasion by the Zionist
army against the innocent Palestinian people, which
goes on in flagrant defiance of the most basic
principles of international law and the fundamental
provisions of the United Nations Charter.

Warplanes, tanks and thousands of troops,
invading the Gaza Strip, have targeted civilians and
purely civilian infrastructures, destroying three main
bridges, disabling the only power plant, making main
roads impassable and bombarding the Strip with heavy
artillery fire and fire from the air. The aggressors are
thus depriving the civilians of basic necessities and, by
severely damaging the water supply system, raising the
spectre of epidemics and health disasters.

With the Palestinian economy already
strangulated under an unjust embargo since January
and the Palestinians remaining under siege even after
the occupiers' withdrawal from Gaza, the new
aggression threatens to inflict further enormous
suffering on civilians and exacerbates the situation
within the Palestinian territory and in the region.

Given the situation in the occupied territory, the
excuse invoked by the invaders to justify the enormous
suffering that is being inflicted upon Palestinian
civilians is devoid of any ground and plausibility.
Nothing could justify the acts perpetrated by the
invading army, which run grossly counter to the basic
tenets of international law. Likewise, it should not be
overlooked that thousands of Palestinians, including
many women and children, are unjustifiably suffering
in the occupiers' jails for extended periods of time.

There should be no doubt that the new round of
aggression pursues more important political and
strategic objectives, which include the undermining of
the democratically elected Palestinian Government.
The abduction and illegal detention of dozens of
Palestinian cabinet ministers and members of the
Palestinian parliament who took office as a result of a
free and fair election clearly attests to this fact. It is
ironic that those who claim to be seeking to promote
democracy in the region are now looking approvingly
upon this ongoing repression.

It is depressing that the occupying forces and the
United States as their main supporter have
continuously failed to learn from their historic blunder.
After more than fifty years they still hope to force the
Palestinian people into submission by employing
means such as those being currently resorted to in the
occupied territory. It is very unfortunate that they fail
to understand that only the restoration of justice could
remedy the grievances and lead to the reinstatement of
peace and normalcy in the region. Neither, apparently,
do they understand that the oppression they impose
upon a whole nation is one of the root causes of many
global problems with which the international
community is grappling.

We are also concerned over the implications of
the new aggression for the whole region. Violating
Syria's airspace and threatens to hit targets inside that
country are equally disturbing. The new aggressive
posture stands to create more instability and tension
and threatens to further destabilize the situation in the
region. Thus the crisis, if unchecked, may tip towards
escalation and engulf the whole region.

While strongly condemning this latest Zionist
criminal act, we believe that aggression that targets
civilians and civilian infrastructures is both an act of
collective punishment and war crimes in defiance of
international humanitarian law. Thus it is imperative
that the international community get involved in an
effective manner and prevent the continuation of those
terrorist designs against the Palestinians.

The impunity with which the Zionists have been
allowed to carry out their crimes has undoubtedly
emboldened them to continue on the same path.
Therefore it is high time for the international
community to take effective measures to protect and
enforce the most basic rights of the Palestinian people
and to help put an end to the vicious cycle of violence
brought about by the persistent illegal occupation of
Palestinian territory. We believe that an end to the
occupation, the formation of a Palestinian State with
Al-Quds al-Sharif as its capital and the return of all
Palestinian refugees to their homeland is the only
solution to the enduring Palestinian crisis.

This Council has an important role to play in this
regard and should act with a View to preventing the
occupying regime from continuing to flout the will of
the international community, incorporated in numerous
resolutions of the United Nations, the Non-Aligned
Movement and the Organization of Islamic
Conference. As the ongoing aggression seriously
threatens international peace and security, the Security
Council has an enormous responsibility under the
United Nations Charter to take necessary and prompt
steps with a view to putting an end to the aggression.

It is very unfortunate - in fact, distressing -
that the United States has not been able to fulfil its
responsibility and obligations in this regard,
particularly as a permanent member of the Security
Council. The United States, by use of its veto right, has
continuously prevented this Council from acting
effectively to protect the Palestinian people.

We hope that, recognizing the need to take
decisive action in the face of this new escalation in the
region, all members of the Council will live up to their
responsibilities in properly addressing the grave
situation created in the wake of the latest aggression.

