Ms. Bensouda: I am honoured to present the fourth
briefing on the activities of the Office of the Prosecutor
in furtherance of resolution 1970 (2011). As this is
my first opportunity to address the Security Council,
allow me to express my gratitude for the Council's
swift, unanimous action in referring the situation in
Libya to the Office of the Prosecutor so as to ensure
accountability for the most serious crimes. Last
month's dialogue session, held under the Guatemalan
presidency, on the relationship between the Council
and the Court is yet another example of the Council's
commitment to fostering understanding and enhancing
relations between the two institutions. I stand ready
to cooperatively work with the Council in our joint
endeavours to promote international criminal justice
and end impunity, in furtherance of our mutual quest
for lasting peace.

The situation in Libya remains of serious concern
to me and to my Office. The Council will recall that
following its referral, and after the Office investigated
and presented its evidence to the Chamber, on
27 June 2011, the Judges issued three arrest warrants for
Muammar Al-Qadhafi, Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and
Abdullah Al-Senussi. Libyan members of the National
Transitional Council informed the Office in April that
the warrants had played a crucial role in delegitimizing
Al-Qadhafi, Saif Al-Islam and Al-Senussi, at a time
when the opposition was struggling to draw attention
to the commission of serious crimes in Libya. N0
investigations of these crimes could conceivably
have been undertaken by the Al-Qadhafi regime, and
International Criminal Court (ICC) intervention was, at
that time, the only way to establish justice for victims
of the Gaddafi regime's crimes.

A lot has happened since the Council referred the
situation to the ICC. Both Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi
and Abdullah Al-Senussi have been arrested and are
in detention. The Libyan authorities have challenged
the admissibility of the case against Saif Al-Qadhafi
and have indicated their intent also to Challenge
the admissibility of the case against Al-Senussi in
the near future. On 9 and 10 October, the judges of
Pre-Trial Chamber I convened a hearing to receive oral
submissions on the Government of Libya's admissibility
challenge in relation to the case against Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi. The Court heard from the Prosecution, the
Defence and legal representatives, as well as the Libyan
authorities, who asserted that they were investigating
the same conduct as that investigated by my Office and
that is now before the International Criminal Court.
The Pre-Trial Chamber will decide in due course on
the merits of the admissibility challenge as to whether
the case should be heard before the International
Criminal Court or in Libya. My Office appreciates the
commitment of the Libyan authorities to respect the
judicial process and will continue to engage with them
within the limits prescribed by the Rome Statute.

It is worth recalling and emphasizing that the
Rome Statute gives national institutions the primary
responsibility to investigate and to prosecute such
crimes, with the ICC intervening only if they are
inactive or unwilling or unable to genuinely do so.
Nonetheless, as the Appeals Chamber has previously
upheld, a State challenging admissibility must provide
the Court with evidence of a sufficient degree of
specificity and probative value that demonstrates that
it is indeed investigating a case.

Pursuant to its stated policy, my Office promotes
and encourages genuine national proceedings to combat
impunity for the most serious crimes of international
concern. We await the Court's ruling on Libya's
challenge. Should it ultimately succeed, my Office
will monitor the proceedings and will cooperate with
Libya, to the extent that my mandate permits, in order
to ensure that they remain genuine. If, on the other
hand, the Court rules that the case should be heard
before the ICC, I will count on Libya's full support and
cooperation to ensure that the proceedings of the Court
are both successful and seen to be successful by the
Libyan public, who are the first and most important
audience for any such proceedings at the ICC.

Let me also emphasize the ever-present need for
complementary and mutually supportive approaches to
addressing accountability generally, involving the full
range of transitional justice mechanisms. In that regard,
I encourage international support and assistance to
enhance Libya's capacity to deal with past crimes and
to promote the rule of law.

I wish to thank the Government of Libya for its
commitment to working with the ICC and for its active
engagement in the judicial process. I encourage the
Government to redouble those efforts in the interests of
justice. My Office appreciates the challenges inherent
in the historic political transition under way in Libya.
I believe that all sides would agree that justice must
remain a key element of that transition.

Looking beyond the cases currently before the
Court, there remains much that my Office and the
Government of Libya can do together to make justice
a reality for Libya's victims. I call on the international
community, in particular the Council, to intensify its
efforts to assist the Government of Libya in any way
that it can in order to combat impunity and to reinforce
a culture of the rule of law. I believe that, by working
together, we can help to address the threats to Libya's
security, both from within and from outside, that have
been created by past and ongoing criminality. I also
believe that we can show the Libyan people that the
world is committed to assisting them in their efforts to
secure justice and lasting peace.

My Office understands that the Government of
Libya has committed to a comprehensive strategy
to address all crimes and to end impunity in Libya.
I encourage the Government of Libya to make that
strategy public and to work with key partners to receive
feedback on the strategy and to seek out the views and
the concerns of victims in Libya. The early finalization
of the strategy will be yet another milestone on Libya's
path to democracy and the rule of law.

My Office takes note of Law 38, which grants
amnesty at the national level for acts made necessary
by the 17 February revolution, as well as Law 35,
which purportedly ensures that any act found to be in
contravention of international law and human rights
covenants will not be exempt. I encourage the new
Libyan Government, scheduled to be sworn in in the
coming days, to ensure that there is no amnesty for
international crimes and no impunity for crimes,
regardless of the perpetrator or the victim.

My Office continues to collect evidence in relation
to a possible second case in Libya. No decision has
yet been taken as to the focus of that second case.
We continue to collect information on allegations of
rape and sexual violence, which targeted both men
and women; allegations against other members of the
Al-Qadhafi Government for crimes committed during
the events of 2011; and allegations of crimes committed
by rebels or revolutionary forces, including against the
residents of Tawergha, individuals hors de combat and
detainees. I will take a decision on the direction of a
possible second case in the near future.

My Office also continues to assess the security
situation in terms of its potential impact on the Office's
ongoing investigations. It appreciates the Government
of Libya's commitment to ensuring the Office's security
while it operates on the territory of Libya.

Given its limited resources and ever-increasing
workload, my Office can only do so much to help
Libya to move forward. The fate of the Libyan people
is in their hands. I look forward to continuing dialogue
with the Libyan Government and other key partners to
ensure transparency in this essential and ongoing legal
process.

