Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): We welcome the efforts made to reform
the Organization in general, and peacekeeping
in particular. I thank Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his
informative remarks on the impressive steps taken over
the past several months.

The Action for Peacekeeping initiative is now the
collective road map for all of us as contributors of
uniformed personnel, the Secretariat, Security Council
members and host countries, so that together we can
pool our efforts in the coming years. We welcome
the fact that the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations has chosen Action for Peacekeeping as the
frame of reference for its report.

We now have the road map; it is now a question of
implementing it. We welcome the Member State fact-
finding exercise currently under way, marking the first
anniversary of the Declaration of Shared Commitments
on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations. Every
Member State, through concrete actions, brings its
particular experience and expertise to peacekeeping.
Sharing ideas and best practices helps and inspires
us all.

Today I will focus on three aspects of the Action
for Peacekeeping initiative: first, our collective
responsibility to ensure that mandates are clear,
benchmarked and adequately financed; secondly,
efforts in the area of performance; and, thirdly and
finally, the added value of partnerships.

This Security Council plays a central role in
defining the mandates of peace operations, be they
peacekeeping operations or special political missions.
Such mandates must be clear, comprehensible and
benchmarked. Indeed, mandates must be understandable
and unequivocal so as to ensure that those entrusted
with their implementation fully comprehend them. Our
collective efforts in this regard must continue when we
consider forthcoming mandate renewals.

These mandates must also be achievable, meaning
that each mission must be allocated resources
commensurate with the scope of its mandate. It falls to
each mission to use the necessary leeway in deploying
its resources so as to best deliver on its mandate.

Turning to my second point - working together to
ensure efficient and effective operations - performance
depends heavily on the way missions work and,
in particular, on the integration of their various
components. We must make every effort to structurally
strengthen the capacity for integrated planning and
coordination within missions and with country teams.

We also welcome the work under way by the
Departments of Peace Operations and of Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs on the issue of stabilization
and on how to tailor peace operations to the context
of complex conflicts characterized by the presence of
armed groups using terrorist tactics. As a contributor
of uniformed personnel to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, we face this reality on a daily basis. The tools
under development by the Secretariat - tools that are
not only reactive but also preventative - will certainly
be very useful.

Finally, I turn to my third point: partnerships. The
European Union and the United Nations have developed
a strong and targeted partnership that operates on the
ground, from the Central African Republic to Mali. In
many situations, European Union activities complement
those mandated by the Security Council, for example in
supporting security-sector reform.

The partnership between the United Nations and
the African Union is also vital. Indeed, that is why
we will be present in Addis Ababa next month. Talks
are under way on the question of United Nations
funding for African Union missions. We welcome the
path being forged by the African Union, particularly
through the revitalization of the Peace Fund aimed at
providing predictable and sustainable funding for peace
initiatives on the continent. The European Union has
long supported the strengthening of the African Union
Peace and Security Architecture. African operations
that are complementary to United Nations operations
must be able to benefit from sound financing, with full
respect for human rights and international humanitarian
law, as well as the budgetary rules of the Organization.
1 am confident that we will find common ground in
this regard.

