Mr. Kolby (Norway): Norway would like to join
others in welcoming our two important guests, Mr.
Xanana Gusmao and Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta, to the
Council. In Norway, both at the political level and
within civil society, we have, for an extended period of
time, attached great importance to East Timor. It was
therefore gratifying to hear their presentations of the
situation and of the challenges ahead of us.

We believe that Timor has been going through a
difficult period of transition since the 1999 referendum.
Through the common efforts of the East Timorese
people, its leadership and the United Nations, much has
been achieved in a short period of time. However, we
all realize that some of the main challenges still lie
ahead. The months leading up to the election on 30
August, as well as the immediate post-election period,
will be of crucial importance for the future of East
Timor. Norway would therefore like to underline the
need for a sustained commitment on the part of the
Unite Nations at this very critical juncture.

We take this opportunity once again to stress the
importance of the August elections being free and fair
and of all East Timorese being able to exercise their
right to vote. The fact that a large number of the
inhabitants have already been registered is
encouraging. In that regard, we also welcome the
initiative by the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) to conduct a
comprehensive voter education programme.

We are all aware of the crucial importance of the
safe return of the refugees from West Timor prior to the
completion of voter registration. We would therefore
like to encourage the Indonesian Government to carry
out the promised refugee-registration exercise at the
beginning of June this year, that being an important
precondition for voluntary repatriation.

However, the security situation in the border
areas and in the refugee camps in West Timor
continues to be a matter of grave concern. Moreover,
there is a clear linkage between the presence of militia
groups in and around the camps and the rather slow
process of obtaining a durable solution to the problem
of refugees. Norway therefore welcomes the initiative
by the Office of the United Nations Security
Coordinator to undertake an inter-agency security
assessment mission to West Timor this month. This
will hopefully be an important first step towards
facilitating a greater degree of safe return for refugees.
As far as security in the border areas is concerned, we
would also once again urge the Indonesian Government
to take the necessary steps to fulfil Security Council
resolution 1319 (2000).

Norway is concerned by recent reports of
politically motivated violence. We would like to take
this opportunity to urge the East Timorese leadership
and UNTAET to further increase their efforts to avoid
increased violence in the period leading up to the
August elections. As my delegation has stated
repeatedly, we attach great importance to the
instigation of criminal proceedings against persons
who are responsible for serious crimes. Preventing an
atmosphere of impunity, objectively ascertaining the
truth and enhancing deterrence are, in our View, key
premises for long-term peace and reconciliation.

Norway is concerned about the limitation of the
temporal jurisdiction of the recently adopted
Indonesian ad hoc tribunal for serious crimes
committed in East Timor. We are unable to see any
valid justification for that limitation of jurisdiction,
which will leave the tribunal without authority to try
those responsible for the massacres in Liquica and Suai
and several other serious crimes. However, we
understand that the tribunal's jurisdiction might be
expanded to also cover the pre-ballot incidents.

The limitation of the tribunal's jurisdiction,
combined with the mild punishment imposed on the
offenders in the Atambua case, gives rise to some
doubt as to the determination to bring to justice those
who have committed serious international crimes.
However, we are pleased to learn that the Indonesian
Attorney General will launch an appeal against the
judgements in the Atambua case. We are equally
pleased to note that the investigations carried out by
UNTAET in East Timor are moving forward, most
recently with the indictment filed on 2 May against two
militia members charged with committing crimes
against humanity in September 1999.

Norway underlines the importance of continued
economic support for UNTAET, the World Bank and
the humanitarian and development agencies working in
East Timor. However, we believe that the development
agencies must make even greater efforts to channel
investment to rural areas in order to ensure
development in those areas.

Once independent, East Timor will clearly be in
need of further assistance, in terms of both financial
and technical support and a continued United Nations
presence. It is our View that the composition of a future
United Nations presence must be based upon a
thorough and in-depth assessment of the situation on
the ground. In particular, we believe that the future
military and police presence should clearly reflect the
actual security situation. At the moment there is
relative stability in East Timor, but the situation
remains fragile. We believe that it would be timely and
pertinent to assess and debate the future United Nations
presence following the Secretary-General's report to
the Council in July of this year.

Moreover, we are pleased that UNTAET has
established a working group for post-UNTAET
planning, focusing on the mandate, size, terms and
duration of a future United Nations presence in East
Timor. We hope the Council will be able to draw
considerably on the work of the working group in its
future deliberations.

Let me end by once again paying tribute to
Special Representative Vieira de Mello and his staff,
both international and East Timorese, for undertaking
such a challenging task in a manner that gives us hope
for a smooth transition to an independent East Timor.

