Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I would like
to express the condolences of the Government of New
Zealand to the Malian people and those affected by the
attack in Bamako on Friday. Such attacks seem endless,
and we are horrified anew every time.

In the light of Friday's attack, it is all the more
important that the parties to the Mali peace process
continue to consolidate the hard-won gains made this
year to move forward with the implementation of
the agreement on peace and reconciliation in Mali.
Similarly, it is vital that the peace process in Libya does
not falter and is brought to a successful conclusion.

I would like to thank the Special Envoy for the
Sahel, Ms. Hiroute Guebre Sellassie, for her briefing
and for her work across the Sahel. The challenges
detailed in the Special Envoy's briefing and the
Secretary-General's report (S/2015/866) are immense.
Making progress will require sustained long-term focus
by the Governments of the region and support from the
international community. New Zealand hopes that we
will be able to adopt a draft presidential statement as
a clear acknowledgement of the challenges to peace,
security and stability across the Sahel.

We have learned time and time again that the
security threats that face one country or region are not
contained borders, deserts or, indeed, oceans. That is
precisely why the Council has had to become involved
in situations that, while largely within the territory of
one country, pose a threat to the peace and security of
the wider region and, as in the case with the Sahel, well
beyond the region.

It is too often that the issues before the Council
are considered and acted upon in isolation. The United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel acknowledges
that the threats to international peace and stability
within that vast region are interlinked. Terrorism,
political instability and the flow of arms, to name but
a few, cannot be dealt with without reference to each
other and without the region acting in close coordination
with the international community. As we know only too
well, those threats are not contained within any one of
the Sahelian countries, or even within the whole of the
Sahel region. The risks of migration, radicalization and
terrorism were rightly highlighted by the Special Envoy
in her briefing.

Looking ahead, and picking up on the observations
and conclusions in the Secretary-General's report, we
consider that four steps are critical.

First, ongoing military cooperation in the region
is essential. Cooperation among States of the region,
such as through the establishment of the multinational
joint task force by the countries of the Lake Chad Basin
Commission, will be critical to reduce the ability of
terrorist groups to operate freely across borders.

Secondly, we need to maintain a concerted focus on
humanitarian support. Combating trends such as food
insecurity and malnutrition are critical to resolving
the root causes of conflict and instability. Social and
demographic issues, including gender inequality,
entrenched poverty, unemployment, lack of access to
education and a growing contingent of disenfranchised
youth, also undermine political stability and national
cohesion across the Sahel. Ultimately, addressing those
challenges requires a long-term approach. The actions,
missions and strategies that the Council mandates in the
Sahel must be carefully considered within the context
of international support.

Thirdly, we need to acknowledge the impact of the
continued instability in Libya on the wider security of
the Sahel. The illicit flow of arms, drugs and people
across the region undermines national Governments
and exposes the countries of the Sahel to unpredictable
to unpredictable security vulnerabilities. A resolution
of the conflict in Libya is important not only for the
people of Libya but for the wider region. New Zealand
recognizes the increasingly important role that regional
organizations play in addressing regional issues. In that
regard, we encourage the United Nations, the African
Union and the European Union to harmonize efforts to
support the Sahel region.

Fourthly, we encourage the Special Envoy to
continue her outreach to all international and regional
actors focused on the Sahel. The fact that there are
currently a multitude of strategies being pursued
by various actors risks duplicating resources and
undermining efforts to support the region. We welcome,
therefore, the increasing cooperation between the Office
for the Special Envoy for the Sahel and the United
Nations Office for West Africa. We urge continued
and long-term engagement with the African Union,
the Economic Community of West African States,
the Lake Chad Basin Commission and leaders of the
Group of Five for the Sahel. Further cooperation will
significantly improve the efficiency and effectiveness
of the combined efforts in the Sahel.

Our pursuit of international peace and stability
in the Sahel must be conducted in unison. If we work
together, then the security gains made so far will
be harnessed and will better prepare us for future
challenges.

