The President (spoke in French): I will now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Mali.

Mali will vote in favour of the draft resolution
before us. This decision is based on our conviction that
the Security Council has an essential role to play, given
the serious situation in Palestine. This situation,
characterized by unbridled violence, is ongoing and is
worsening daily. Our Council can no longer remain
silent; it must take appropriate measures to face this
situation. In the View of my delegation, the draft
resolution on which we will take a decision will be a
major contribution.

In addition, I would say that Mali is deeply
committed to the pursuit of the peace process. In that
perspective we feel that the United Nations must
continue to shoulder its standing responsibility to
ensure a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the
Middle East. My delegation reiterates its full support
for the efforts of the Secretary-General and the United
Nations Special Coordinator for the peace process in
the Middle East with the parties and those in charge in
the region.

As for the Security Council, it must make its
contribution to improving the present situation by
taking the necessary measures to assist both parties to
overcome this present tragedy and to resume
negotiations in order to find a final agreement on all
the problems on the basis of previous agreements and
on the basis of resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
My delegation feels that the majority of delegations
have found this text to be objective, balanced and well
measured. Unfortunately, the Council has not arrived at
a consensus on this.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I now put to the vote the draft resolution
contained in document S/2001/ll99.

A vote was taken by show ofhands.

In favour:
Bangladesh, China, Colombia, France, Ireland,
Jamaica, Mali, Mauritius, Russian Federation,
Singapore, Tunisia, Ukraine.

Against: adopted, owing the negative vote of a permanent
United States ofAmerica. member of the Security Council.

Abstaining: There are no further speakers left on my list. The
Norway, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
Northern Ireland. of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The President (spoke in French): The result of The meeting rose at 2 am. on Saturday,
the voting is as follows: 12 votes in favour, 1 against 15 December:

and 2 abstentions. The draft resolution has not been

