Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): As in the past, we thank Special
Coordinator Mladenov for presenting today's report
to us, while recognizing the significant challenge that
his work entails in the most adverse of circumstances.
Unfortunately, the current state of the situation in the
Middle East and the direction it is taking continue be a
cause of great concern and outrage for us, as we witness
a progressively worsening trend that is bringing us
dangerously close to the brink of the impossibility
of achieving a just, lasting and comprehensive peace
based on the two-State solution - the only viable one.

Making our feelings heard, however, as we often
do in this Chamber, does not relieve us of the primary
responsibility conferred upon the Security Council for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
the success of which demands taking firm and effective
action in tandem with our positions and in consonance
with the authority and respect that this beacon of world
order deserves. Given the absence ofsignificant political
will and process and the division among positions, the
inertia that we are experiencing with regard to the
Israel-Palestine issue threatens to perpetuate the status
quo leading to actions that are contrary and in clear
violation of international law, the Charter of the United
Nations and the relevant Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions.

We continue to observe how the hopes of the
Palestinian people to establish their own State are
fading away in the face of the systematic expansion
of Israeli settlements in the occupied Palestinian
territory, underpinned by a policy that seeks to
legitimize them. The civilian population, both Israelis
and Palestinians, including women and children,
continue to be the victims of an environment marked
by constant violence, fuelled by provocations and
incitement and inflammatory rhetoric, which puts their
lives in jeopardy and deprives them of the possibility
of well-being, compounded, at the same time, with the
inability to embark on a path leading towards a process
of intra-Palestinian reconciliation to build a nation.

Consistent with its guiding principles, the position
of the Dominican Republic remains the same,
including, inter alia, respect for the sovereignty and
self-determination of peoples, in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations with respect to the inadmissibility of the
acquisition of territory by force. We reject the expansion
of illegal settlements in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem.

Accordingly, we stress that, with regard to
Jerusalem, we recognize, in line with the relevant
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions,
the character and special status of the Holy City of
Jerusalem, its spiritual, religious and cultural dimension
and heritage, as a sacred place for the three monotheistic
religions ofIslam, Christianity and Judaism, and we are
opposed to any measure that alters or seeks to alter that
character and status.

At the same time, we condemn in the strongest
terms all acts of violence continuing to take place
throughout the occupied Palestinian territory, including
the use of lethal force during demonstrations, clashes,
security operations and other actions in Gaza and the
West Bank, which involve children, women and medical
personnel, none of whom should ever be targeted. We
also condemn the firing of rockets and the launching
of incendiary devices and explosives from Gaza into
Israel by Hamas and other Palestinian militants.

The humanitarian situation in Gaza remains critical,
heightened by an alarming environmental situation
limiting access to drinking water and subsequently
affecting health, food security and development,
which is compounded by widespread insecurity, the
electricity crisis and the lack of opportunities. We
therefore commend the vital work on the ground by
the relevant organizations and agencies of the United
Nations system, such as the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
as well as the support of friendly countries, to alleviate
suffering and to bring about change.

I should like to conclude by saying that we will
not achieve peace merely by making statements month
after month. Let us not deceive ourselves. If we really
want to achieve peace, the first step to that end is to end
the hate speech by both sides. That is our opinion.

