Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): Sir, Ukraine deeply
appreciates the initiative of Poland to hold this open
debate, as well as the fact that you personally are
presiding over this meeting. We thank the Secretary-
General for presenting his report on the issue of the
protection of civilians (S/2018/462), as well as the
Director-General of the International Committee of the
Red Cross for his presentation.

As I am about to deliver a statement in my national
capacity, I also would like to highlight the fact that
Ukraine aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
by the observer of the European Union.

We welcome the fact that for the first time the dire
situation of civilians in Ukraine affected by the Russian
military aggression in the Donbas region of Ukraine
was referred to in the report of the Secretary-General.
Ukraine shares the Secretary-General's grave concern
about the situations of armed conflict in many countries
in which the civilian population, in particular women
and children, suffers disproportionately as a result of
active military operations.

However, what is really disheartening is that despite
a near-universal recognition by States Members of the
United Nations of the need for full compliance with
international law, including humanitarian and human
rights law, the issue of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict remains as topical today as it was in
1999, when the Council adopted resolution 1265 (1999).
Almost two decades have passed, and we all continue
to express concern, strongly condemn, urge, call for,
underline and so on. Moreover, we are witnessing
a worrisome trend of new and devastating conflicts
emerging and the agenda of the Security Council
continuing to grow.

In all fairness, many countries and international
organizations, including the United Nations, have
taken very concrete and practical actions to alleviate
the suffering of civilians in numerous armed conflicts.
However, the lack of comprehensive and enforceable
action on an international scale hampers our progress
in this area.

So long as impunity rules the day, so long as some
States Members of the United Nations, including
one well-known permanent member of the Security
Council, could not care less about implementing the
decisions of the International Court of Justice, the
Council will be doomed to go in circles around the
issue of the protection of civilians, addressing it but
never really resolving it.

What is the solution, one may well ask. I think that
we have to get real. In the absence of a supranational
body to enforce international law, it becomes the
joint responsibility of us all, meaning that no crime
of aggression or other transgression against the
international rule-based system can be tolerated
under pretexts concocted just to protect one's own
narrow interests.

In keeping with the request contained in the
concept note for today's debate (S/2018/444, annex), I
will highlight what my country is doing to provide the
best possible protection for civilians as Russia's armed
aggression against Ukraine enters its fifth year.

As was mentioned earlier, according to United
Nations estimates, some 3.4 million people from the
Donbas region now require humanitarian assistance
and protection. With 1.5 million registered internally
displaced persons (IDPs) since 2014 - the first year of
the conflict - the Ukrainian State has increased more
than six-fold its budgetary allocations for monthly cash
payouts to those IDPs.

The Ukrainian authorities are doing their utmost
to ensure the continuous functioning in the Donbas
region of objects of critical infrastructure that benefit
the local population. For example, the Donetsk Filter
Station, located in the so-called grey zone, supplies
potable water to almost 400,000 people on both sides
of the line of contact. However, five members of its
service personnel were wounded on 17 April after
their car came under fire from Russian-backed forces.
Ukrainian deminers have cleared mines and ordnance
from more than 1,000 civilian infrastructure facilities
and more than 150,000 explosive remnants of war,
including almost 1,000 improvised explosive devices
purposely set up by Russian-backed forces.

In 2017, an inter-agency commission on the
application and implementation of international
humanitarian law in Ukraine was established with
the aim of identifying the most pressing humanitarian
needs, setting concrete goals, monitoring the
implementation of tasks and assessing efficiency
in addressing the needs identified. All that is just a
fraction of what has been done to help civilians during
the ongoing military conflict instigated and fuelled by
Russia, which continues to flood the Donbas region
with its weapons and military personnel. Right now,
the conflict may be in a low-intensity phase, but it is no
less deadly. For example, on 20 February, a Ukrainian
military medic, Ms. Sabina Halytska, was killed when
riding in a vehicle clearly marked with a red cross that
was struck by a Russian antitank guided missile. She
was only 23. What is that if not a direct violation of
resolution 2286 (2016), which the Council adopted
unanimously in 2016?

Back in 2005, during a debate in the Security
Council on the same subject that we are discussing
today, one delegation emphasized the need

"to stress the role played by the International
Criminal Court and to recall the as-yet-untapped
potential of the Fact-Finding Commission created
in accordance with article 90 of the first Protocol
Additional to the 1949 Geneva Conventions on
protecting victims of war." (S/PV5319, p. 19)

Despite the fact that I am quoting a representative of
the Russian delegation, I would readily subscribe to
every word. I deeply regret that, unfortunately, the
position of one permanent member of the Council is not
as permanent as it could have been in order to save the
lives of many.

In conclusion, we call on all States and parties to
armed conflict everywhere to respect international
humanitarian and human rights law and to abide by the
orders of the Court in The Hague.

