Ms. Amos: We are in the fifth year of a war in
Syria characterized by breathtaking levels of savagery,
and it is just over one year since the Council adopted
resolution 2139 (2014). The resolution demanded action
by the parties to the conflict to cease attacks against
civilians and facilitate humanitarian access to those
in need. We all had hoped that the resolution would
compel the parties to reduce the violence and lead to
a significant improvement in the situation of people in
Syria. By any measure, however, the situation in Syria
has dramatically worsened.

Civilians continue to bear the brunt of the conflict.
The Secretary-General has submitted report after
report highlighting the failure of the parties to meet
their basic minimum legal obligations. Indiscriminate
aerial bombings, including the use of barrel bombs, car
bombs, mortar attacks, unguided rockets and the use
of other explosive devices in populated areas, are the
hallmarks of this conflict.

Fighting continues to escalate across the country.
Increased violence in Idlib city in the past few days is
particularly worrying and has the potential to displace
hundreds of thousands more people. I am concerned
that civilians could become trapped in the city if the
fighting escalates. People must be given safe passage
and be allowed to leave if this becomes necessary.

I have previously reported on the worsening
socioeconomic situation in the country, which has eroded
the development gains made over a generation. Today,
a Syrian's life expectancy is estimated to be 20 years
less than when the conflict started. Unemployment is
around 58 per cent, up from around 10 per cent in 2010;
and nearly two thirds of all Syrians are now estimated
to be living in extreme poverty.

The inability of the Council and countries with
influence over the different parties at war in Syria to
agree on the elements for a political solution in the
country means that the humanitarian consequences
will continue to be dire for millions of Syrians.

Children are particularly badly affected, with
5.6 million children now in need of assistance. Well
over 2 million children are out of school. A quarter of
Syria's schools have been damaged, destroyed or taken
over for shelter. It will take billions of dollars to repair
damaged schools and restore the education system.

Nutritional surveys indicate a worrying
decline in the nutritional status of children. Three
governorates - Hama, Aleppo and Deir-ez-Zor - have
global acute malnutrition rates above 10 per cent
among the children sampled, a level considered serious
according to World Health Organization standards. The
overall country-wide global acute malnutrition rate was
7.2 per cent. This is considered to be poor.

The health system in Syria has been destroyed.
Only half of the network of primary health centres that
existed before the conflict are still working. Physicians
for Human Rights has documented 233 attacks on 183
medical facilities, with 610 medical staff killed over the
last four years.

Basic services continue to be deliberately attacked
and cut. For example, some 450,000 people in Dar'a
had their water out for two weeks in February. Even
when basic services are restored, people have only
sporadic access owing to the systematic degradation of
basic infrastructure. Non-governmental organizations
reviewing satellite imagery report that 83 per cent of
the lights have gone out in Syria over the past four
years. This is an average. The cuts are even higher in
areas such as Aleppo.

As needs grow, humanitarian organizations need
to reach more people, but we are facing increasing
difficulties in reaching the 4.8 million people who live
in areas which are hard to reach. And as the violence
escalates and conflict lines continue to shift, I fear
that these numbers will rise. Access continues to be
constrained by insecurity and active fighting, but the
parties to the conflict are increasingly and deliberately
obstructing the delivery of life-saving aid.

In parts of the country under the control of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), a number of
humanitarian offices have been closed. As a result, the
World Food Programme was forced to halt distribution
to 700,000 people in ISIL-controlled areas of Aleppo,
Al-Hasakeh, Deir ez-Zor and Raqqa governorates,
and Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations distributions in the northern governorates - the
agricultural belt ofthe country - have also been reduced
in the past months.

The Syrian Government continues to put in place
restrictive administrative hurdles, hampering the
effective delivery of aid, and have insisted that the
United Nations share beneficiary lists. In February,
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs instructed the United
Nations that all communications with Government
ministries and public-service providers be routed
through the Ministry. At a time when needs are growing
and the humanitarian community should be scaling up
its response, the Government continues to put in place
measures that are not practical and slow down our
response.

So far this year, the United Nations has requested
access to 33 locations for the delivery of aid through
inter-agency convoys; only three have been agreed,
to Al Waer, Talbiseh and Al-Rastan in Horns. Despite
the approval and support of the Governor, Syrian State
security forces removed surgical and other medical and
reproductive health supplies from the convoys to Al
Waer and Talbiseh. Urgently needed medical supplies,
including surgical kits, are scheduled to be delivered
to Al-Rastan on 30 March. I ask the Council to make
it clear to the Government of Syria that these convoys
must be allowed to proceed and that their security
forces should allow the free passage of all supplies to
people in need.

There has been some confusion about the number
of people in besieged and hard-to-reach locations. In
besieged areas, people cannot leave and assistance
cannot get in on a regular basis. In February, the
United Nations could not deliver any food or medicines
to besieged locations. The United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) restarted delivery of some assistance to
Yarmouk on 4 March. However, food distribution takes
place only three times a week, with around 200 families
receiving parcels on each distribution day. UNRWA
estimates that the 18,000 people trapped in Yarmouk
require 400 food parcels daily to meet their basic
needs. An additional 228,000 people are now living
under siege in Government-controlled neighborhoods
of Deir ez-Zor by ISIL. They are unable to leave the
city, and only minimal supplies have been airlifted in
by the Government. This increases the total number of
people besieged in Syria from 212,000 to an estimated
440,000.

This situation cannot continue: 185,500 people
are in areas besieged by the Government, despite its
assertions that it has a responsibility to look after its
own people. The rest are in areas besieged by armed
and terrorist groups. The authority of the Council is
being undermined. People trapped in besieged locations
are becoming more and more desperate. We must be
allowed to deliver essential humanitarian items, such as
food, nutritional supplies for children, medicines and
medical items. Time is running out. More people will
die.

The United Nations and its humanitarian partners
continue to do everything we can to try to save lives,
and we are still getting aid to millions of people each
month, including through cross-border operations.
The pledging conference in Kuwait on 31 March
will be an opportunity to raise some of the resources
required to maintain our life-saving work. I encourage
Governments to give generously.

We also need the Council's continued strong
support in the following areas. They should remain
strong advocates for compliance with international
humanitarian and human rights law; and make it clear
that parties to the conflict, including the Government,
which bears a special responsibility as a Member of the
United Nations, cannot act with impunity. On the issue
of denial of access, where parties arbitrarily withhold
consent to relief operations there must be consequences
and accountability. Council members may wish to
consider the concrete steps they would like to take
given the violations of the Council's demands on access
set out in resolution 2139 (2014). And on the repeated
targeting of health facilities and personnel, the Syrian
armed forces, non-State armed groups and terrorist
groups must be held accountable for their actions.

Day after day, month after month, year after year,
the death, destruction and violence in Syria grows. As
Council members have said many times, there is no
humanitarian solution to the crisis. The international
community must demonstrate greater determination to
reach a long-overdue political solution.

