Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): We convey our
appreciation to the delegation ofUruguay for convening
this open debate on the situation in the Middle East,
with a focus on Palestine.

My delegation aligns itself with the statements
made by representatives of the Islamic Republic of
Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, and of
the State of Kuwait on behalf of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation (OIC).

The ongoing violence and conflicts in different
parts of the Middle East continue to touch a raw nerve
within the international community. The protracted
conflicts have already exacted an insufferable toll,
with many women and children among the civilian
casualties. The massive displacement of peoples across
and within borders have resulted in a dire humanitarian
situation, further compounded by the denial of access to
some badly affected populations. The mostly fratricidal
and sectarian conflicts have added to the strength of
terrorists and violent extremists, who have thrived
both on the region's resources and on the peoples'
sense of despair and lack of entitlement. The situation
in the Middle East is thus untenable and deserves the
Council's unmitigated attention.

The Palestinian question remains at the heart of
the turmoil in the Middle East. It underpins a number
of political, moral and ideological rifts that we see
being played out on the broader canvas of our current
geopolitical realities. It is no doubt convenient for
various groups with a vested interest to allow these rifts
and divisions to widen further, in total disregard for the
will and conscience of peoples around the world. We
must reject such parochial, self-defeating schemes and
continue to remain on the right side of history on the
Palestinian question.

In line with our constitutional commitment, the
Government and the people of Bangladesh maintain
unwavering support for the just and legitimate struggle
of the Palestinian people to regain their inalienable
rights, including their right to self-determination
and the establishment of an independent and viable
Palestinian State, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital.
We believe that the continued Israeli occupation,
expansion of settlements and indiscriminate attacks
against civilians constitute systematic Violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights
principles. We continue to urge all key actors to remain
engaged in the pursuit of a comprehensive solution to
the Palestinian question in accordance with the relevant
United Nations resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the Quartet road map.

In that spirit, we support OIC proposals to work
towards a Council resolution to revive political efforts
aimed at achieving the desired two-State solution and
convening an international conference to address the
multidimensional aspects of the Palestinian question
in a focused, structured and holistic manner. Our
collective solidarity with the Palestinian people must
be translated into sustained, result-oriented and
meaningful actions.

Within the United Nations, we commit to continuing
our efforts to enhance the voice and visibility of the
United Nations Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, as we do
through other relevant international platforms. The
people of Bangladesh stand ready to extend a hand of
support to the brotherly Palestinian people at any hour
of need.

The toxic and corrosive messages used by many
terrorists and violent extremist groups around the world
often use the Palestinian question in order to create
justification and legitimacy for their own misguided
agendas. It is of course our shared responsibility to
expose the sheer hypocrisy and hollowness of their
arguments and defeat them through a combination of
strategies rooted in human rights principles. However,
such principles may still fall short of reaching
our ultimate objectives, if we fail to seriously and
unequivocally factor in the need to mobilize our
combined political efforts, including through the
Council, to find a peaceful solution to the Middle East
crisis and thus deny our opponents one of their core
rallying agendas. In Bangladesh, under the watchful
guidance of Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina's zero-
tolerance approach, we remain vigilant so that violent
extremists cannot just employ any cause, no matter how
legitimate it may be, for their distorted ideologies and
actions.

The international community has recently
demonstrated, including through the adoption of
resolution 2254 (2015), that it is indeed possible to put
aside differences and find creative, forward-looking
solutions in search of peace, although beset with uphill
political and diplomatic challenges. Drawing inspiration
from some of the recent achievements, we feel
encouraged by the firm high-level commitments that
we have heard in the Council Chamber throughout the
day and harbour renewed hopes for an early resumption
of the Middle East peace process despite all odds. We
should look towards the continued determination and
engagement of the members of the Council to make
good on such commitments.

