Mr. Alkalaj (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Let me
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for this month
and for bringing this very important issue before the
Council. I would also like to thank the leaders of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, Judge Carmel Agius and Prosecutor Serge
Brammertz, for their respective reports (S/2019/4l7, annexes I and II) and for today's comprehensive
briefings. My remarks today will therefore be
rather brief.

We note the continued progress made by the
Mechanism in fulfilling the residual activities ofthe now
closed International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY). In addition, I would like to underline that the
successful conclusion of the Mechanism's mandate in
an efficient manner and within a reasonable time frame
is of crucial importance for justice and reconciliation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the region.

Throughout the years, Bosnia and Herzegovina's
cooperation with the ICTY has been steadfast and
full, as evidenced by the Tribunal's report. In the same
vein, we remain devoted to actively contributing to
the Mechanism's efforts to accomplish its mission.
Prosecuting war crimes, regardless of the national or
religious affiliation of the perpetrators or victims, is
of essential importance to long-term stability in the
country and the region.

We would like to highlight our appreciation for
the support of the European Union, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the
United Nations Development Programme in terms of
strengthening the human and material resources of
judicial institutions that are processing war crimes and
in terms of general capacity-building. Furthermore,
consistent cooperation among the Office of the
Prosecutor and the relevant authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Serbia and Croatia, in accordance with
the principles ofinternationaljustice and the rule oflaw,
is crucial in investigating and prosecuting war crimes.

In closing, I would like to emphasize that Bosnia
and Herzegovina remains committed to investigating,

prosecuting and punishing the persons responsible for
war crimes. We will continue to work on strengthening
the national judicial system. More justice means more
trust and stability within Bosnia and Herzegovina and

the Western Balkans region.

The meeting rose at 12.35 pm.
