Mr. Roet (Israel): I would like to congratulate
Ukraine and its Minister for Foreign Affairs on
its presidency of the Security Council and to wish
Ukraine success in the coming month. We thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this timely debate on an
important topic, and we were proud to be a sponsor of
resolution 2341 (2017), adopted this morning.
For Israel, today's debate is unfortunately not a
theoretical one, as we have been coping with terrorist
threats since our founding. Today, as terrorism
threatens all of us, Israel is in one of the world's most
volatile and violent neighbourhoods, threatened from
all sides. To the north, we face Hizbullah, which has
been designated internationally as a terrorist group, and
which hides its arsenal of more than 150,000 rockets,
all pointing towards Israel, in civilian homes, schools
and hospitals. In threatening civilians from within its
own population, Hizbullah is committing a double war
crime, and yet its actions are rarely if ever condemned
in this Chamber. In 2016, Hassan Nasrallah, Secretary
General of Hizbullah, threatened a catastrophic attack
on Haifa's ammonia-storage tanks that would, he said,
lead to the death of tens of thousands of residents and
affect 800,000 Israelis. He went on to declare that this
would be exactly like a nuclear bomb and that therefore
he could say that today Lebanon had a nuclear bomb.

In the south, we face Hamas, the terrorist group
controlling Gaza that openly calls for the destruction
of the State of Israel. Hamas also intentionally targets
civilians among its own population, while making an
effort to target crucial infrastructure. We witnessed
that in 2014 when Hamas attempted to paralyse Israel
by attacking Ben Gurion Airport, Israel's primary
international transport hub.

Israel has previously stated here in the Chamber that
wherever there is terror, there Iran is also. Therefore,
hearing the statement made by the representative of
Iran a few minutes ago reminds me of someone who
killed his own parents and then begs the mercy of
the court because he is an orphan. Iran is the leading
State sponsor of terror, backing and supporting the
operations and activities of Hizbullah, Hamas and other
terror groups based in the Middle East and throughout
the world.

Iran continues to test increasingly advanced
ballistic missiles, in a direct threat to Israel. Just last
week, on 4 February, a senior member of the Iranian
Parliament's National Security and Foreign Policy
Commission stated, "only seven minutes are needed
for the Iranian missile to hit Tel-Aviv". The test firing
of that ballistic missile proves once again that Iran
is ignoring resolution 2231 (2015). I call upon the
Security Council to respond firmly and decisively to
such Iranian violations and provocations.

We have recently witnessed a wave of terror attacks
on critical infrastructure across the globe, including by
Da'esh. The downing of the EgyptAir jetliner aircraft
over the Mediterranean Sea, the attacks in Istanbul's
Ataturk Airport, and the Brussels metro station and
airport bombings left hundreds dead and wounded,
proving once again that no country is safe and no person
is immune to such despicable attacks.

From global transportation to financial systems,
from energy infrastructure to water supplies, attacks on
critical infrastructure threaten the very foundations on
which our modern society is built. Terrorists recognize
that perpetrating attacks against critical infrastructure
has the potential for devastation that transcends the
target itself. Attacks on major infrastructure networks
have the ability to paralyse the workings of entire
countries and regions.

We must adapt every day to the constant and evolving
terror threats that aim to attack our infrastructure, our
civilians and our citizens. We recognize that the only
way to combat such threats is by staying ahead of the
game, remaining vigilant and anticipating the next
step of the perpetrators. Today's realities require us to
address not only physical attacks. We are now fighting
on a whole new front, and we must also guard against
cyberthreats and attacks.

Critical infrastructure is closely linked to
technology and the associated danger of cyberattacks.
Cyberattacks have no borders and are not limited to
State actors. Perpetrators meet no physical barriers and
can cause even greater damage than a physical terror
attack on a single location. Through Israel's high-tech
security culture and joint private-public cyberventures,
Israel has successfully combated threats that impact
both private and State systems.

It is said that necessity is the mother of invention.
Out of necessity, we have become experts in the field
of counter-terrorism and are proudly sharing our
knowledge with Governments throughout the world.
Israeli experts are contributing their expertise on a wide
range of issues - from terrorist financing to forensic
investigation and from aviation security to border
protection. Those activities reflect our fundamental
belief that terrorism can be effectively confronted
only through international cooperation. A serious
international threat requires a serious international
response. We are committed to taking all necessary
steps to continue protecting our citizens and sharing
our knowledge with the international community.

