Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): I wish to join other
speakers in welcoming the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Staffan de Mistura, to the
Security Council. I think I can say that we were all
impressed by and grateful for the leadership he is
showing in Afghanistan as head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). We
listened with great interest to his briefing and to the
statement of the Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, Ambassador Zahir Tanin, whom I also
welcome at this table.
Let me also take this opportunity to thank
Ambassador Apakan for his leadership and his team,
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
UNAMA for their excellent organization of last week's
Security Council mission. I believe, like others, that we
had a very productive visit, which has helped us to
enhance our understanding of the situation in
Afghanistan and of the extremely difficult
circumstances under which the United Nations is
operating. The lack of improvement in the security
situation and ongoing reports of recent events -
targeted attacks by the Taliban on the civilian
population and on United Nations staff members - are
of great concern to us.

Austria aligns itself with the statement to be
made later in this debate by the European Union
delegation on behalf of the European Union. In
addition, Austria wishes to make the following points.

We appreciate the work undertaken by the Afghan
Government to advance a political solution to the long-
standing conflict by way of the development of a peace
and reintegration programme and the holding of the
Consultative Peace Jirga earlier this month. We
welcome the significant efforts to include
representation from a wide spectrum of Afghan society
in the Jirga. Looking ahead, it will be vital to ensure
that all relevant sectors of society are fully involved in
the next steps, such as the implementation of the peace
and reintegration programme and the establishment of
a national high-level peace council. UNAMA should
continue to support the Afghan-led reconciliation and
reintegration process.

We would be interested in receiving more
detailed information in the next report of the Secretary-
General on how Afghanistan's ethnic communities and
the women of Afghanistan are included in the planning
and implementation of relevant programmes, including
with a View to the implementation of resolutions 1325
(2000) and 1889 (2009).

We also note that, according to the final
communique of the Peace Jirga, the people of
Afghanistan demand a just peace that can guarantee the
rights of all its citizens, including women and children.
The J irga further urged that the law be applied equally
to all citizens of the country. It is clear that sustainable
peace in Afghanistan will be achieved only if justice is
served in tandem with a political solution ensuring
accountability for serious crimes of the past. Hence,
the Afghan national action plan for peace, justice and
reconciliation - approved by the Afghan Government
in 2005 and endorsed by the London Compact in
2006 - should be fully respected in the reintegration
and reconciliation process. From our point of view, the
amnesty law that came into force at the end of 2009 is
not in line with the demands of the Peace Jirga or with
international law and should therefore be repealed.

We are also aware that the Peace Jirga called for
the removal of the names of the Afghan opposition
from the list established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999). During the Security Council mission to
Afghanistan, our Afghan interlocutors expressed keen
interest in the issue of de-listing. In my capacity as
Chairman of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the
Taliban, I had a chance to meet with interlocutors on
the subject, and I am grateful to UNAMA for
facilitating these contacts.

I explained that the review of the 1267 sanctions
list is an ongoing process based on resolution 1822
(2008), that it is conducted on a case-by-case basis and
is not, as such, linked to current developments. I also
indicated that, with regard to possible de-listings of
Taliban-related individuals, the Committee would be
guided by the following principles: individuals should
convincingly renounce violence, lay down arms, break
ties with Al-Qaida and fully respect the Afghan
Constitution. I note with satisfaction that these criteria
square fully with those mentioned by Ambassador
Tanin, earlier in this debate.

In recent months we have been working actively
with the Afghan authorities to obtain relevant
additional data on listed individuals. I encourage the
Afghan authorities to urgently provide to the
Committee the information required to conclude the
review successfully by the extended deadline of
31 July. Let me make this absolutely clear - if this
information is to be taken into consideration in the
course of the ongoing review, receiving it must be a
matter not of weeks, but of days. As I said, I encourage
the Afghan authorities to move along these lines. We
look forward to continued cooperation with the
Government of Afghanistan and UNAMA in the full
implementation of resolutions 1267 (1999), 1822
(2008) and 1904 (2009).

Let me now turn to the preparations for the
September legislative elections. We appreciate the
successful efforts of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General to facilitate a solution regarding the
status of the electoral law and commend the
Independent Electoral Commission and the Electoral
Complaints Commission for their ongoing work,
including the successful conclusion of the registration
phase. The high number of female candidates is a
remarkable and positive development. All efforts must
be undertaken to ensure their security. Beyond the
upcoming elections, we fully agree with the assessment
that a more comprehensive and long-term electoral
reform is necessary.

Let me also mention that Austria welcomes the
recent instruction by the Afghan Ministry of Education
that, in view of the threat by the Taliban, schools
should no longer be used as polling stations in
elections. We therefore hope that the Afghan
authorities will do their utmost to act in accordance
with that commitment and where, or if, possible extend
it to health facilities. I say that because using schools
as polling stations in past elections not only led to a
marked increase in attacks on schools, but also
unfortunately resulted in a lasting decrease in the
school enrolment rate.

Let me also say in more general terms that youth
make up more than half of the population of
Afghanistan and constitute its most valuable resource.
In that context, we are also grateful to UNAMA for the
efforts that it has already undertaken to strengthen its
child protection capacity. We hope that such efforts
will be continued.

Finally, Austria looks forward to the Kabul
Conference, co-chaired by the Afghan Government and
the United Nations. Effective transition to greater
Afghan control over security, governance and
development, based on a renewed commitment by the
Afghan Government to its people, must be the common
objective. It will be critical to long-term success that
all those initiatives be firmly based on the principles of
good governance, the rule of law and respect for
human rights. That will make it easier for donors to
give their support to Afghan-owned national priority
programmes. Austria stands ready to continue to
support Afghanistan on its way to a more secure and
prosperous future.

