Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): At the outset, I
wish to commend you, Mr. President, for organizing
today's important debate. I am sure that this meeting,
under your able guidance, will be fruitful. This
important subject continues to deserve our serious
attention.

Mediation is built upon a culture of dialogue, an
essential ingredient in growing the culture of peace. It
is anchored in emphatic listening and mutual
communication, rather than in deafening silence and
lingering prejudice. It is also inclusive, incorporating
the views of all parties for a comprehensive approach
to a conflict.

In reality, hostile parties often have a hard time
talking to each other, let alone making peace.
Therefore, the call for a mediator can undoubtedly
become urgent. The confidence placed by the
disputants in the mediator is of primary importance,
and thus the selection of an appropriate mediator is
crucial.

A successful mediation often begins in the
absence of ceremonial episodes and formal procedure.
Informality is often key to the building of confidence
among parties and promotes a more candid approach.
This can yield the most suitable solution possible,
given the reality of the constraints experienced by the
parties. The core process of mediation often needs to
be away from the spotlight of the media. In short, time,
trust and knowledge, as well as adequate logistical
backup, are critical if a mediator is to be successful.

The United Nations has been one of the largest
generators of mediation initiatives. We commend the
actions undertaken by the Secretary-General in
establishing a Mediation Support Unit within a short
period of time and with strong support from Member
States. The Unit has become a practical tool for
supporting the good offices and mediation efforts of
the United Nations and regional organizations.
Thus, Indonesia welcomes the recommendation
that the Organization and Member States build local,
national and regional capacity for mediation. That is
why we attach great importance to a more strategic
discussion on the establishment of a clearer framework
within which the Secretary-General can assist them.

Regional organizations can play a meaningful and
effective role in mediation. It is paramount, then, that
the United Nations and regional organizations team up
in mediation efforts. While the United Nations has the
requisite resources and experience, a regional
organization carries with it local content and has an
equal chance for success in mediation. The African
Union, the Organization of American States and the
European Union, to name just a few, are notable
mediators.

In South-East Asia, Indonesia, for its part, has
worked together with the rest of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) family to establish
a Charter that will serve as the legal and institutional
framework for ASEAN. In the Charter, ASEAN sets
out the fundamental principle of reliance on the
peaceful settlement of disputes. ASEAN member States
will endeavour to peacefully resolve all disputes in a
timely manner through dialogue, consultation and
negotiation. At the same time, the ASEAN Charter also
provides that ASEAN member States that are parties to
a dispute may at any time agree to resort to good
offices, conciliation or mediation. It clearly stresses the
importance of mediation as one of the preferable
modes of peaceful dispute settlement.

Indonesia is not only committed to mediation, but
is also a passionate advocate of mediation, for we too
have reaped the benefits of successful mediation in
resolving conflict situations within our own borders.
Others in our region and beyond have shown interest in
drawing upon those experiences.

As a final point, I should like to say that our
experiences have taught us one important lesson:
mediation does work. Mediation support efforts should
be responsive to the demands of fast-moving peace
processes. Therefore, our need for that peaceful means
will remain in the future. Indonesia welcomes efforts to
further explore ways and means to reinforce the
Council's contributions to the promotion of mediation
as an important and cost-effective means of dispute
settlement.
