Mr. Dion (Canada) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank France, in its capacity as President of the
Security Council, as well as you personally, Sir, for
affording me this opportunity to address the Council
on the subject of the protection of civilians in United
Nations peacekeeping operations. This initiative by
France is necessary given the alarming the situation
of civilians in situations of armed conflict. It has been
a little more than 15 years since the Council first did
pioneering work in placing the protection of civilians
as a central element of its mandate. Nevertheless,
the situation of civilians in armed conflicts has only
deteriorated since.

Here in the Council in 2015 (see S/PV.7374), the
Secretary-General told of a terrible toll. Humanitarian
organizations reported that the number of people in
urgent need of assistance and protection increased
from 52 million to 76 million in 2014 alone. That is
a huge increase. There is therefore urgency in finding
solutions and ensuring that the Council does more
pioneering work to concretely implement the principles
and existing declarations on the protection of civilians.

It is for that reason that Canada announced at the
General Assembly in May its adherence to the Kigali
Principles on the Protection of Civilians, which reflects
the explicit determination of Africans to protect
civilians. Today I wish to announce our support for two
important initiatives that directly target the need for
swift and decisive action by the Council in the event of
massive human rights violations. First, Canadajoins the
political declaration, submitted by France and Mexico,
on suspending the use of the veto in the Security
Council in the event of mass atrocities. Secondly,
Canada endorses the code of conduct put forward by
the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group
with regard to measures against genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes.

In its letter of invitation to this meeting, France
submitted to us four main issues on the protection
of civilians. In fact, this is about no fewer than four
fundamental responsibilities with regard to which we
must respond.

Our first responsibility is to properly assess the
implementation of protection-of-civilians mandates in
peace operations. We must build on what has already
been done. The adoption by the United Nations
more rigorous mechanisms on performance and
accountability is therefore a step in the right direction.
The same goes for the commitment of the Secretary-
General to report to the Security Council failures in
protecting civilians. Those are measures that contribute
to the aim of the United Nations, among other things, to
combat the scourge of sexual exploitation and violence.

Our second responsibility is to ensure that Blue
Helmets fully understand their obligations to protect
civilians. Too often the instructions are ambiguous.
The protection-of-civilians mandates drafted by the
Council should clear. Depending on the experience of
peacekeepers in protecting civilians, the Council should
clarify the mandates so that they are understandable
and reflect the complexity of missions. Such a complete
understanding of mandates by peacekeepers is
necessary in all aspects of a missions, namely, the use
of innovative strategies to protect civilians, meeting
the need for all the resources required on the ground,
evaluating and classifying the threats facing civilians,
responding quickly when communities are threatened
and taking into account the special needs of the most
vulnerable groups, such as displaced persons, refugees,
women and children.

Our third responsibility is to promote the deepening
of cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and international organizations, such as the African
Union, to promote awareness of the need to protect
of civilians. To that end, we should compile lessons
learned from our experience in Mali and the Central
African Republic so as to ensure that the African Union
receives better support in protecting civilians.

(spoke in English)

Our fourth responsibility is to ensure that the
protection of civilians forms an integral part of the
training peacekeepers receive before their deployment
in the field. Each country that contributes troops
and police forces has an individual and essential
responsibility. More developed States must provide
assistance to less-developed ones by funding
peacekeeping training centres.

Those are the improvements we need to make to
ensure that United Nations peacekeeping missions
can better protect civilians. We must adhere to the
Kigali Principles. We must support the policy initiative
launched by France and Mexico on the suspension of the
veto in the Security Council in cases of mass atrocities.
We must endorse the code of conduct put forward by the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group.

We must take on the four responsibilities raised by
France, that is, a fair assessment of the implementation
ofmandates, a complete understanding by peacekeepers
of their mandates, better cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and international
organizations and, ultimately, protecting civilians as an
integral part of the training of peacekeepers.Those are
four improvements needed so that our peacekeepers can
endure as guardians of civilians. Without political will,
however, those improvements will have little effect.

Consider Syria in recent weeks. Flagrant violations
of international law, including attacks against medical
facilities and their staff, as well as the blocking of
humanitarian aid to besieged communities. Canada
reiterates its full support for the measures taken by the
Security Council to end such violations. Many of us
seek peace in that region. Canada is doing its part in
the coalition to help Syria and Iraq by responding to
humanitarian appeals and supporting United Nations
efforts to strengthen emergency measures to protect
civilians, in particular the most vulnerable populations,
and reduce food insecurity.

But Prime Minister Justin Trudeau and our
Government want to do more. Canada is back, including
in peacekeeping missions. We have committed to
increasing our support for United Nations peacekeeping
operations and support its mediation efforts in conflict
prevention and post-conflict reconstruction. Those
commitments reflect our deep desire to be a determined
peacebuilder and to make a real and valuable
contribution to building a more peaceful and prosperous
world. Canada believes that, if followed by concrete and
resolute action and inspired by responsible conviction,
the French initiative, which brings us together today,
can ensure that our peacekeeping missions will always
protect civilians. Let us unite so that those civilians
who need our protection may one day be less numerous.

