Mr. Wai (Myanmar): Mr. President, I wish to
thank you for giving me the opportunity to participate
in today's open debate on this important subject. I
would also like to thank the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. John Holmes, for his
comprehensive briefing this morning.

Armed conflict breeds a cycle of violence and
brings untold suffering to innocent civilians. Armed
conflict is exacerbated by the easy availability of illicit
small arms and light weapons. Every year, some
300,000 civilians are killed by small arms and light
weapons in armed conflict. Every day, some 1,400
civilians die in armed conflict because of the easy
availability of small arms and light weapons. One of
the most effective ways to protect civilians in armed
conflict is to have a legally binding international
instrument prohibiting the illicit trade of small arms
and light weapons with non-State actors.

The United Nations Security Council adopted
resolution 1674 (2006), which condemns in the
strongest terms all acts of violence or abuse committed
against civilians in situations of armed conflict.
Myanmar joins the international community in
condemning all such acts. We are in full sympathy with
victims of armed conflict in various parts of the world,

because we ourselves have gone through the bitter
experience of insurgent groups committing atrocities
against our civilian population.

Soon after attaining independence, Myanmar had
to face numerous insurgencies. Until recently, there
were 18 insurgent groups in the jungle. My country
continues to face a situation where the insurgents
deliberately target civilians. Throughout the various
periods of the insurgency, our civilian population has
suffered much at the hands of the insurgents.

I wish once again to stress our strong belief that
the most efficient way to protect civilians in armed
conflict is to resolve the root causes and bring armed
conflict to an end. Therefore, the Myanmar
Government has embarked on a national reconciliation
process and has been successful in bringing 17 out of
the 18 insurgent groups back to the legal fold. As a
result, some 100,000 former armed insurgents are no
longer fighting against the Government. The only
major armed group left is the Kayin National Union
(KNU). The Government continues to invite the KNU
insurgents to come back to the legal fold.

In the past, we encountered difficulties in our
discussions with the KNU because of some outside
interference that hindered the peace process. However,
we are gratified that, as a result of the Government's
continued efforts to bring about national reconciliation,
we were able to reach a peace agreement with an
important faction of the KNU/Karen National
Liberation Army (KNLA) in February 2007. Led by the
Chairman of the KNU/KNLA Peace Council, 320
members returned to the legal fold after the successful
conclusion of peace negotiations. The Government will
continue its endeavours to negotiate with the remaining
faction of the KNU to return to the legal fold, to join
hands with the local populace in developing their
region.

We categorically reject the groundless
accusations that the Government targets the civilian
population. Even with respect to the insurgents, we
conduct counter-insurgency operations only against
those KNU elements that engage in terrorist activities.
In the Kayin state, where the KNU has not conducted
its insurgent activities, the Government does not
conduct counter-insurgency campaigns. It is only
towards those elements of the KNU and the self-styled
Shan State Army South who are carrying out terrorist
activities against civilians that the Government
conducts military operations. We will not tolerate
terrorism under any guide or pretext; nor should
anyone else do so.

We continue to strongly believe that a
comprehensive approach aimed at promoting economic
growth, eradicating poverty and bringing about
sustainable development and national reconciliation
would go a long way towards putting an end to armed
conflict. Based on that conviction, the Government
has, in the past decade, spent more than 97.69 billion
kyats and more than $5 50 million to develop the border
areas where most of our ethnic nationalities reside.

The Myanmar Government will also do its
national duty to protect its citizens and to bring peace,
stability and prosperity to the country.

