Mr. Menan (Togo) (Spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Finn Reske-Nielsen
for introducing the report of the Secretary-
General on the United Nations Integrated Mission
in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) (S/2012/765), and to
congratulate him for the work he has done in taking
over the responsibilities of Ms. Ameerah Haq. I also
wish to welcome to New York His Excellency Mr. Jose
Luis Guterres, Minister of State and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Timor-Leste. His presence among us
testifies to the importance that his Government attaches
to today's debate, which enables him to exchange his
views with the Council on the future of Timor-Leste.

Six years after the establishment of UNMIT,
by resolution 1704 (2006), significant progress has
been achieved. The results obtained in strengthening
democracy and the rule of law are extremely
encouraging, particularly since the adoption of
resolution 2037 (2012), which extended UNMIT's
mandate to 31 December 2012. We were able to assess
for ourselves the reality on the ground during the
Council's mission to Timor-Leste from 3 to 6 November,
in which I was privileged to participate and which has
just been exhaustively described by the representative
of South Africa (see S/PV.6858). On that occasion, we
were able to observe the high degree of partnership
and trust between the United Nations, in particular
UNMIT, and the Government, on the one hand, and
the entire Timorese political class, on the other. My
country especially welcomes that.

With respect to political progress, the Timorese
Government has successfully met the challenge of
organizing, in accordance with the requisite standards
and with the participation of all, the presidential
election won by Mr. Taur Matan Ruak, and transparent
parliamentary elections whose results were accepted
by all parties. Consequently, the legitimacy of the new
Government, led by Prime Minister Xanana Gusmao,
has been endorsed by the people, while the opposition
continues to actively participate in parliamentary
debates.

The Government's regular consultations with
political parties not represented in Parliament is another
initiative that should be encouraged. Togo particularly
welcomes the strengthened climate of trust, cooperation,
dialogue and reconciliation among Timorese political
stakeholders who presided over the organization this
year of commemorative demonstrations, such as those
marking the tenth anniversary of the country's return
to independence and the thirteenth anniversary of the
popular referendum.

Similarly, we note that democratic governance has
been strengthened, in particular through the adoption
of the Decree Law setting out the rules concerning
the planning, implementing and funding of public
projects in all districts of the country. In parallel,
the Timorese authorities have pursued their efforts
to strengthen the mechanisms of the fight against
corruption. The Anti-Corruption Commission in the
country plays a remarkable and vital role in that area.
However, as indicated by the Secretary-General in
his report, it is appropriate to urge the Government to
make further progress in adopting precise rules and
making operational the Audit Chamber of the High
Administrative Tax and Audit Court.

Togo has many reasons to welcome the situation in
Timor-Leste, all the more so since the security issue is
no longer a cause of grave concern. In that regard, the
report under consideration shows that UNMIT police
spared no effort to provide support for institutional
development and for strengthening the capacity of the
Timor-Leste national police. However, every effort must
be made to halt not only domestic and gender-based
violence, but also incidents linked to the illegitimate
use of firearms. That is why my country keenly hopes
that the national police, already fully operational, will
steadily be provided with competent human resources
and appropriate logistical resources so as to strengthen
its capacities in all areas, particularly in disciplinary
investigations.

Moreover, we call for open cooperation between
the armed forces and the national police, with
responsibilities clearly allocated between them in order
to avoid possible future conflicts.

In the area of human rights and national
reconciliation, despite important progress, the
Government must strengthen its effort to protect the
rights of its citizens and guarantee access to justice for
all, with particular attention to the cases of those who
have disappeared and their families. It is also necessary
to resume the development of ethics courses for judges,
prosecutors and lawyers.

The tasks entrusted to UNMIT, pursuant to
resolution 2037 (2012), will soon come to an end. As a
prelude to that, we gladly note that the Joint Transition
Plan will be duly carried out until the drawdown of
UNMIT on 31 December, as attested by the fact that
several projects are being carried out jointly by the
Government and the United Nations system.

With regard to the statement of the Timorese
authorities that United Nations support through a
political or peacekeeping mission would no longer be
necessary after 2012, my country hopes that the new
cooperation in the strengthening and developing of
institutions will not skirt such essential matters as the
resolution of socioeconomic problems to achieve the
equitable and sustainable development of Timor-Leste.
It is appropriate to protect gains achieved at such a cost.

In conclusion, I reiterate the gratitude of my
country to UNMIT, the United Nations and its
specialized programmes and funds for their importanty
work, which has made the renaissance of Timor-Leste
possible. I am also grateful to South Africa for the
important role it has played as the leading country in
managing the Timorese situation. Finally, I thank the
troop - and police-contributing countries to UNMIT
and the International Stabilisation Force for the great
sacrifices they have made to bring stability to the
people and Government of Timor-Leste, the true worth
of which we can appreciate today.

The new Timor-Leste still needs the United Nations,
as the Head of the Government stated in his letter of
20 September 2012 (S/2012/736, annex). That is to be
expected from a country emerging from so many years
of sociopolitical conflict and which remains fragile.

