Mr. Mendoza-Garcia (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): Costa Rica thanks the delegation of Egypt for
the timely organization of this debate.

We have witnessed a dramatic evolution in the
nature of the terrorist threat. In recent months, attacks
on almost every continent have killed, maimed or
displaced tens of thousands of civilians. We send a
message of solidarity to the Governments and the
peoples of Egypt and Iraq with respect to the recent
attacks they have suffered.

Terrorism is more than ever a serious threat to
States and the international community as a whole. The
flow of foreign terrorist fighters - more than 30,000
individuals from some 100 United Nations Member
State, as reported by the Organization - has further
complicated the response to the threat. Terrorist groups
such as Da'esh and the Al-Nusra Front promote the
recruitment of young people through media campaigns
with a narrative that presents the West as an enemy of
Islam, which requires recruits willing to defend it.
In 2014 and 2015 alone, Da'esh launched more
than 1,000 media campaigns for recruitment purposes.
These were translated into Russian, English, French
and German. Most consisted of videos showing
terrorists in battle. The second-most recurrent theme
consisted of interviews with terrorists who have been
recruited from around the world. In that period, the
number of foreign fighters grew by 70 per cent. If we
want to prevent vulnerable young people who hold
moderate opinions from becoming militant extremists,
and militant extremists from becoming terrorists, it is
necessary to address the ideological narrative used to
draw them into their ranks.

In that regard, my delegation recognizes the
importance of resolution 1624 (2005), which seeks,
among other things, to prevent educational, cultural
and religious institutions from encouraging extremist
indoctrination by calling for Member States to legally
prevent and prohibit incitement to acts of terrorism, in
accordance with their obligations under international
human rights law.

However, nowadays, when Da'esh recruits mostly
through social networks and collective media, it might
be appropriate for the media to consider the possibility
of adopting voluntary codes of conduct for journalists
covering terrorism, including, for example, avoiding
the glorification of terrorists. Another possibility is to
provide media communication opportunities to victims
of terrorism and their families, thereby empowering
the victims and giving them a voice. That voice
should be transmitted in the same cultural language
and through the same channels used by young people,
like the terrorists do. Without affecting freedom of
expression and the right of access to information, it
may be appropriate to assess whether the establishment
of guidelines such as those I have mentioned could be
useful to counter the terrorist narrative.

The day after the bombing in Paris, a network
campaign was launched under the title "Nous Sommes
Unis", prepared by the Quilliam Foundation, a civil
society think tank based in the United Kingdom.
The campaign carried a message of peace in which
several people, Muslim and non-Muslim, francophone
and non-francophone, European and non-European,
spoke of unity and solidarity, rejecting ideologies and
narratives that divide and kill innocent people. That
is a good example of possible actions to counter the
terrorist narrative.

At the same time, Costa Rica reaffirms its belief
in the need to address other situations that can create
spaces for the spread of terrorism and its narrative, such
as prolonged unresolved conflicts; the dehumanization
of victims; the absence of the rule of law; violations
of human rights; discrimination on ethnic, nationality
or religious bases; the political exclusion; economic
marginalization, and the lack of effective governance,
among others.

We reaffirm the need for a comprehensive,
multidisciplinary and multilevel approach, led by the
United Nations. We take this opportunity to appeal
respectfully to States that have not ratified the Arms
Trade Treaty to do so without delay. The diversion
of weapons to extremist groups could be reduced
significantly if more States implemented the provisions
of the Treaty.

Finally, we wish to reiterate the commitment of
Costa Rica to preventing and combating terrorism in
the context of respect for the rule of law and human
rights, and we call on all States to try to bring to fruition
the ongoing negotiations to draft the comprehensive
counter-terrorism convention, with a View to adopting
it as soon as possible.

