Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank France for convening
today's debate and to reaffirm the Government of
Mexico's gratitude to Ms. Sandra Honore Braithwaite,
Head of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH), and her team, for their tireless
work over the years and their proven commitment to
the Haitian people.

The winding down of MINUSTAH and the
establishment of the new United Nations Mission
in Support of Justice in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) are
positive developments for Haiti. Mexico, as part of the
Economic and Social Council Ad Hoc Advisory Group
on Haiti, has witnessed the iron determination of the
Haitian Government and people to build prosperity in
their country. The United Nations should support the
Haitian Government in those efforts, in accordance
with the national priorities that Haiti itself has defined.

This new stage is a rare opportunity to test the
concepts behind United Nations coordination of peace,
humanitarian assistance and development on the
ground. We expect the United Nations country team
in Haiti to have impeccable coordination, consistency,
efficiency and transparency. Haiti represents a unique
theatre in which the United Nations system can
show that it is possible to make the transition from
conflict management and humanitarian assistance to
coordinating a truly sustainable peace conducive to
the development and fulfilment of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and its Sustainable
Development Goals.

The United Nations has a moral and economic debt
to the Haitian people. We must find an appropriate
response to the problems caused by the terrible cholera
epidemic so that we can care for the families of the
victims and those affected by the epidemic. General
Assembly resolution 71/161, on the new United
Nations approach to cholera in Haiti, recognizes the
Organization's responsibility to the Haitian people.
In that context, I am pleased to inform the Security
Council that Mexico will allocate 100 per cent of its
unencumbered balance from MINUSTAH to the United
Nations Haiti Cholera Response Multi-Partner Trust
Fund. I urge the international community to increase
its support for the fulfilment of the mandate of the new
Mission, bearing in mind that its success will depend to
a large extent on continued support from those who have
been part of MINUSTAH and from new contributors.

The two years of Mexico's participation in
MINUSTAH enabled my country to support the efforts
of the United Nations in Haiti and the Mexican armed
forces to gain experience and build their capacities
for peace operations in a new phase of Mexico's

relationship with the United Nations. My country will
continue to participate in MINUJUSTH, as we believe
that it responds to the important issue of adapting
peacekeeping operations' mandates to the political and
security context on the ground. If we are to strengthen
institutions in Haiti, particularly as regards developing
the operational capacities of its National Police, as well
as making progress in enhancing the rule oflaw and the
protection of human rights, full international support
for MINUJUSTH will continue to be essential, and
Mexico therefore wishes to contribute police personnel
to the Mission.

I would like to conclude by paying tribute to the
efforts of the thousands of men and women who gave
their all to MINUSTAH, some of them losing their
lives. I reiterate Mexico's belief in the importance of
making sustainable peace the guiding thread for the
effectiveness and coherence that we expect from the
work of the United Nations in building and maintaining
international peace and security.

