Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
I, too, wish at the outset to thank Mr. Koenigs and Mr.
Costa for the useful information that they have just
given us. I broadly share their assessment of the
situation. I should also like to welcome the presence of
Mr. D'Alema, who highlighted Italy's efforts to
promote the reconstruction of Afghanistan. We listened
to him with interest.

The Permanent Representative of Germany will
shortly make a statement with which I fully associate
myself. For my part, I should like to emphasize the
following elements.

The Special Representative painted a picture of
contrasts. The security situation remains worrisome, and
the risks of increasing violence continue to be significant.
At the same time, the progress made since the launching
of the Bonn process should not be underestimated: the
central institutions are functioning; administration is
strengthening in a number of provinces; and the economy
is growing and State tax revenues are growing along
with it. Only the building of Afghan capacities -
which will definitely take time - will make it possible
to ensure the development and stability of the country.

In order to improve security, there must be
continued efforts to train, drill and provide equipment
in order to make the Afghan security forces, both
civilian and military, fully operational. But the solution
to the many difficult challenges facing Afghanistan
cannot be exclusively military. The Afghan authorities,
like the international community, must remain fully
engaged to make progress in the following areas:
swiftly improving the living conditions of Afghans,
particularly outside Kabul; building Afghan capacities,
which requires more determined action against
corruption, the drug trafficking and illegal militias;
fighting drug production and trafficking, which jeopardize
security and development; and strengthening coordination
among the members of the international community
within the framework of the Joint Coordination and
Monitoring Board.

The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) is intended to play a major role
in all of those areas, because the United Nations is
regarded as a central and impartial actor. It alone has
both the legitimacy and the expertise needed to
coordinate reconstruction efforts and to support the
consolidation of the democratic transition process by
supporting the actions of the Afghan authorities.

UNAMA must be given the means to fully carry
out this mission. That is why we support the Secretary-
General's recommendation that its mandate be extended
for one year, as well as the priorities that he suggests for
that mandate: strengthening the coordination of assistance
at the local level, particularly humanitarian assistance;
stepping up the good offices mission in matters of
regional cooperation; and promoting human rights and
the protection of civilians.

In that connection, we invite the Special
Representative to continue to promote the
implementation of the Action Plan on Peace, Justice
and Reconciliation, particularly those aspects involving
transitional justice and the fight against impunity. That
is an important commitment undertaken by the Afghan
Government within the framework of the Afghanistan
Compact.

Furthermore, we believe it is essential that
UNAMA devote greater attention to the impact of
fighting on civilian populations and to freedom of
speech in the media. In order to accomplish that, it is
important that UNAMA continues to expand its
geographical presence by opening new provincial
offices where security conditions allow. Beyond that,
the stakes are so high that it is more necessary than
ever to implement a truly integrated strategy that
brings together Afghanistan with all the countries
interested in its stabilization - for example, by
establishing a contact group.

In that context, I wish, finally, to emphasize the
importance of regional cooperation and the support that
the international community can lend to such cooperation.
Pakistan and Afghanistan in particular must be
encouraged to improve control over their common border
and to develop cooperation and exchange among them.

