Mrs. Busic' (Croatia): At the outset, I would like
to express the deepest condolences of the Government
of Croatia to the Russian Federation for the passing
of His Excellency Vitaly Churkin, the Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation to the
United Nations.

I thank Ukraine for initiating this important and
well-timed debate.

Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the representative of the European Union. I shall give
additional remarks in my national capacity.

Europe came a long way in overcoming the horrible
legacy of two world wars that originated on European
soil. Today, former battlefields have been turned into
areas of close cooperation, peace and prosperity.
Nevertheless, some parts of the European continent are
still not immune to conflict and strife, and that leads to
human suffering and instability. While we are facing
new challenges such as mass migration and climate
change, existing disputes and unresolved or protracted
conflicts are hindering Europe's development and
endangering its stability.

The obvious and many-times-uttered question arises
here too: what can we, as States and the international
community assembled in this Organization, undertake
to prevent, mitigate and resolve such occurrences
and situations, building upon past practices and
implementing lessons learned? Answers may be many,
but allow me to share with the Council Croatia's views
and experience in that regard.

During the 1990s, Southeast Europe was the
unfortunate stage of armed conflicts not seen on the
continent since the end of the Second World War. At
the same time, that part of Europe was also the place
of the largest peacekeeping operations in the history of
the United Nations. Several key lessons learned from
that period can be summarized as follows. First, a clear
and precise mandate is the prerequisite for the success
of any operation. Second, the strict observation of
international law is crucial, in particular with regard to
the inviolability of internationally recognized borders.
Third, an engaged preventive diplomacy and a timely
response to early warnings - which in the case of
the former Yugoslavia utterly failed - are pivotal.
Fourth and finally, a tailor-made approach to complex
sanctions regimes and their principled implementation
can go hand in hand with the above-mentioned elements
of the equation.

The United Nations has been haunted by its failures
in Rwanda, Croatia and Bosnia-Herzegovina, when its
peacekeeping forces failed to prevent atrocities and
the genocide of civilian populations they purported to
protect. It became clear that the United Nations could
no longer follow the traditional concept of protection
and that the United Nations troops needed to actively
defend civilians from armed attacks when necessary.

However, a good example of creative diplomacy
and a well-designed peacekeeping mandate can be seen
in the United Nations Transitional Administration for
Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium mission
in Croatia, which led to the peaceful reintegration of
the occupied Croatian region of Eastern Slavonia into
Croatia. To this day, it remains one of the most successful
operations in the history of the United Nations. Croatia
stands ready to share its experiences concerning
all aspects of that fruitful endeavour, together with
its know-how in confidence-building, post-conflict
stabilization, reconstruction and reconciliation.

European post-conflict experiences demonstrate
the importance of institution-building and the
strengthening of the rule of law and the administrative
framework of the State. This is essential for fostering
peace and creating conditions for economic prosperity
and job creation. Only then can old animosities be
fully replaced with cross-border cooperation and true
reconciliation. The history of the European Union, a
member State of which Croatia became in 2013, serves
as a shining example in this regard.

While the experience of South-East Europe clearly
demonstrates how costly the failure not to act on time
and in a decisive manner can be, at the same time it
also shows that in post-conflict peacebuilding, regional
organizations can play an important stabilizing role.
Such is, for instance, the engagement of the European
Union and its cooperation with the United Nations in
an effective and calibrated burden-sharing in Bosnia-
Herzegovina through Operation Althea of the European
Union-led peacekeeping force.

As a signatory to the Dayton Peace Agreement,
Croatia bears a special responsibility for stability in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The genuine institutional
equality of all three constituent peoples and all citizens
is crucial to the long-term stability of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which will contributie to the security of
South-East Europe. In this regard, Croatia will also
continue to strongly support the European and Euro-
Atlantic perspective of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
South-East Europe in general as the best impetus for
safeguarding sustainable peace, development and the
strengthening of institutions.

The Security Council and the international
community as a whole should spare no effort to bring an
end to current active conflicts in Europe, in particular
with a View to mitigating the grave situation in Ukraine.
Simultaneously, we ought to push for the resolution of
all other existing or protracted conflicts in Europe that
continue to endanger international peace and security
in the foreseeable future. The tools for this are available
and known and the expertise is vast, so we must not
allow history to repeat itself because, purportedly, no
one was listening the first time around.

