Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We are
grateful for the briefing by Mr. Ould Abdallah, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia
and the statements of Mr. Omaar, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Somalia, and Ambassador Lamamra,
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union, who join the Council today.

My delegation shares the View of the Special
Representative on what has been called the long march
of Somalia towards stability, taking into account both
the progress made in just a few weeks and the many
remaining challenges. In the light of the success of the
presidential elections held on 30 January in Djibouti, it
is important for the international community to
redouble its efforts to complete the establishment of
the Somali State and its institutions, in close
coordination with the new Government of Somalia, the
United Nations, the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and regional organizations.

In Mexico's View, concrete action in the
following areas is of priority. First, it is fundamentally
important that the Djibouti agreement, signed in 2008
between the Transitional Federal Government and the
Alliance for the Re-liberation of Somalia, continue to
be the operative mechanism to promote the process of
national peace and reconciliation. The new President
has demonstrated his commitment to international

efforts to establish peace. An example is the agreement
reached with some insurgent groups to declare a truce
and proclaim Islamic law, sharia. However, it is
worrying that the most extremist groups remain on the
sidelines of dialogue, which threatens the fragile
progress achieved. The President must therefore
continue his efforts to bring about the full
implementation of the agreement in order to promote
inclusive political dialogue to stabilize the country.

Secondly, it is essential that the new Government
focus its efforts on a complete reform of the security
sector - based upon the recommendations of the
technical assessment mission which visited Addis
Ababa and Nairobi last January - as a useful starting
point to achieve progress in strengthening the Somali
police force with the support of the Joint Security
Committee and the Joint Security Force.

Concrete progress must also be promoted with
regard to the justice system and to programmes to
combat national and regional arms trafficking. That
must be linked to actions to bring about the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
ex-combatants as well as demining activities with
United Nations support. The responsibility of the
African Union here is essential, and close cooperation
and coordination with regional bodies will facilitate the
creation of strategies to consolidate the rule of law and
bring about full compliance with international law as a
basis for socio-economic development.

Thirdly, the Security Council must bring about
the active participation of regional bodies and
mechanisms during discussions on the issue. Exchange
of information and points of View with groups such as
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
the International Contact Group on Somalia can
provide valuable contributions to such discussions.

Fourthly, with regard to human rights, the
enlarged police force must ensure full observance of
human rights and adopt measures to protect the civilian
population and ensure those responsible for violations
be held accountable for the deaths of civilians, whether
resulting from crossfire incidents, targeted
assassinations or the murder of judges, as such acts
foster impunity and undermine the judicial system.

Mexico also condemns the attacks against
humanitarian workers, which have caused a reduction
in humanitarian aid and significantly affected
vulnerable groups, in particular women and children.

Measures must also be taken to address the alarming
recruitment and use of children in armed conflict.
Here, we acknowledge the significant role played by
the Human Rights Unit of the United Nations Political
Office for Somalia. We reiterate how important it is for
that Office to continue its work in coordination with
the new Government and AMISOM.

With regard to international humanitarian law,
Mexico calls upon the parties to the conflict to observe
its provisions and principles, to cease attacks
immediately and to avoid situations where civilians
may be affected.

It is also essential that the new Somali
Government fulfil the measures of the sanctions
Committee, as a complementary measure to the
endeavours to bring about peace and security in the
region.

With regard to the report of the Secretary-General
on piracy in Somalia (S/2009/ 146), we acknowledge
that piracy is one of the consequences of the serious
instability affecting the country. That is why we agree
with the Secretary-General on the importance of
following an integrated approach to achieve stability in
the region.

Mexico condemns acts of piracy, armed robbery
and violent acts against the safety of navigation in the
Gulf of Aden and believes that their perpetrators must
be brought to justice under the applicable legal system.

Likewise, Mexico supports the validity, relevance
and applicability of existing international law to
address the threat represented by acts of piracy off the
coast of Somalia. In that regard, we recognize the
importance of Security Council resolutions 1816
(2008) and 1846 (2008), which authorize, subject to
certain conditions, entry into Somalia's territorial
waters, in accordance with the United Nations Charter.

I wish to emphasize that in Mexico's View - as
the texts of the aforementioned resolutions explicitly
indicate i the powers granted to the Security Council
under Chapter VII of the Charter are the legal basis
that permits States to enter Somalia's territorial waters
for the purpose of suppressing acts of piracy and armed
robbery at sea and to employ, in Somalia's territorial
waters, in a manner consistent with actions permitted
on the high seas with respect to piracy under relevant
international law all necessary measures to counter acts
of piracy and armed robbery.

In that sense, in both resolutions, the Security
Council, having determined the situation to be one that
threatens international peace and security, decided on
the measures necessary to maintain or re-establish that
peace and security. It is important also to recall that
both resolutions explicitly establish that the
authorizations granted are not considered precedents in
customary international law. In our View, that is
recognition of the exceptional nature of the authorized
actions and of the Security Council acting pursuant to
Chapter VII of the Charter. With that understanding,
Mexico wishes to review its support for the initiatives
undertaken by the International Maritime Organization
and the Security Council to counter this threat in a
coordinated and consistent way.

Lastly, my delegation supports the work of the
Contact Group on Piracy Off the Coast of Somalia, set
up pursuant to resolution 1851 (2008), and recognizes
the importance of the multinational operations taking
place off the coast of Somalia to combat piracy.

