Mr. Vrailas: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its member States.
The candidate countries the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as
well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova, Armenia
and Georgia, align themselves with this statement.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive report (S/2014/876), Special
Representative Haysom and Executive Director
Fedotov for their briefings, and Ambassador Tanin for
his statement.

I would also like to express my heartfelt condolences
to our Pakistani colleagues, to the Government of
Pakistan and to the families of the victims for the
heinous attack on the military school in Peshawar, which
left us all in shock. The European Union stands fully
committed to tackling the threat posed by terrorism and
ready to assist the Pakistani Government.

We saw recently at the London Conference on
Afghanistan that the international community remains
committed to assisting the Government and the people
ofAfghanistan, The United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan and the United Nations agencies remain
critical to the effective coordination and delivery of
international assistance to Afghanistan. The role of
the United Nations will be even more important in the
coming years in building Afghan capacity, and thereby
supporting effective and accountable administration
across the country as the international presence
decreases.

The European Union believes that it is the right
time for the relationship between the international
community and Afghanistan to take a different shape.
Afghans have increasingly taken the lead responsibility
in all areas across the country and have shown increasing
willingness to engage in regional cooperation. The
European Union and its member States have already
signalled their intention to change the way they operate
in Afghanistan. Our new strategy puts the emphasis
on supporting the development of Afghanistan's own
institutions - institutions critical for ensuring that
the legacy of the international engagement will be an
Afghanistan that is able to stand on its own two feet, an
Afghanistan that enables its people to live in the peace
and prosperity to which they legitimately aspire.

The London Conference provided a good
opportunity to hear and see the plans that the National
Unity Government has for further progress and
increased self-reliance. The European Union believes
that the vision put forward in the "Realizing Self-
Reliance" reform paper can be the basis for renewed
progress in Afghanistan. At the same time, it is also
critical that efforts be made to ensure progress on peace
and reconciliation. It is imperative now that President
Ghani Ahmadzai and Chief Executive Officer Abdullah
appoint a new Cabinet as soon as possible. One of the
first tasks of the new ministers will be to substantiate
the plans set out in the Government's vision to allow
for consultation with Afghans and the international
community in advance of the senior officials meeting
foreseen to take place in Kabul in 2015.

In developing the details for the meeting, the EU
would like to highlight three areas that would benefit
from particular attention.

First, with regard to justice and the rule of law,
while we realize the challenges they pose, we find it
is vital that Afghans see the development of a system
where every Afghan stands equal before the law. The
key to guaranteeing greater equality for women in
Afghanistan is not just to have more laws saying they
are equal, but the consistent implementation of the laws
that are already in place. Some important appointments
have already been made, but now Afghanistan needs a
concerted effort to drive reform across the whole of the
justice system.

Secondly, Afghans must be empowered to keep their
Government accountable at all levels. That requires a
programme to improve subnational governance that
transfers decision-making authority and resources from
the national level to the provinces, from the provinces to
the districts and from the districts to the communities.

Thirdly, Afghans must be assured that security
will be maintained. Further strengthening the capacity
to address the remaining security challenges will be a
prerequisite for additional progress. The sustainable
economic reconstruction of Afghanistan largely
depends upon a safe and stable Afghanistan, as well as
a stable and conducive regional environment. In that
regard, we would like to emphasize the importance of
the Resolute Support Mission, which will train, advise
and assist the Afghan national defence and security
forces at the invitation of Afghanistan.

In conclusion, these changes, together with those
set out in more detail in the paper provided by the
Government of Afghanistan, can contribute to the real
change we all want to see. Afghans themselves are
really the ones taking the decisions and shaping their
destiny.

