The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.

I thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Arnault for his briefing.

Americans are grieving today along with
Colombians for the lives lost in the terrible mudslides
this past weekend. We express our heartfelt condolences
to the people of Colombia who were affected by
that tragedy.

Special Representative Arnault is playing a critical
role in supporting the implementation of the historic
Final Peace Agreement.

As my colleagues know, we have begun a review
of United Nations peacekeeping missions. Although
the Colombia Mission is not a peacekeeping mission,
the same principles of effectiveness and accountability
apply. To be effective, missions must have a solid
political foundation on which to build. They must enjoy
the cooperation of the host countries. They must have
clear realistic goals with identifiable exit strategies.
And we as a body must be able to adjust those missions
to fit new realities.

I want to congratulate the Monitoring and
Verification Mechanism in Colombia for meeting
those and additional criteria. The Mission has all
the pieces in place for a successful outcome. It has a
carefully designed mandate to support a clear and
established peace process. It also has a clear deadline
for the demobilization and disarmament of the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC). In
that regard, I was pleased to hear that both sides are
working together towards the implementation of
the Peace Agreement as quickly as possible. We are
thankful for both the process that they have established
and the cooperation that they have achieved. We urge
both sides to build on that momentum so as to move
forward more quickly.
As the Security Council looks forward to
continuing its support for Colombia through monitoring
the next stage of the peace process, we must keep in
mind the principles of effectiveness that the Council
has developed. I believe that those are the building
blocks of continued success in achieving lasting peace.
Lasting peace in Colombia means that the Government
will need to extend its authority throughout the entire
State. All parties must now work with the Government
to make that happen. It is no secret that, as the FARC
move into demobilization zones, they leave behind
remote, lawless areas that have been largely untouched
by the Colombian Government. The political vacuum
that that has created is a dangerous threat to long-term
peace. It must be filled before other armed groups,
including drug traffickers, step in.
To that end, the United States continues to enjoy
strong cooperation with Colombia in combating
drug trafficking. We are providing assistance to the
Government in fulfilling the Peace Agreement so
as to end Colombia's illicit drug problem. We hope
and expect that progress will continue. As we have
discussed today, much good has been done, but much
more remains to be done.

During the time during which I have been here,
I have learned that moments of hope and promise are
truly moments to be savoured. For Colombia, this is
one of those moments. The United States stands with
Colombia in building lasting peace for its citizens.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Colombia.

