Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in French): Allow
me at the outset to warmly thank France for organizing
this very important ministerial debate on the protection
of civilian populations during peacekeeping operations.
I also wish to welcome your presence here with us today,
Mr. Minister, and that of His Excellency Mr. Faustin
Archange Touadera, President of the Central African
Republic. I also thank Mr. Peter Maurer, President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross,
for his statement.

(spoke in Arabic)

The atrocities that civilians endure in the many
conflicts raging around the world today, particularly in
the Middle East and Africa, represent an unprecedented
challenge to the basic pillars of international law,
international humanitarian law and the enforcement
of the principle of protecting civilians in times of
conflict. Such atrocities particularly impact women and
children, the groups most vulnerable to such violations.
Despite the great advancements on the conceptual
level in the protection of civilians since the adoption
of resolution 1265 (1999), which established the
protection of civilians as a key priority for the Security
Council and made it one of the major pillars of the
mandates of United Nations peacekeeping operations,
the continued plight of civilians in many armed
conflicts has clearly exemplified the degree of failure
of our efforts to provide protection on the ground. The
most appropriate way for peacekeeping operations to
undertake a role in protecting civilians is still unclear.
There is no agreement yet among Member States on
the effectiveness of the use of force by United Nations
missions to protect civilians. In that context, Egypt
pays tribute to the Kigali Principles on the Protection
of Civilians in armed conflict.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo was granted an
active mandate in the field of cooperation, in particular
with the Force Intervention Brigade, which was an
offensive component. Despite its relative success,
that mandate did not succeed in providing enough
protection to civilians in eastern Congo, where they
are still the Victims of atrocities at the hands of armed
groups. Turning to South Sudan, the Organization
provided direct protection to civilians in the United
Nations camps. However, despite those efforts, that
style of direct protection - notwithstanding its
moral imperative - is still extremely costly and not
sustainable. It also does not expand its protection to the
hundreds of thousands of civilians at risk beyond the
gates of United Nations camps. In addition, they face
overcrowding in such camps, particularly the ones that
impose security inside those walls.

We should first stress that States and Governments
shoulder the primary responsibility for the protection
of civilians. The objective of peacekeeping operations
is to promote the capabilities of States to meet
their obligations, while respecting the principles
of sovereignty, national ownership and the cultural
specificity of the host country. In that context, we can
look at the role ofpeacekeeping operations in providing
protection to civilians in terms of three main pillars.

First, as a political tool that enables them to play
a central role in providing a conducive environment
to end conflicts and reach a peaceful settlement and
in providing support to the parties to the conflict in
the implementation of the peace agreements reached
among them.
Secondly, those missions play a role in providing
physical and material protection to civilians through
the military and police forces in cases where the State
is unable to provide protection and the peacekeepers
establish refugee camps or counter the attacks of
armed groups.

Thirdly, the missions can provide a safe environment
through the implementation of a number of measures,
including promoting and developing relevant national
institutions in the country concerned, such as the
justice and security sectors.

Therefore, efforts to develop the capabilities of
peacekeeping operations must stress the following:

First, operations should standardize the concepts
regarding the protection of civilians and set policies
that accurately define the duties demanded of the
peacekeeping operations, including clarifying the rules
of engagement that the forces must adhere to while
undertaking their duties.

Secondly, troop-contributing countries should
be involved in establishing the mandates of the
peacekeeping operations and a planning process aimed
at ensuring the presence of a common vision and
common objective with regard to the tasks that the
operations should carry out.

Thirdly, troop-contributing countries must include
a component on the protection of civilians in their
predeployment training so that they can inform their
troops of the scope of their duties.

Fourthly, the Secretariat should be encouraged to
initiate better communication on the social level, have
an early-warning system, report any attack against
civilians and ensure a prompt response from the
peacekeeping operations.

Fifthly, peacekeeping missions should be provided
with the necessary expertise and components so as
to enable them to provide protection to civilians, and
the Secretariat must regularly provide a report on all
United Nations missions on the extent to which they
have implemented their mandate.

Indeed, there have been great advancements in
the capability of peacekeeping operations to provide
protection to civilians. However, the increasing number
of conflicts and gross violations, including the resort
to Violence, forced displacements and cutting access
to humanitarian aid, are factors that we need to take
into account in order to promote a better role for the
United Nations in the framework of peacekeeping
operations, in particular with regard tor the protection
of civilians. Here I would like to refer to the fact that
ending conflicts is the only sure way to sustainably
protect civilians. The effective protection of civilians
in armed conflict should not be limited to physical or
material protection. It should focus, first and foremost,
on providing political solutions aimed at ending
conflicts and preventing their resurgence. It should
also address the root causes of such conflicts so as to
prevent their recurrence.

That might be the central message emanating
from the reports of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations (S/2015/682) and of the Advisory
Group of Experts on the Review of the Peacebuilding
Architecture (S/2015/490), in addition to the need
to accord greater attention in the future to the new
challenges and difficulties that threaten civilians,
which, apart from armed conflicts, consist mainly of
the spread of international terrorism as a nefarious
phenomenon. Any effort to promote only material or
physical protection will end up being only a marginal
effort that tackles the symptoms and not the source of
the problem. It will not ensure a genuine and sustainable
protection of civilians. Peacekeeping operations are
merely a tool to protect civilians and should therefore
be used in the framework of a more comprehensive
strategy aimed at settling conflicts and preventing
their resurgence.

