Mrs. Juodkaite Putrimiene (Lithuania): I wish
to congratulate the United Kingdom on assuming the
presidency of the Council for the month of November,
and to thank Spain for its excellent work in presiding
over the Council in October.

I would like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
for her latest report on Libya and for her briefing today.
Lithuania remains deeply concerned about the
ongoing conflict in Libya. Human rights violations and
abuses and violations of international humanitarian
law continue across Libya. All parties to the conflict
have to refrain from committing atrocities and take
all necessary measures to prevent the commission of
such crimes. We are seriously concerned about the
continuous threats to human rights defenders, media
workers and journalists. Many human rights defenders
and journalists have fled the country, fallen silent or
operate underground because of the continued attacks,
threats and intimidation, abductions and arbitrary
detentions. We encourage the Prosecutor and her
Office to continue to monitor this situation closely.
Furthermore, the barbaric crimes perpetrated by Daesh
and similar groups, including massive executions, may
constitute crimes under the Court's jurisdiction and
have to be further monitored by the Prosecutor.

We appreciate the Prosecutor's efforts to highlight
the plight of internally displaced persons and, in
particular, the situation of the Tawerghans. We welcome
the meeting of the Misrata/Tawergha Joint Committee,
held in Tunis early in September. The agreement to
develop their return strategies and plans for reparations
is a positive development. Ensuring the safe return
and protection of the Tawerghans should be seen as an
important element of national reconciliation.

Lithuania also welcomes and supports the ongoing
dialogue on cooperation and burden-sharing between
the Government of Libya and the Office of the
Prosecutor. We would like to underline the importance
of continuing such judicial cooperation in order to
address impunity for atrocities, including through the
implementation of the memorandum of understanding
on burden-sharing regarding investigations and
prosecutions in Libya.

Lithuania thanks the Prosecutor for her update
on the cases against Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and
Abdullah Al-Senussi. Libya should uphold its legal
obligations and surrender Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi to
the International Criminal Court. With regard to the
verdicts and sentences announced in Tripoli last July
against Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and other Qadhafi
officials, we call on Libya to ensure that these steps
do not undermine its responsibility and obligation
to cooperate with the Court. We also note that the
Prosecutor's Office will continue to monitor and collect
information on the progress of the proceedings against
Abdullah Al-Senussi. We are concerned about the
allegations of torture and inhuman treatment during
interrogation sessions at the Al-Habda prison, where
Al-Senussi is also being held. We encourage the Libyan
authorities to take measures to put an end to degrading
treatment and torture, if such acts do occur, and to
investigate and punish those responsible.

Allow me to conclude by expressing our gratitude
to Prosecutor Bensouda for her dedicated work and
for the tireless efforts of the International Criminal
Court in dealing with enormously difficult cases. Let
me underline that combating impunity is an obligation
of the entire international community. Therefore, the
United Nations has to ensure that adequate resources
are available for investigating the situations referred to
the Court by the Security Council.

