Mr. Gnehm (United States of America): The
resolution adopted by the Council today marks a historic
step for the people of El Salvador and for United Nations
peace-keeping. On 30 April, the mandate of the United
Nations Observer Mission in El Salvador (ONUSAL) will
end, bringing to a close one of the most successful peace-
keeping operations ever authorized by the Security Council.
With the end of ONUSAL, the Security Council ends its
involvement in peace-keeping in El Salvador.

Under ONUSAL's vigilance and with its assistance,
the major goals set out in the 1992 Peace Accords have
been accomplished. In 1994, the Frente Farabundo Marti
para la Liberacion Nacional (FMLN) participated in free,
fair and non-violent elections and is now the leading
opposition party in El Salvador. The FMLN's military
structure has been dismantled and its weapons destroyed.

Further, the Salvadoran Armed Forces have been
reduced to one third their wartime size. The
Ad Hoc Commission removed over 100 officers for their
past human rights and other abuses. The Commission on
the Truth investigated the most notorious crimes of the
war, fixed responsibility and made recommendations to
prevent such acts from reoccurring. A new police force,
the National Civil Police, has replaced the paramilitary
security forces. Approximately 19,000 people have
received land under the accords and thousands more have
received education, credit and technical training. Today,
El Salvador is a country which is enjoying the first fruits
of peace and reconciliation.

The end of ONUSAL's exceptional work in
El Salvador is not a sign of flagging international interest
but a vote of confidence that the Salvadoran people can
complete the peace accords without direct international
supervision. Today's resolution urges both former
combating sides to accelerate their efforts towards
fulfilling the accords. The Government of El Salvador and
the FMLN have a solemn responsibility to implement
fully the remaining chapters of the peace accord, which
include that on the judicial system, the electoral system
and economic and social issues.

The international community will continue to assist
with these efforts. The Secretary-General has expressed
his intention to establish an office in El Salvador, headed
by his personal representative, to verify compliance by
the parties in carrying out remaining elements of the
peace accords. With the end of United Nations peace-
keeping efforts in El Salvador, we hope that States
Members of the United Nations will continue to support
the Salvadoran people as they finish their long march
towards a lasting peace.

