Mr. Al-Bader (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like first to extend our thanks to you, Mr. President, for
convening this important periodic meeting which keeps
Council members abreast of new developments in the
Middle East. I wish also to thank Mr. Alvaro de Soto,
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his presentation to the Council and for the attention he
accords to this question. My delegation endorses the
5
statement to be made later by the representative of the
Kingdom of Bahrain on behalf of the Group of Arab
States.

We in the State of Qatar believe that a
comprehensive and permanent settlement is within
reach, but that it can come about only through
dialogue. That is why we were in the forefront of those
who called for an open ministerial -level meeting of the
Council last month to revive the peace process. It
behoves the Security Council, which is responsible for
the maintenance of international peace and security, to
continue providing the necessary momentum to the
peace process. The international community,
particularly the permanent members of the Security
Council and the members of the Quartet, should take
concrete and tangible steps to renew the stagnant peace
process in the Middle East on all tracks, in accordance
with prior agreements, the relevant Security Council
resolutions, the terms of reference of the peace process
and the Road Map.

We would like to emphasize the following points.
First, any unilateral settlement runs counter to the
terms of reference and the principles of the peace
process and cannot constitute a comprehensive and
permanent settlement. Secondly, repressive practices
and illegal policies, such as building or expanding
settlements, the separation wall and isolating
Palestinian villages and cities from each other, hamper
the peace efforts and exacerbate the humanitarian crisis
which the Palestinian people is enduring in the
occupied territories. Thirdly, the Security Council has
repeatedly called for the establishment of a viable,
democratic and sovereign Palestinian State, living side
by side with Israel in peace and security. Hence, the
Security Council and the international community,
particularly the sponsors of the peace process and the
Quartet, should exert more strenuous efforts to resume
the peace process, in accordance with agreed bases and
relevant Security Council resolutions, the principle of
land for peace and other legal mandates.

Here, I would like to cite the statement made by
the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of my country in his statement before the
Council on 21 September 2006, in which he said,

"The problem at hand does not need a
magic solution and neither side can, in my
opinion, come up with an innovative solution
because the solution is known to all and sundry. It
is the principle of land for peace, which is based
on the existence of two States, Palestine and
Israel, which President George Bush referred to
in his address to the General Assembly".
(S/PV.5530, p.7)

While we urge the parties concerned to shoulder
their responsibilities and return to the negotiating table,
the State of Qatar would also call on the Israeli
Government to take the peace process seriously and to
withdraw to the 4 June 1967 line. Given that the main
reason for the conflict is Israel's continuing illegitimate
occupation of Palestinian territories, that is something
Israel must do if we are to achieve just and
comprehensive peace in the region.

