The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Peru.

I thank Mr. Ibrahim Gambari, Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, for his valuable briefing
to the Council today.

First, we wish to express our vigorous
condemnation of the assassination of Lebanese
Minister Pierre Gemayel and to reiterate our support
for the process of sovereign and democratic affirmation
in Lebanon. As I said at our meeting of 9 November on
this item, this month's serious developments
underscore the need to return to the peaceful solution
offered by the Quartet's Road Map, which was
endorsed by the Security Council in resolution 1515
(2003). That is the required path if we are to meet the
goal of two democratic States, Israel and Palestine,
living side by side in peace and security.

To that end, we must encourage the internal
cohesion of the Palestinian political regime. The
problems of governance in Palestine make it difficult

to undertake measures to prevent attacks from Gaza
against Israeli objectives. Such attacks are
unacceptable. Unfortunately, this situation has not been
conducive either to the success of efforts to free the
Israeli soldier who was kidnapped on 25 June 2006 or
to putting an end to the smuggling of weapons into
Gaza.

Moreover, the disproportionate response, which
results in civilian Palestinian victims and which Peru
has condemned, is a violation of international
humanitarian law and creates hurdles to the search for
ways to promote dialogue. In that connection, Peru
once again urges all the parties involved to break the
cycle of violence, destruction and death that has
brought so much suffering to both peoples. We also
urge the parties to respect the norms of international
humanitarian law and to return to the path of dialogue
in order to renew the peace process in accordance with
the criteria established by the Quartet.

The international community should support the
peace process in a constructive way, with a view to
easing tension, restoring stability and facilitating the
implementation of the Road Map in order to reach a
final, just and sustainable solution in the region.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of
Finland.

