Mr. Kuchynski (Ukraine): My delegation
welcomes today's open debate as a logical extension of
a number of discussions held by the Security Council
over the past few years on closely related subjects. We
recognize the additional relevance and value of our
discussion in the light of the forthcoming fourth high-
level meeting between the United Nations and regional
organizations, to be held tomorrow and the day after
tomorrow on the same topic, cooperation for peace-
building.

My delegation would therefore like to thank the
Tunisian presidency for organizing this timely
discussion and for the submission for our consideration
of a thoughtful and comprehensive background
document. We are also grateful to the Secretary-
General for his important and very informative
statement.

It is known that over the past decade United
Nations peacekeeping efforts have undergone an
evolution in the face of new challenges to peace and
security, in particular a significant increase in the
number and complexity of conflicts. This evolution has
given birth to a new generation of operations with
multifunctional mandates, not only targeted at stopping
the violence and bloodshed but also aimed at
preventing the emergence or recurrence of conflicts, as
well as facilitating the movement of war-torn societies
from violent conflicts towards reconciliation, economic
reconstruction and democratic development.

In pursuit of these efforts, the United Nations has
accumulated vast and largely successful experience in
Namibia, Mozambique, El Salvador, Guatemala, the
Central African Republic, Eastern Slavonia, Cambodia
and the Republic of Macedonia. Today, the United
Nations is involved in large-scale operations with
peace-building components in Kosovo, Bosnia and
Herzegovina and East Timor. It has recently established
Peace-building Support Offices in Liberia, Guinea-
Bissau, the Central African Republic and Tajikistan.
The United Nations peace-building process in Haiti is
still under way. We look forward to examining the
forthcoming proposals of the Secretary-General on the
establishment of a peace-building mission for Somalia.

All of these examples testify to the fact that the
issue of peace-building is becoming increasingly
topical for the United Nations; its peace-building
efforts are in very great demand throughout the world.
Looking at peace-building from the conceptual
standpoint, we remain ofthe View that it is inseparably
linked to conflict prevention. In this context, we
recognize the distinction between preventive peace-
building, embracing a wide variety of long-term
political, institutional and developmental activities to
address the structural causes of conflicts, and post-
conflict peace-building, encompassing reconstruction
and development efforts to prevent the recurrence of
conflict.

We fully share the View that the time has come to
define a common approach to peace-building and to
work towards a comprehensive and universally agreed
strategy for peace-building and conflict prevention,
involving all international partners. This view is, by
and large, in line with the proposal that Ukraine
advanced at the Millennium Summit and the Security
Council Summit on the need to elaborate a
comprehensive United Nations strategy for conflict
prevention on the basis of the large-scale use of
preventive diplomacy and peace-building. We hope that
the ongoing efforts to reform the existing mechanism
of United Nations peacekeeping, which were boosted
by the Brahimi report and blessed by the Millennium
Summit, will yield the expected results.

Obviously, the implementation of such a
comprehensive strategy will require effective
interaction between all bodies and agencies of the
United Nations, as well as the active input of Member
States, regional organizations, international financial
institutions, non-governmental organizations, local
stakeholders and other players. At the same time, my
delegation is convinced that the United Nations should
retain the primary role as the coordinator and originator
of these activities. In this regard, the idea of
developing a permanent mechanism within the United
Nations to coordinate international peace-building
efforts could be very helpful.

It is recognized that the existing capacities of the
United Nations system in pursuing peace-building
strategies in terms of economic development are not
fully utilized. Meanwhile, there is no need to prove that
poverty and underdevelopment are among major
contributing factors to conflicts. The efforts to
eradicate poverty and promote sustainable development
constitute an integral part of the process of long-term
peace-building and conflict prevention. In this context,
we welcome the recently increased attention of the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP),
which is in a position to assist conflict-riven societies
in overcoming the consequences of the conflicts, to its
role in crisis and post-conflict situations. We hope that
this positive tendency will further grow.

The role of international financial institutions and
the international donor community at large in providing
the necessary funds and resources to the collective
peace-building efforts can hardly be overestimated. We
believe that more active involvement of these
institutions in this work in the future should be further
encouraged.

I would also like to mention the importance for
peace-building approaches of the effective
implementation of programmes of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) of
ex-combatants. In this context, permanent attention, in
our View, should be drawn to the issue of combating
the illicit traffic in arms, which has a direct impact on
the DDR process in peacekeeping environments. We
hope that the 2001 United Nations Conference on the
Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All
Its Aspects, to be held in July, will strengthen
international efforts in this field and contribute to the
effectiveness ofthe DDR process in existing and future
United Nations operations.

As regards the situation of child soldiers, let me
reiterate my country's position that including the post
of child protection adviser in the staff of all United
Nations peacekeeping forces and peace-building
missions should become standard practice.

Securing the rights of refugees and internally
displaced persons to repatriation and resettlement, as
well as their property rights, is yet another Vital
element of the United Nations peace-building efforts.
We also cannot agree more with the View that the
establishment of democratic institutions and the
promotion of human rights and good governance are
prerequisites for the ultimate success of peace-building
and conflict prevention. In this context we recognize
the growing role of the United Nations police
component in ensuring these decisive factors.

My delegation shares the views of the President,
expressed in his letter before us today, that the Security
Council can play the role of the international
community's catalyst for attention and commitment to
the demands of peace-building efforts, especially post-
conflict peace-building. At the same time, we believe
that when the United Nations peace efforts in a zone of
conflict reach the stage of long-term preventive peace-
building, the Security Council should pass the main
player's baton to other bodies of the United Nations,
like UNDP, to coordinate further international efforts to
this end.

We also believe that the practice of consultations
between the United Nations Security Council and the
regional organizations involved with the United
Nations in joint endeavours of post-conflict peace-
building - like the one we had a week ago with the
Chairman-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe - should be established on
a regular basis.

Finally, let me assure you, Mr. President, that my
country, which has the experience of participation in
eight United Nations operations or missions with
peace-building elements, intends to continue further its
practical contribution to strengthening the United
Nations capacities for peace-building and the
elaboration of a comprehensive approach to it.

