Mr. Skoog: It is an honour to back in the Security
Council, now in my new capacity as Head of the
Delegation of the European Union (EU) to the United
Nations. I address the Council today on behalf of the
High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs
and Security Policy, Mr. Josep Borrell Fontelles, in
his capacity as Coordinator of the Joint Commission
established by the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA). I would also like to extend my gratitude to
Secretary-General Antonio Guterres and Mr. Marc
Pecsteen de Buytswerve, Ambassador of Belgium
serving as Facilitator for the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015), for the great collaboration over
the past months. In addition, I would like to convey my
deep appreciation for the work done by colleagues in
the Secretariat, including in relation to the procurement
channel - as just mentioned by Under-Secretary-
General Rosemary DiCarlo - and work to prepare the
latest report (S/2019/934) of the Secretary-General on
the implementation of the resolution.

Today we are witnessing a major challenge, as
the JCPOA is under increasing pressure. We have
a responsibility, as members of the international
community, to prevent it from falling apart. The
remaining parties to the JCPOA at the latest Joint
Commission meeting, on 6 December, emphasized the
key importance of full and effective implementation
by all sides, as well as their determination to pursue
all efforts to preserve the agreement. The reasons are
clear, and it is important to remember where we were
before the JCPOA.

The plan rolled back Iran's nuclear programme, set
strict limitations, blocking Iran's access to plutonium
and high-enriched uranium, and established the most
robust verification mechanism by the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). Once the JCPOA
was agreed upon, more than four years ago, Iran fully
complied with the nuclear-related provisions for three
and a half years, including for 14 months after the
United States withdrew from the plan and reimposed
unilateral sanctions. That has been verified and reported
by the IAEA through the Agency's robust monitoring
mechanism on the Iranian nuclear programme.

However, earlier this year, Iran decided to embark
on a worrisome path of decreasing its nuclear-related
commitments. That is something that the European
Union deeply regrets, and we strongly urge Iran to
change its course of action. The JCPOA is a nuclear
non-proliferation agreement with obligations on all
parties. Alongside the implementation by Iran of its
nuclear-related commitments, the lifting of sanctions
that allows for the normalization of trade and economic
relations with Iran constitute essential parts of
the J CPOA.

In that regard, the European Union and all 28
member States deeply regret the withdrawal of the
United States from the agreement. The United States
subsequent reimposition of unilateral sanctions and its
decision not to extend waivers with regard to trade in
oil are having a significant impact on Iran's economy.
In addition, the United States decision not to fully
renew waivers for nuclear non-proliferation projects
could bear significant security implications.

The EU expresses its strong support for the
continuation of key nuclear non-proliferation projects
that are an essential part of the JCPOA. We welcome
continued efforts by the Arak Working Group
co-Chairs - China and the United Kingdom - in
taking the Arak modernization project forward. We
also welcome the efforts of Russia to continue the
implementation of the project at Fordow for the
production of medical stable isotopes.
The European Union, for its part, lifted its
sanctions in line with its JCPOA obligations. It
remains committed to work on the preservation of
the agreement, including towards the objective of
normalizing economic and trade relations with Iran.
We welcome the fact that efforts have been intensified
in recent weeks, particularly on the Instrument in
Support of Trade Exchanges (INSTEX), with a view to
facilitating legitimate trade with Iran, consistent with
international laws and European regulations, as well
as to support the needs of the Iranian population. We
welcome the decision announced on 29 November by
Belgium, Denmark, Finland, the Netherlands, Norway
and Sweden to become shareholders of INSTEX
along with the original shareholders, namely, France,
Germany and the United Kingdom.

The JCPOA is a key element of the new global
nuclear non-proliferation architecture, and we should
not forget that it was unanimously endorsed by
resolution 2231 (2015). It is the only tool available
to provide the international community with the
necessary assurances on Iran's nuclear programme. It
is essential that we continue to preserve this tool and
not let it derail into an irreparable situation. That is
why the EU continues to be resolutely committed to the
JCPOA. We continue to support it and are determined
to work with the international community to preserve
it. We should not assume that another opportunity will
be presented to the international community to address
Iran's nuclear programme in such a thorough manner
as the one presented by the JCPOA. The EU has been
consistent in its commitment to the continued full and
effective implementation of the Agreement, as long as
Iran abides by its commitments. That has been repeated
in numerous statements.

The course of action taken by Iran to reduce its
nuclear-related commitments is deeply worrisome. In
a statement on 11 November, together with the Foreign
Ministers of France, Germany and the United Kingdom,
the High Representative of the European Union
expressed extreme concern about the latest step taken
by Iran with regard to restarting uranium enrichment
activities at Fordow.

A number of projects are being implemented in
support of annex III of the JCPOA, on civil nuclear
cooperation, particularly in the field of nuclear safety
and regulatory support. Annex III helps us to gain
a better understanding of Iran's nuclear needs and
gradually build confidence in Iran's programme. It
also plays a significant role for Iran, as it balances the
limitations of the nuclear programme with civil nuclear
development and longer-term engagement.

Established under annex IV of the JCPOA, the
procurement channel remains aunique non-proliferation,
transparency and confidence-building instrument. It
is a key mechanism to prevent the misuse of nuclear
and dual-use items and to ensure that exports of such
items are consistent with the JCPOA. We recognize
the challenges brought about by the withdrawal of the
United States from the J CPOA and the re-imposition of
sanctions. The procurement channel, however, remains
a Security Council mechanism, and the decision on a
proposal for transfer is endorsed by all its 15 members.
In the eighth Joint Commission report on the status of
the Procurement Working Group's decisions and on any
implementation issues, submitted to the Facilitator on
4 December and subsequently circulated as a document
of the Security Council (S/2019/925), the remaining
participants stated their commitment to continue
reviewing proposals in an impartial and independent
manner. In that context, it is a positive signal that the
channel keeps receiving proposals, albeit at a decreased
pace. A substantial amount of outreach has been
conducted during the past few years, and countries
around the world are aware of the procedures of the
channel. Our outreach efforts will continue, together
with colleagues from the Secretariat and the Facilitator.
We expect that all Security Council members will
continue supporting the channel's preservation in line
with resolution 2231 (2015).

While the JCPOA addresses nuclear non-proliferation
aspects, a series of events outside the nuclear domain
are increasingly worrisome. The EU continues to urge
all actors to reduce tension, refrain from escalatory
rhetoric and prevent a military build-up in the region.
The European Union has repeatedly urged Iran to
refrain from activities that could deepen mistrust, such
as ballistic missile tests, which are inconsistent with
resolution 2231 (2015).

The EU is a strong promoter of multilateral
diplomacy and continues to advocate for dialogue and
constructive engagement. It is thanks to the JCPOA
that the EU has been able to hold discussions with Iran
on the situation in the region. The EU-led discussions,
together with France, Germany, Italy and the United
Kingdom, focus on exchanging views with Iran on
regional stability. That dialogue, as well as other
channels of communications between the European
Union and Iran, continues to be a useful platform for
discussions on shared interest and concern. The absence
of direct channels of communication might easily lead
to spaces where the risk of misunderstandings and
miscalculations thrives.

Let us not forget what the purpose of the JCPOA
is: it is a nuclear non-proliferation agreement. Let us
not forget what it has been able to deliver: it kept Iran
fully compliant with its nuclear-related commitments
for three and a half years. Let us not forget that there
is no credible, peaceful alternative. That is why the
EU, together with other partners of the international
community, will continue to work relentlessly to
preserve the JCPOA while calling on Iran to reverse its
course of action.

