I would like to thank the Acting Special Representative of the Secretary- General, Ms. Stephanie Williams, for her briefing, but in particular for all of the efforts she has made throughout her mandate, allowing for significant progress to be made on the path to finding a solution. With regard to security, we welcome the signing on 23 October of a permanent ceasefire agreement that covers the entire Libyan territory. The discussions within the 5+5 Joint Military Commission regarding the modalities for implementing that agreement have enabled real progress. The reopening of coastal roads, and subsequently roads in the central region of the country, could enable further progress. That must be accompanied by the effective withdrawal of forces from the front lines as well as other confidence-building measures, including a comprehensive process of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of militias. We call on the foreign forces and mercenaries present in Libya to withdraw within the 90-day period stipulated in the agreement. The arms embargo must also be fully respected, in accordance with the resolutions adopted by the Security Council. The Libyan parties called on the Council to adopt a draft resolution to guarantee the implementation of the ceasefire agreement. The Council must now uphold its responsibility by authorizing the deployment, under the auspices of the United Nations, of a credible and effective monitoring mechanism, including to support the efforts made by the Libyan parties themselves. That is why we urge the Secretariat to propose realistic but also ambitious options on this issue as soon as possible. France stands ready to work with its partners in that regard. On the political front, too, the progress made must be sustained. It is up to the Libyans, and the Libyans alone, to decide on their future. The convening of the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum in Tunis and the continuation of those talks in a few days' time are encouraging. The adoption of a road map and agreeing on the date of 24 December 2021 for holding the elections are important steps. The Forum participants must now agree on the formation of a new executive responsible for organizing those elections. No one should impede that process. Potential spoilers will be subjected to sanctions. We condemn the violations of human rights and international humanitarian law, especially those committed against migrants and refugees. Those responsible must be held to account. That is why, together with Germany, we have taken the initiative to request the identification of migrant traffickers. France strongly condemns the assassination in Benghazi of the lawyer and human rights activist Hanan Al-Barassi. Such crimes must not go unpunished. We welcome the strengthened cooperation between the International Criminal Court and the United Nations Support Mission in Libya. France will remain mobilized to ensure that all stakeholders are focused on the same goal of achieving peace in Libya. It is in that spirit that we announced the convening of a meeting of Libya's neighbours. The Libyan crisis has endured for too long. France stands ready to continue its efforts, and the Council must play its role fully in order to put an end to the crisis and support the efforts of the Libyan parties.
