Mr. Alday Gonzalez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the Spanish delegation for convening this
debate and Ms. Sandra Honore both for introducing
the comprehensive report of the Secretary-General
(S/2015/677) and for her leadership of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
at a highly critical moment for the future of the
country. This debate is particularly relevant for Mexico
because it is our first participation since Mexican
military personnel were deployed to the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti.

My delegation is pleased to note that the situation
in Haiti has seen progress in security, the strengthening
of the rule of law and the training of Haitian National
Police (HNP), and above all that the long-postponed first
round of legislative elections was able to take place in
a relatively peaceful environment, making it one of the
most important milestones for Haitians of recent years.
We are pleased to have been able to support the conduct
of the elections through financial contributions to the
Electoral Observation Mission of the Organization of
American States, and the basket fund for elections in
Haiti administered by the United Nations Programme
for Development. We commend MINUSTAH personnel
for having provided special protection to the candidates
following the agreement between the Mission and the
Ministry for the Status of Women and Women's Rights.

The August elections are testimony to the growing
capacity of institutions in Haiti to assume greater
responsibility in the democratic life of the country. We
call on all political actors in Haiti to act in the same
spirit to ensure that the next round of elections is free,
fair, inclusive and transparent.

Mexico hopes that institution-building, especially
in terms of the HNP, will remain the cornerstone of
efforts to reconfigure the United Nations presence
in the country. We also consider it essential that, in
addition to playing a security role, MINUSTAH and the
United Nations agencies in Haiti continue to provide
socioeconomic alternatives to bolster progress in other
key areas in the daily lives of the Haitian people. The
prevention of sexual violence and quick-impact projects
focused on strengthening the rule of law and good
governance are just some of the items with a significant
multiplier factor.

However, my delegation remains concerned about
the humanitarian situation. Public health problems
are hot spots at any stage of national reconstruction
and rehabilitation, and it is important that the Haitian
authorities and the international community ensure that
those challenges do not become additional obstacles
for lack of proper care. We welcome the decision to
reactivate the High-level Committee on Cholera, since,
according to Haiti's national statistics, that disease
remains a major challenge in several departments of
the country.

Mexico supports the recommendation of the
Secretary-General to extend the MINUSTAH mandate
for another year without any change in the number of
troops. We share the nearly unanimous efforts of the
Group of Friends of Haiti to ensure that MINUSTAH's
force reduction is progressive, not accelerated, and
prudent rather than hasty. We strongly welcome
the coherence, consistency and commitment shown
over the past 10 years by Argentina, Chile, Uruguay
and Guatemala,\ during periodic assessments of the
presence and future of MINUSTAH.

Mexico believes that the reduction and eventual
withdrawal of the Mission from Haiti must be anchored
in a coordinated transition plan among MINUSTAH,
the States Members of the United Nations - especially
the troop- and police-contributing countries - and,
above all, the Haitian Government. We also appreciate
the recommendation of the Secretary-General that
a strategic assessment on the future presence of the
Organization be undertaken, based on the progress
made over the past 11 years, the degree of stability in the
country and the capacity of the Haitian National Police
to assume its growing responsibility. In our opinion,
that assessment should occur once the electoral process
is complete and once the new President and Parliament
have taken office.

We are inspired by the progress made by the Haitian
people. The update of the situation in the country that
was given to Haiti's partners by a number of Haitian
ministers last week reflects broad progress in various
areas. These periodic reports are important for
maintaining relations between Haiti and its partners in
the international community, in the public and private
sectors, and for continuing to consolidate stability and
democracy.
As we assess the future relationship between Haiti
and the United Nations, we believe that the Peacebuilding
Commission could be, if the Haitian Government
sees fit, the structure under which the relationship
could be further enhanced. Haiti's experience could
contribute decisively to the development of other
countries emerging from conflict. Whatever the path
charted by Haiti and the international community for
their future relationship, we are sure that this Council
will continue taking appropriate decisions that enable
the consolidation of progress. Mexico's commitment
to development and stability in Haiti, at the bilateral
level, with the United Nations and through the Ad Hoc
Advisory Group on Haiti of the Economic and Social
Council is for the long term.

