Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I too wish
to thank you, Mr. President, and the entire delegation of
Canada for having organized this open briefing. I wish at
the same time to thank Mr. Ingvar Carlsson for his useful
statement on the report of the Independent Inquiry into the
actions of the United Nations during the 1994 genocide in
Rwanda. I commend the members of the Inquiry for their
work, which led to a report of great importance and historic
value.

We should like to pay tribute to the Secretary-General
for his praiseworthy initiative to task the Inquiry with
establishing the facts about the behaviour of the
Organization with respect to the genocide in Rwanda so
that the entire international community, the United Nations
and Member States might draw the lessons needed to
prevent such tragedies in the future.

Six years ago, the people of Rwanda suffered a
tragedy that left a mark on its history: the massacre of
800,000 people. The international community, and in
particular the United Nations, did not prevent that
genocide and did not react in time to bring it to a halt.
The report of the Independent Inquiry sheds light on this
dark period of Rwanda's history and on the international
community's failings during the tragedy. The report will
inevitably enhance awareness and will be the basis of in-
depth reflection on how to predict and prevent tragedies
of this kind.
The Independent Inquiry has set out a series of
conclusions and recommendations that deserve the full
attention of States Members of the United Nations, of the
Security Council and of the Secretariat. These will
undoubtedly serve as a benchmark when future
peacekeeping challenges arise.

Today's review in no way detracts from the valour,
the courage and the sense of duty of the members of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda
(UNAMIR), including Tunisian Blue Helmets, who on
instructions from the Tunisian Government stood their
ground during the terrible weeks of the genocide. The
report of the Independent Inquiry refers to this, and
commends it.

As the Independent Inquiry notes, some measures
have been taken in recent years to enhance the capacity
of the United Nations to respond to conflicts and to avoid
some the mistakes made in Rwanda. But additional
measures are needed to strengthen the capacity of the
Organization to prevent future disasters. Political will and
full support from the international community are
indispensable if this undertaking is to succeed.

