Ms. Sison (United States of America): Abu Jaafar,
a coroner in eastern Aleppo, recently told a reporter,

"You know, it is not our job to bury people, but if
we do not, no one else will. Where we used to bury
one man, we now lay down entire families. We dig
and we dig; it never ends".

We dig and we dig; it never ends. Today we had
a chance not to end but to briefly stop the ongoing
butchery in eastern Aleppo. We have failed because
of a cynical act. With a wave of their hands, Russia,
China and Venezuela showed that they do not want the
suffering of eastern Aleppo to end. They have heard the
cries of people who are pleading for their lives, people
cowering in the basements oftheir ruined homes, people
who are picking through trash to find a morsel to eat,
and they said, "No, the Security Council cannot help
you". Russia, together with its ally, Bashar Al-Assad,
will keep bombing these people instead.

Today we will hear a lot of words from Russia; we
have heard a lot already. But it is Russia's action using
its veto to block a brief humanitarian pause that speaks
volumes today. The raised hands that blocked today's
draft resolution (S/2016/1026) to aid suffering civilians
shows us everything we need to know about Russia's
intentions in Syria, and Russia has no one to blame for
its veto today except itself.
If it had been adopted and implemented, the draft
resolution that Russia and China vetoed today would
have established a seven-day pause in the fighting
in eastern Aleppo. That pause would have allowed
life-saving humanitarian aid to get into eastern Aleppo
and allowed civilians who wished to escape to leave.
This was no political draft resolution. Its purpose was,
in fact, quite simple: stop the bombing, stop the shelling
and get people help.

It probably should not even have been necessary to
propose this draft resolution. After all, the Council has
long demanded that the regime enable immediate and
unhindered humanitarian assistance, and, of course,
international humanitarian law requires that civilians
not be targeted. The situation in eastern Aleppo is so
dire that the Council has to demand that the parties
respect the norms that all of us know should apply. Let
me tell the Council what Russia and China have vetoed
today in blocking this draft resolution and allowing the
bombardment of eastern Aleppo to continue. They have
vetoed the delivery of basic medicine to people who
will die without it. They have vetoed the evacuation
of sick and dying people who have no chance of
surviving in the bombed-out hospitals and clinics of
eastern Aleppo. The have vetoed the delivery of food to
civilians who could starve to death and, in the case of
vulnerable children, suffer lifelong effects from severe
malnutrition. They have vetoed the lives of innocent
Syrians. This action is a death sentence for innocent
men, women and children.

We had no illusions about today's draft resolution
offering a lasting solution to the fighting in Aleppo,
much less in all of Syria. But if implemented, it
unquestionably would have saved the lives of Syrian
civilians. It would have eased their suffering, if only for
a week, and it just might have created space for other,
more durable solutions to emerge beyond a brief pause
in the killing. Because of today's vetoes, now we have
none of that.

So Syrians trapped in eastern Aleppo will continue
to have to choose between two hells: stay put and be
barrel-bombed, starved and mortared to death, or
try to escape and risk being bombed or picked off by
snipers on the journey or tortured or disappeared by
regime forces.

Let me share what just one resident of Eastern
Aleppo faced this past week. Modar Shekho is an
emergency nurse. His brother was killed last Sunday,
reportedly by an artillery strike. Modar's father then
went out to search for a place to bury his son. As the
father searched, he, too, was killed, hit by an airstrike.
So Modar lost his brother and his father. Think about
that: parents being killed as they look for places to
bury their children. And finding places to bury the
dead in eastern Aleppo is getting harder and harder.
Cemeteries are full; they have been full for a long time
now. People have started to dig shallow graves in public
parks, rushing to dig so as to avoid the fate of Modar's
father. They have even stopped burying loved ones in
the daytime; it is simply too dangerous.

Russia and China's vetoes mean that we on the
Council have failed to stop this destruction. History
will remember that Russia once again, together with
China and Venezuela, thwarted the Council's efforts to
act to help the Syrian people for the second time in as
many months.

The United States recognizes New Zealand and
Spain for their tireless efforts to find a way here in
the Security Council to stop the fighting in eastern
Aleppo. We also greatly appreciate Egypt's leadership
in preparing and advocating for this draft resolution
for weeks and for speaking on behalf of the countries
in the region most directly affected by the conflict to
demand a halt to Russia and the Al-Assad's regime's
brutal campaign, calls that Russia has blatantly defied
in vetoing this draft resolution.

But in the face of this callous act, we must not
give up. The civilians of eastern Aleppo cannot stop
the bombs from falling on them or get their hands on
the food and medicine they need to survive; but we
who are not trapped there do have that power. So while
Russia has taken advantage of its permanent seat on the
Council to block today's draft resolution, the rest of us
have an obligation to continue to search for other ways
to pressure Russia and the Al-Assad regime to stop this
devastating assault. And each time an approach comes
up short, we must be willing to try another strategy to
end the carnage. We can all fight harder and dig deeper
to make sure that Russia never evades scrutiny for its
actions in Syria, to make sure that we are never silent
in the face of these atrocities and to make sure that we
apply maximum pressure to bring this barbaric military
campaign to a halt.

