Mr. Kim Bonghyun (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, I would like to express my sincere appreciation
to the Nigerian presidency for its leadership in
convening this open debate to discuss the important
issue of preventive diplomacy. Preventive diplomacy is
indeed a broad agenda item encompassing political,
socio-economic, humanitarian and governance-related
areas. Thus I echo the call of the other Members that
we need a more coordinated, comprehensive and
holistic approach to effectively take up this issue.

Over the years, the merits of preventive
diplomacy have been widely recognized among
Member States. However, the actions of the United
Nations remain weighted towards the more visible,
forceful and reactive measures rather than the invisible,
quiet and proactive initiatives required to prevent
conflicts.

The problems concerning preventive diplomacy
stem from the fact that it is very difficult to determine
what worked and why, and far easier to point to what
failed. Moreover, there is the so-called invisibility
problem of successful conflict prevention, since it is
neither seen nor heard. However, such shortcomings
should not be the cause of inaction, as preventive
diplomacy is driven by overriding political,
humanitarian and moral imperatives and is much more
cost-effective than dealing with conflicts after their
outbreak and escalation.

Against that backdrop, we note with satisfaction
the various efforts made by the regional and
subregional organizations in Africa towards conflict
prevention. In particular, the Early Warning System
established by the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) is a step in the right
direction that sheds new light on the initiatives that
need to be taken up more actively at the international
level.

Through the incorporation of an effective early
warning system, we would be in a better position to
detect the signs of conflict at the preliminary stages.
Once we can ascertain that the tensions for a potential
conflict are on the rise, we can then employ the
relevant tools of preventive diplomacy.

I should like to take this opportunity to
emphasize the importance of mediation among the
various tools for preventing conflicts. During the open
debate on 21 April 2009 on this topic (see S/PV.6108),
I stressed that mediation services must be provided by
the most qualified mediators at the earliest stages of
conflict. To that end, thorough databases of dedicated
mediators need to be created so that when the need
arises, less time and energy will be devoted to locating
mediators with the right attributes for the situation.

I applaud the efforts undertaken by the Secretary-
General and the Secretariat in this field since then, as
United Nations engagement in preventive diplomacy
and in support of peace processes have been quite
extensive. One example is the work of the Mediation
Support Unit, which now employs a standby team of
mediation experts. Another achievement worthy of
mention is the mediation work of the Department for
Political Affairs on the reconciliation talks in Somalia
that led to the Djibouti Agreement and on the national
political dialogue in the Central African Republic. In
all, the Organization has provided mediation support to
over 20 peace processes.

In addition to mediation, we should also seek to
more actively utilize other preventive diplomacy tools
as well, including establishing good offices, dispatching
special envoys and increasing consultations, among
others.

If our efforts on preventive diplomacy are to
succeed, effective resource allocation will be key. In
this vein, we could look into the plausibility of
allocating a portion of the peacekeeping budget
towards preventive diplomacy efforts. We should strive
not only to identify the most effective strategy and
tools, but also to obtain the resources needed to carry
out the various tasks comprising preventive diplomacy.

I sincerely hope that the United Nations and
Member States will henceforth work closely together
with regional and subregional organizations, such as
the African Union and ECOWAS, and also with
relevant non-governmental organizations so that we
can turn the various ideas we have proposed today on
preventive diplomacy into concrete action. For its part,
the Government of the Republic of the Korea will exert
its utmost efforts to this end.

