The Secretary-General: I thank China for using
its presidency of the Security Council to highlight the
importance of strengthening multilateralism and the
role of the United Nations.

Today's discussion takes place just days before
the one hundredth anniversary of the end of the First
World War. That conflict was a colossal tragedy and a
frightening harbinger of bloody decades to follow.

Europe was multipolar at that time, but that was not
enough to keep violence at bay. Without multilateral
mechanisms for international problem-solving, war
erupted and lasted for years. It took a second global
cataclysm to trigger the multilateral arrangements we
know today. They have a proven track record in saving
lives, generating economic and social progress and
avoiding a third descent into world war.

Recent years have seen inspiring achievements in
international diplomacy, above all the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and the Paris Agreement
on Climate Change. The peace operations authorized
by the Council are also important expressions of
multilateralism in action. Peacekeeping has helped a
great many countries to recover from armed conflict.
Our missions are often critical bulwarks against chaos
and bloodshed. That is why I am so encouraged that
151 countries, along with 4 leading international and
regional organizations, have expressed support for
the Action for Peacekeeping initiative, which aims to
strengthen these collective partnerships.
In other realms, however, multilateral efforts are
under immense stress. This is a time of multiplying
conflicts, advancing climate change, deepening
inequality and rising tensions over trade. It is a period
whenpeople are moving across borders in unprecedented
numbers in search of safety or opportunity. We are still
wrestling with the risk of the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction and only beginning to reckon with the
potential dangers ofnew technologies. There is anxiety,
uncertainty and unpredictability across the world. Trust
is on the decline, within and among nations. People
are losing faith in political establishments - national
and global. Key assumptions have been upended, key
endeavours undermined and key institutions undercut.
It often seems that the more global the threat, the less
able we are to cooperate. This is very dangerous in the
face of today's challenges, for which global approaches
are essential.

In this difficult context, we need to inspire a return
to international cooperation. We need a reformed,
reinvigorated and strengthened multilateral system.
In the end, multilateralism is nothing more than
countries coming together, respecting one another and
establishing the forms of cooperation that guarantee
peace and prosperity for all in a healthy planet. Towards
that end, we need stronger commitment to a rules-based
order, with the United Nations at its centre and with the
different institutions and treaties that bring the Charter
to life.

But it is not enough to have laws and international
conventions, Vital as they are. We need new forms
of cooperation with other international and regional

organizations - a networked multilateralism. And
we need closer links with civil society and other
stakeholders - an inclusive multilateralism. The

Security Council has a central role to play in showing
the value of international cooperation. Let us recall
that Charter of the United Nations endows the Council
with special stature, powers and responsibilities; and so
this body also bears the burden of not just its own but
the United Nations overall reputation. I think we can
all agree that crises in Syria, in the Middle East peace
process and elsewhere have shaken popular faith in
the potential of the international community to deliver
solutions.

I encourage the members of the Council to do
more to overcome divisions, embrace the prevention
and peacebuilding agendas, and make greater use of
mediation and the other tools set out in Chapter VI
of the Charter for the resolution of disputes through
peaceful means. I remain convinced of the need for a
surge in diplomacy, and I draw strength from recent
examples of negotiated political solutions to problems
that previously seemed hopeless. In the same spirit,
I encourage all Member States to make greater
investments in building a fair globalization that works
for all, and in social cohesion that gives a stake in
society to all, in line with the 2030 Agenda. There
should be no room for demonizing minorities, migrants
and refugees, or for stifling the diversity that enriches
societies.

As we mark the centennial of the First World War,
we must draw on its lessons and buttress our practice
of multilateralism for the tests and threats of today
and tomorrow. And as twenty-first-century challenges
threaten to outpace twentieth-century institutions
and mindsets, let us reaffirm the ideals of collective
action while pursuing a new generation of approaches
and architecture capable of responding. Reform of the
United Nations has a crucial contribution to make, and
I look forward to continuing to press ahead across the
pillars of that effort.

But most of all, it is our resilient and still visionary
Charter of the United Nations that points the way with
its articulation of universal values, its grounding in
peace, development, human rights and the rule of law,
and its vision of countries living as good neighbours
and sharing a common fate and future. Strengthening
multilateralism means strengthening our commitment
to the Charter. Such a commitment is needed now more
than ever from all around this table and around our
world.

