Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): It is an
honour for my delegation to be taking the floor at this
meeting, which you, Mr. President, have convened.

I would like at the outset to express the solidarity
of the people and the Government of Uruguay with our
brother peoples and Governments of Afghanistan and
the United Kingdom, who have been struck once again
by cowardly terrorist attacks.

Mr. President, I would also like to congratulate you
on having convened today's meeting and thank you for
your statement. We also thank the Secretary-General
for his briefing.
Historically, transboundary waters have served the
development of nations, either as navigational routes
for the transport of people and goods or as vectors for
the production of energy or the extraction of natural
resources, through fishing, for example. Nevertheless,
these waters - which down the centuries have united
the peoples who share their shores - have on occasion
become a source of friction and conflict between them.

Water does not fall within the set of resources
defined as a global public good, but is rather a scarce
natural resource whose management can stoke political
sensitivities at the international level. Water stress is a
reality that may well continue to worsen and bring in
its wake an exacerbating of existing tensions, resulting
in shared river basins and aquifers generating hostility
rather than cooperation if appropriate policies are not
adopted. In order to understand the sensitive nature of
the issue, it should suffice to note that a significant part
of the world's population currently lacks access to safe
drinking water and adequate sanitation.

Governments should adopt a cooperative approach to
the peaceful management of transboundary water flows.
Uruguay therefore firmly believes in this cooperative
approach, which is why we support negotiation as a tool
for reach agreements that guarantee the peaceful use of
these waters. Accordingly, we are party to treaties that
exemplify cooperative management of these waterways.

By way of example, I would point to the border
treaty between Uruguay and Brazil of 12 October 1851,
and its successor treaties, in which the midline, talweg
and joint ownership or basin regimes were established
for shared river and lake resources. These treaties
set up binational commissions for the management
of river and lake resources, such as the Brazilian-
Uruguayan Joint Commission for the Development of
Mirim Lagoon Basin and the Cuareim River, and more
recently, in 2010, the Agreement on River And Lake
Transport on the Uruguay-Brazil Waterway.

With respect to the Argentine Republic, through
the Uruguay River Treaty of 1961 and the 1973 Treaty
concerning the River Plate and its Maritime Front,
the borders were settled between both countries and
statutes corresponding to the use and management of the
waters were promulgated. These legal instruments are
the fruit of a pragmatic approach to finding innovative
and creative solutions designed to adequately address
our respective interests. This approach has led to the
establishment of a legal architecture of precise balances
and reciprocal concessions. In both, the borders are set
forth in meticulous detail based on criteria using the
midline or the talweg systems, depending on the section
of the river and respecting the way the watercourse
winds as it flows, in order to demarcate the islands,
thereby arriving at innovative solutions by which some
of those islands are under the sovereignty of one or the
other of the parties, although physically located on the
other side of the borderline.

These instruments define the exclusive jurisdiction
of each party and the waters of common use where
the navigation channels are located, and provide for
the unrestricted freedom of navigation and special
norms for channels and for fishing, inter alia. The
texts of these treaties also provide for the founding
of binational bodies for the administration, oversight
and use of the rivers, which led to the establishment,
respectively, of the Administrative Commission for the
Uruguay River and Administrative Commission for the
River Plate, the latter with headquarters on Isla Martin
Garcia. This island, which falls under Argentine
jurisdiction despite its proximity to Uruguay, is the
headquarters of the Administrative Commission and
has been declared an exclusive natural reserve for the
conservation and preservation of indigenous fauna and
flora. Both Commissions adopt decisions by consensus
and, using this framework, it has always been possible
for agreements to be reached, with the sole exception of
a dispute between the two countries that was resolved
after being brought before the International Court
of Justice.

Pursuant to these agreements, joint monitoring of
water quality and navigability of watercourses is carried
out and permits for commercial activity and construction
for each party are granted, taking into consideration
the protection of water resources as the lifeblood of the
riparian economy as well as the protection of wildlife
and the diversity of local species. It is also important to
highlight that in 2010 Uruguay signed the Agreement
on the Guarani Aquifer with Argentina, Brazil and
Paraguay in order to promote the conservation of the
aquifer, provide environmental protection of the area,
and guarantee the multiple, rational, sustainable and
equitable use of its water resources.

In terms of transboundary waters, the best form
of preventive diplomacy is the one that focuses on
strengthening the legal frameworks that regulate them
and on setting up the necessary institutional framework
for their management and administration through
dialogue and cooperation between the parties.

