Mr. Ismail (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
this month, which abounds with activity and international
meetings. We would also like to express our appreciation
to you for holding so many open debates on many current
subjects of ongoing concern and interest for the
international community. Our appreciation and thanks also
go to the Secretary-General for his progress report on the
implementation of his recommendations regarding the
main causes of conflict in Africa - the subject of this
debate.

My delegation studied carefully the report of the
Secretary-General contained in document S/1999/ 1008.
We would like to make the following brief remarks in the
hope that they will advance the discussion.

Paragraph 2 of the report states that

"The Security Council established its own
ad hoc Working Group to review the
recommendations in the report pertaining to peace
and security. The Working Group developed
concrete proposals for action on: (a) support for
regional and subregional initiatives in the areas of

 

conflict prevention and maintenance of peace;
(b) establishment of an international mechanism to
assist host Governments in maintaining the security
and neutrality of refugee camps; (c) strengthening of
Africa's peacekeeping capacity; (d) strengthening the
effectiveness of arms sanctions regimes imposed by
the Security Council".

In this connection we would like to thank the Council
for its interest in establishing the ad hoc Working Group to
study and submit proposals on the aforementioned points.
We would have liked to see the text of these proposals in
the body of the Secretary-Generals follow-up report. We
would also have liked to see to what extent this report has
taken into consideration the views of the States that are not
members of the Council, particularly those views expressed
during earlier debates on the causes of conflict in Africa
and those that contained valuable ideas on the sanctions
system and on the role of regional organizations and other
issues.

As for the part on targeting sanctions, the report of
the Secretary-General refers to the efforts of non-
governmental organizations and to the symposiums that
some countries have sponsored on this particular topic. The
Secretariat provided technical support to this symposium, as
is mentioned in paragraph 12 of the report.

In this respect we would like to reaffirm the necessity
of taking into consideration the Views of the Member States
of the United Nations on sanctions because, in the final
analysis, they are directly concerned. In this regard, the
report does not take into consideration the resolution
adopted by the General Assembly by consensus in relation
to "An Agenda for Peace".

As for the problem of the illicit flow of small arms
and light weapons, my delegation would like to recall the
necessity of finding a solution to this problem, by dealing
with it through a mechanism that, by means of effective
supervision, would stop rebel movements and gangs from
getting hold of these arms and weapons.

As for paragraph 18 of the report, on identifying
international arms merchants, we believe that our efforts
would be better served if we identified manufacturing and
exporting businesses and their means of export, in order to
lay the foundations for an international regime to control
the manufacture and export of such weapons and the trade
in them.

Last year, when the Secretary-General submitted his
first report on the causes of conflict and the promotion of
durable peace and sustainable development in Africa, he
mentioned many of the causes of these conflicts. These
included the legacy of colonialism, economic reasons and
other external factors that led to these conflicts and their
continuation. He also highlighted the relationship between
peace and development.

In this context I would like to refer to paragraph
102 in the follow-up report issued by the Secretary-
General on 25 September, which refers to the conflict in
southern Sudan. Let me note that everyone knows that
there is an ongoing conflict in the south of my country.
This is one of the crises bequeathed to us by colonization.
Its flames were fanned by the warlords and the rebels,
and this conflict has now gone on for more than 50 years.

Since it came to power, the present Government has
made serious, tireless efforts to achieve peace in the
south. It has welcomed all good offices and initiatives in
this respect. It has also accepted the Declaration of
Principles as a basis for negotiations between it and the
rebels within the context of Inter-Governmental Authority
on Drought and Development (IGADD). It recently
proclaimed a comprehensive ceasefire in preparation for
peace and reaffirmed its commitment to provide basic
human rights for all its citizens in the war-torn areas.

Today, from this rostrum I declare - and I will
repeat this declaration in my statement before the General
Assembly this evening - that the Government of the
Sudan is willing to declare a permanent ceasefire for the
whole of the south of the Sudan. If the rebels accept this,
we will then ask the relevant organizations to separate the
warring forces, to supervise the ceasefire for humanitarian
reasons and to allow the initiative of IGADD to succeed
in achieving a peaceful solution to the problem.

The rebel movement has rejected a ceasefire, is
obstructing the routes for humanitarian assistance, and is
killing relief workers. The killing of four staff members
of the International Committee of the Red Cross last
April - an incident condemned by the international
community and the Secretary-General - is still fresh in
our minds.

From this rostrum we appeal to the international
community and to the Security Council to pressure the
rebel movement to join the peace process and to adopt
sanctions similar to those that have been adopted against
the rebel Savimbi in Angola. The Non-Aligned

 

Movement, at the ministerial meeting that took place during
this session of the General Assembly, declared Savimbi a
war criminal.

The Secretary-General's current report stresses the
importance of socio-economic development in dealing with
the causes of conflict. However, we feel that not enough
attention has been paid to this aspect. Assistance has not
equalled the level required, nor have enough resources been
made available for the projects of rehabilitation,
development and reconstruction. We would like to reaffirm
that if insufficient attention is paid to this aspect, the door
for renewed conflicts will remain open.
Experience has proved beyond any doubt the urgent
need to pay attention to socio-economic projects during the
transitional period in areas where relative stability has been
established. There is no need to wait for a comprehensive
peace; development would thereby be playing a supportive
role in bringing about such peace.

I have taken note with interest the statement made by
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Canada, which contained
a reference to my country. I thank him for his interest in
the affairs of the Sudan and would not wish to end my
statement without addressing his reference to the slave trade
in my country, which was surprising and amazing indeed.

Canada is almost the sole country to make these
allegations against the Sudan in the Council. Canada has no
resident diplomatic representation in the Sudan and has sent
no official delegation to our country in recent years to
uncover the facts. I would also mention that my country
hosts over 50 foreign diplomatic missions, including 20
Arab and 10 European embassies, a resident envoy of the
European Union and a similar number of African and Asian
embassies.

The Ministerial Council of the Arab League met this
month in Cairo and looked into the misleading malicious
media campaigns launched by certain suspect organizations,
such as Christian Solidarity International (CS1), against my
country, as well as the falsehoods and allegations that have
been made concerning the slave trade in the Sudan. CS1 is
an organization that seeks to foment sectarian strife among
the Sudanese - Christians and Muslims alike - and to
incite hatred. The Council unanimously decided that the
misleading campaign is aimed at destroying the Sudan's
image, destabilizing the country and arousing sectarian
strife. It called for opposition to this campaign. A copy of
the resolution has been sent to the President of the Security
Council. As members know, the Economic and Social
Council Committee on N on-Governmental Organizations
has adopted a resolution recommending the withdrawal of
the consultative status of CS1, in view of that
organization's excesses and violations of the rules
governing its relationship with the United Nations.

A draft resolution submitted by the members of the
European Union to the Commission on Human Rights in
Geneva last March on the situation of human rights in the
Sudan, which included a tribute to the progress made by
my country in that respect, made no mention of
allegations concerning the slave trade. It referred to
kidnappings that occur during tribal conflicts over water,
pasture and agricultural land, which occasionally erupt in
some remote regions of the Sudan regardless of the ethnic
similarities or differences of the tribes concerned. This is
a phenomenon that we are working hard to overcome and
eliminate. In that respect, I would call the Council's
attention to the convening, in Khartoum last July, of a
workshop on the ways and means of stopping and
preventing such conflicts. It was attended by
representatives of certain United Nations bodies and non-
governmental organizations and by civil and governmental
leaders. The workshop's recommendations have been
implemented by my government and forwarded to the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.

The Government of the Sudan has treated these
allegations very seriously. We believe that slave-trading
is a heinous crime against humanity and a horrendous
violation of all values and of all revealed religions.
Article 20 the 1998 Sudanese Constitution provides that
every human being has the right to life, freedom, the
security of his own person, dignity and honour in
accordance with the law. He is free and cannot be
enslaved, forced to work, humiliated or tortured. Article
163 of the 1991 Sudanese Criminal Code provides for the
punishment by imprisonment and fine of all who attempt
to force others to work.

In the wake of the allegations made in some
European capitals, I met with European ambassadors in
Khartoum and asked them to provide us with any
information at their disposal on the existence of this
practice in my country. They all denied that they had any
such information and that this practice exists in the
Sudan. When these allegations were repeated, we
appealed to the Organization of African Unity (OAU)
through its Secretary-General, who is present at this
meeting, to dispatch a fact-finding mission to seek
information on the subject of these allegations concerning
the slave trade.

 

I cannot help but wonder how dozens of senior
officials from the southern part of my country, where these
practices are alleged to occur, can all be unaware of their
occurrence? These officials include the Vice-President, a
southern Christian; four federal ministers, including the
only woman on the Council of Ministers, a southern
Christian who is Minister of Labour and Humanitarian
Affairs; the Deputy Foreign Minister, who is an Anglican
Bishop; over 60 members of the federal Parliament; all the
governors and ministers of the 10 southern States; hundreds
of senior officers of the Army and the police force;
academicians; ambassadors and diplomats. The Sudanese
ambassadors to Rome, Oslo, Bonn and Dar es-Salaam are
all Christians from the southern Sudan, as are dozens of
other diplomats. Even the Deputy Chief of Mission to
Ottawa is a southern Christian.
The tragic war in southern Sudan is due to the
rejection of the repeated ceasefires by the rebel movement.
It has displaced over half the population of that region to
the North, particularly Khartoum, where all the diplomatic
missions and the offices of the United Nations and of non-
governmental organizations are located. Anyone who lives
in or has visited our country knows that all religious and
ethnic groups live in peaceful coexistence there. Christians
and Muslims, southerners and northerners are all treated
equally. Many senior personalities and officials of regional
and international organizations who have visited our
country can vouch for that. Foremost among these is the
Secretary-General of the OAU, who is among us now and
who visited southern Sudan and its capital, Juba. He was
witness to the peaceful coexistence of all inhabitants there.
I ask the Canadian Minister to give me the name of just
one person who was enslaved and the names of those who
bought him.

In view of the gravity of the accusations made in the
statement of the Foreign Minister of Canada against my
country and taking into consideration that Canada is a
member of the Security Council and that this matter can
seriously harm the Sudan's reputation and destroy the image
of the Sudanese people, I ask the Canadian Government to
send a fact-finding mission so that it can ascertain the
falsity of these allegations and restore respect to my
country.

This grave phenomenon, if found in any society, is
the worst insult against that society. We cannot deal with
this through clamorous media or such unfounded
accusations, but through close cooperation that will
eliminate it. The Sudan opens its doors to any country or
organization that believes that this practice or this
phenomenon exists on its territory. It is perfectly willing
to cooperate in fighting this phenomenon. Let me reiterate
that we welcome a Canadian delegation that would visit
the Sudan in this connection. We again ask the Security
Council to send a fact-finding mission to investigate the
strike against the Al-Shifa pharmaceutical plant, which
was launched by the United States. We hope that Canada
will set an example by upholding values and principles
and that it will support that request.

In conclusion, in view of the gravity of the
accusations levelled against the Sudan these days, which
are fuelled by some who work against my country, let me
repeat that the Sudan does not have any objection to
receiving a mission of the United Nations and the
European Union, the Organization of African Unity, the
Arab League or the Organization of the Islamic
Conference to investigate these accusations levelled
against the Sudan regarding the slave trade. We are
perfectly willing and ready to cooperate with such a
mission and to deal positively with the results it might
obtain.

