Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I welcome
the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States
and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Poland to the
Security Council today. I thank all speakers and briefers,
including Secretary-General Antonio Guterres, for
their contributions to today's debate.

The United States supports continued cooperation
between the League of Arab States and the United
Nations, including on key issues such as counter-
terrorism, conflict prevention, peacebuilding,
post-conflict reconstruction and natural-resource
management. We appreciate the efforts of the United
Nations to establish a liaison office in Cairo to enhance
coordination and look forward to it opening soon.

The United States also values its important
partnership with the League of Arab States, and we
thank the League for working with us on our vision of
a stable, prosperous and secure Middle East, including
the League's ongoing support for President Hadi
Mansour and the legitimate Government of Yemen,
as the United Nations mediates between the parties to
reach a political settlement to end the conflict in that
country. We also value the League's key support for the
Global Coalition to Defeat the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham (ISIS).

Today all of the territory that ISIS once held in
Iraq and north-east Syria has been liberated. The 75
nations and five international organizations of the
Global Coalition should be enormously proud of this
achievement. Working by, with and through our allies
and local partners, we have launched an unprecedented
military-stabilization, counter-messaging and law-
enforcement effort to counter the evil ideology of
ISIS and prevent attacks against our homelands, our
personnel, our citizens, our citizens and our interests.

We also commend our friends and allies within
the League of Arab States for standing firm on not
readmitting Al-Assad's Syria and not normalizing
relations with his regime until a political settlement
consistent with resolution 2254 (2015) has been
achieved. International solidarity against normalizing
relations is critical in helping bring the Al-Assad regime
to the realization that there is no military solution to
the conflict. Only a political solution as outlined in
resolution 2254 (2015) will achieve long-term peace
and stability for Syria and its neighbours.

Iran remains the most significant threat to regional
peace and security, engaged as it is in numerous malign
activities in the region. The United States welcomes the
31 May statement of the League of Arab States, issued
following its meeting in Mecca, in which it called out
Iran for its destabilizing behaviour. Iran has gone to
great lengths to prolong regional conflicts that radiate
instability across the region and exacerbate human
suffering. The United States is pressing the Iranian
regime to end its role in these conflicts and curtail its
support for proxy militias. Individually, the States of the

region are susceptible to Iran's coercion, intimidation
and malign behaviour. Indeed, Iran has deployed
many of its resources to perpetuate its revolutionary
ideology and malign activities in the region. It should
be countered by a strong unified front.

It is unacceptable for any party to attack commercial
shipping, and today's attacks on ships in the Gulf of
Oman raise very serious concerns. The United States
Government is providing assistance and will continue
to assess the situation.
Turning to Middle East peace, the White House is
working on a vision for peace that will offer a brighter
future for all and will release it when the time is right.
We hope all stakeholders will read the plan with an
open mind and be willing to engage constructively. We
look forward to discussing ideas and strategies on how
to achieve a more prosperous future for the Palestinian
people with international stakeholders at the upcoming
workshop in Bahrain later this month.

The United States supports continued cooperation
between the League of Arab states and the United
Nations and looks forward to seeing a strong relationship
advance progress toward a more stable, prosperous and
secure Middle East.

