Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): I would like to thank Special Representative
Zahir Tanin for his briefing and welcome Mr. Ivica
Dacie, First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, and Ms. Vlora
Citaku, Ambassador of Kosovo to the United States
of America, to today's meeting. However, following
in the footsteps of other colleagues, I would like to
respectfully encourage them to keep to their allotted
speaking time in future.

The recent elections in Kosovo were well organized
and demonstrated the political maturity of Kosovar
society. Nonetheless, we deplore the fact that, within
the Serbian Kosovar community, the elections were
marked by a climate of intimidation and limited choice
for voters. It is also important that the verification and
count process be completed in order to prevent the
election results from being contested. We hope that
the formation of the new Government will provide
an opportunity to ensure the active and meaningful
participation of women.

We encourage the next Government of Kosovo to
continue the reform process, in particular in the area
of the rule of law. We would like to acknowledge the
indispensable role of the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo in that regard.

We deplore the fact that no progress has been
made in resuming the dialogue between the authorities
of Belgrade and Pristina, under the auspices of the
European Union. Both sides can only benefit from
maintaining regional stability, and a comprehensive
and legally binding agreement on the normalization
of relations is essential in that regard. It is important
that the parties honour all their commitments in order
to create a climate conducive to normalizing their
relations. Unilateral actions and declarations must give
way to a spirit of compromise. We call on the Kosovar
leadership and the Serbian leadership to demonstrate
responsibility and political will. In that context, we
reiterate our call on the Kosovar authorities to eliminate
customs duties on imports from Serbia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina and call on both sides to make a greater
commitment to regional integration.

Reconciliation also requires justice. We call on
the Kosovar authorities to cooperate fully with the
Specialist Chambers. It requires also that greater
progress must be made with regard to missing persons.
We call on the parties to intensify their cooperation to
resolve this vital humanitarian issue.

The future of Kosovo, as a secure and stable
democracy, has been shaped, among other things, by
the efforts of the United Nations and the presence of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK). We reiterate the importance of
respecting the immunities of United Nations personnel
on the ground, in accordance with the norms of
international law. We took note of the information
provided by the Special Representative in his briefing
with regard to the internal report compiled following
the incident that occurred on 28 May. The excessive
use of force against UNMIK personnel is unacceptable.
We call for a follow-up to the recommendations made
in the report. It is vital that UNMIK be able to safely
discharge its mandate. In conclusion, the international
community continues to invest in Kosovo and to
help create the conditions for the normalization of
relations between Serbia and Kosovo. However, it is
up to the parties to create such conditions and to reach
an agreement.

