Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): Cote d'Ivoire would like to thank Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
for the quality of his briefing on developments in the
political process in Syria. It must be acknowledged that
the situation is becoming increasingly alarming and of
concern on the military and humanitarian fronts. My
delegation also congratulates him on his tireless efforts
for political dialogue among the Syrian parties in order
to find a lasting solution to the protracted crisis in
the country.

Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the holding ofintra-Syrian
peace talks in Vienna on 25 and 26 January as part of
the political dialogue of the Geneva process. Likewise,
we encourage the various initiatives that have been
undertaken, in particular in Sochi, Russian Federation,
with a view to calming and definitively resolving the
crisis in Syria in accordance with the provisions of
resolution 2254 (2015).

My delegation regrets the fact that, despite the
declared will of the various stakeholders, the most
recent initiatives in the context of the political dialogue
among the Syrian parties have not led to any significant
progress on the ground. On the contrary, we have for
some time been witnessing a military escalation and an
upsurge in violence, which, ifleft unchecked, may lead
to a spillover of the conflict.

My delegation would therefore like to call for
a ceasefire and an immediate de-escalation of the
conflict in Syria at the risk of witnessing a greater
humanitarian catastrophe. We once again thank the
United Nations for its ongoing efforts to protect and to
provide humanitarian assistance to the besieged people
of Syria.

In particular, my delegation would like to extend
its support to the draft resolution initiated by Kuwait
and Sweden to put in place a 30-day ceasefire in Syria,
which would allow the urgent delivery of humanitarian
aid to the populations in distress. In the light of the
tragic situation in Syria, we call on the members of
the Security Council to show flexibility in order to
reach a compromise that will allow the safe delivery of
humanitarian aid so as to alleviate the suffering of the
Syrian people.

In order to prevent a further deterioration of the
humanitarian situation, my country urges the parties to
the conflict to work together towards a lasting political
solution, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015),
which is the only way to end the violence and tragedy
being experienced by the Syrian people.

