Mr. Mulet: I thank you, Sir, for this opportunity
to brief the Council on the outcome of the joint African
Union-United Nations mission deployed pursuant to
resolution 2182 (2014). The mission was mandated to
review progress towards achieving the benchmarks of
a United Nations peacekeeping operation in Somalia;
assess the impact of the temporary surge of troops of
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) to
22,126, authorized in resolution 2124 (2013); and make
recommendations on the next steps in the military
campaign.

Let me begin by echoing the Secretary-
General's profound appreciation of the African Union
Commission for the admirable spirit of collaboration
that prevailed throughout the joint mission. The close
partnership demonstrated by the African Union (AU)
and the United Nations in that exercise reflects the
solidity of our partnership in Somalia and beyond. I
also wish to express appreciation to all other partners
who participated. Their contributions were central to
the success of the joint mission.

The joint mission concluded that the surge of
AMISOM. uniformed personnel and the logistical
support package for the Somali national army authorized
in resolution 2124 (2013) enabled AMISOM. to realize
significant gains against Al-Shabaab. That progress
would not have been possible without the continuing
sacrifices of AMISOM. troops and the Somali national
army. Their heroism deserves our collective tribute.
However, in the face of these advances, Al-Shabaab
has continued to adapt, launching asymmetric attacks
and blocking access to some of the newly recovered
areas. The group has also expanded its presence in
Puntland and become a more significant threat within
the subregion.

Against this backdrop, the Secretary-General is
of the view that despite the progress made towards
achieving the benchmarks endorsed by resolution 2124
(2013), a United Nations peacekeeping mission at this
time would be a high-risk undertaking. The Secretary-
General has recommended refining the language of
the benchmarks to better adapt them to the evolving
situation in Somalia without altering the substance
endorsed by the Council in resolution 2124 (2013). The
benchmarks cover issues related to the political process
and the extension of State authority, the threat level,
the development of the Somali security institutions,
and the support of the Somalis for the deployment of
a peacekeeping operation. I would urge the Council to
endorse the adjusted benchmarks.

In making its recommendations for the coming
period, the joint mission recognized the importance
of the international community's engaging in
Somalia in accordance with the new federal map. The
recommended security strategy is therefore designed to
create an enabling environment for the political process
to unfold in Mogadishu and the regions during the
next critical 18 months. The proposed strategy will be
guided by three interlocking objectives: first, enabling
the political process at the federal, regional and district
levels; secondly, reinitiating offensive operations
against Al-Shabaab strongholds as soon as possible,
while maintaining continuous and flexible offensive
capabilities; and thirdly, enabling consolidation efforts.

These objectives are ambitious and will require
strong commitments on the part of all partners
involved in Somalia. In particular, the Somali Federal
Government, the African Union and troop-contributing
countries, the United Nations and key partners must
plan and implement the strategy together and fulfil
their respective commitments. Only through the
dynamic and integrated management of the strategy's
implementation can we hope to bring greater and
durable security to the Somali people.

At the core ofthe proposals ofthejoint mission rests
the need to maintain the surge in AMISOM. uniformed
personnel until the end of 2016, as recommended by
the Secretary-General, while improving the efficiency

and effectiveness of AMISOM. We welcome the
recommendations of the Chairperson of the African
Union, as well as the decision taken by the African
Union Peace and Security Council at its 52lst meeting,
on 30 June, to undertake a structured and targeted
reconfiguration of AMISOM. within the authorized
ceiling of uniformed personnel. The reconfiguration
mandated by the African Union Peace and Security
Council includes the enhancement of the AMISOM
police component, the deployment of requisite
capabilities, such as quick-reaction and special forces, to
enable AMISOM. to become more agile and to facilitate
cross-sectoral operations and the streamlining of
AMISOM. command and control. We are encouraged by
the ongoing efforts of the African Union Commission
to explore concrete avenues to implement AMISOM's
reconfiguration.

Ultimately, the proposed security strategy will
succeed only if the Somali security institutions are
supported and able to progressively assume greater
responsibility for their own security. If they are to
achieve this goal, it is important to devise an enhanced
and more coherent architecture for the delivery by
international partners of capacity-building support
to the Somali national army and Somalia's overall
defence sector. More importantly, we must make a more
concerted effort to gradually hand over responsibility
for security to the Somalis.

The adoption on 23 April of the Guulwade Plan
for the development of the Somali national army was
a critical step forward. It is essential that all Member
States abide by their responsibility to effectively
coordinate and fully share information on their bilateral
contributions to the security sector through the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM).
Such a renewed spirit of partnership and transparency is
a prerequisite for ensuring that our collective resources
achieve optimal results. The continued provision of
the non-lethal support package to the Somali national
army authorized in resolution 2124 (2013) will also be
essential to enabling its continued engagement in joint
operations alongside AMISOM.

A gradual shift of efforts towards establishing and
capacitating the Somali police force is equally critical.
We must accelerate the development of effective and
accountable Somali police forces, particularly in the
regions, with a focus on maintaining citizen security.
This is important for buttressing State-building
efforts, freeing up military capacity and avoiding the
militarization of law and order functions. AMISOM
and UNSOM. have an important role to play in this
regard, including in Puntland.

The finalization ofa realistic police plan, currently
being prepared under the structures of the New Deal
Compact, is essential. Short-term assistance to jump-
start the establishment ofpolice in the regions is needed
alongside the recommended increase in AMISOM
police, which is expected to provide operational
assistance, mentoring and training. That is why the
Secretary-General recommends the delivery of an
immediate non-lethal support package to the Somali
police forces to bridge the gap between assistance that
can be provided today and the longer-term support that
will be provided under the New Deal. The package would
provide the rudimentary infrastructure, equipment and
sustainment items required to jump-start basic policing
operations in the regions, including Puntland.

We are very concerned about the evolution of
Al-Shabaab's threat in Puntland and the potential
impact of the situation in Yemen. The security of
Puntland should not be forgotten by the international
community. We therefore recommend extending the
non-lethal support package to the Somali national
army, as approved in resolution 2124 (2013), to 3,000
Puntland forces on an exceptional basis until the end
of 2016, but only upon completion of their integration
into the Somali national army as well, as their formal
inclusion in the Guulwade Plan.

We are concerned about the unfolding influence
of Al-Shabaab in Kenya, as well as the rest of the
subregion. A comprehensive approach is a logical
way by which to counter this threat, integrated with a
security strategy to combat violent extremism both in
Somalia and across the region.

Following the joint mission, Al-Shabaab mounted
a number of attacks in Somalia that coincided with the
holy month of Ramadan. These renewed efforts are a
source of concern, which further reinforces the need for
the overall security effort in Somalia to become more
nimble in order to degrade an increasingly adaptable
Al-Shabaab. We are encouraged by the commitments
expressed by the African Union and by the troop-
and police-contributing countries to work towards
that objective. Collective action to take forward the
recommendations of the joint mission is urgently
needed.

