Mr. Gillerman (Israel): I thank the Secretary-
General for honouring us with his presence.

This is a horrible, sad and bloody Sunday. This is
a day on which we mourn and grieve, together with the
people of Lebanon, at the deaths of the innocents and
civilians in Kafr Qana. Those people, including women
and children, who were killed in this horrible, tragic
incident may have been killed by Israeli fire, but they
are the victims of Hizbollah: they are the victims of
06-44873

terror. If there were no Hizbollah, this would never
have happened. If Lebanon were free of the
stranglehold of that monster, this would never have
happened. And, while we mourn the deaths of those
people, we must stress that Israel has never targeted -
and in this particular case did not target - innocent
people.

Kafr Qana has been a hub for Hizbollah for a
long time. Hizbollah has been launching missiles and
rockets at Israel from Kafr Qana. We will make
available to the Security Council a film that shows
Hizbollah launching a rocket from right behind a three-
storey house: a civilian residence very similar to the
one that was hit today in Kafr Qana. That is the sad
reality.

Israel has repeatedly beseeched the residents of
Qana to leave. I would not be surprised if Hizbollah
made them stay. We are dealing with a ruthless,
cynical, cruel enemy, one of the most monstrous terror
organizations that this world has ever known. They
have no regard for Israeli life, and they have no regard
for Lebanese life. They do not care about the people of
Lebanon. They have infiltrated every fibre and every
cell of that country, so that, in the words of my
esteemed Lebanese colleague who appeared on United
States television only last week, "You cannot
distinguish in Lebanon between Hizbollah and the
Lebanese." In his words, Hizbollah is everywhere; in
his words, Hizbollah has infiltrated and become part of
Lebanese society.

But there is a huge moral disequivalence between
the two sides. While our enemies - who only today
have launched more than 100 missiles at Israeli towns
and villages - specifically target women and children
in order to kill them, we are defending ourselves in this
brutal war. And sometimes, tragically, as happened
today, women and children get hurt, because they are
used as human shields by Hizbollah. Hizbollah has
homes in Lebanon that house missiles - in which the
family sleeps with a missile. When you sleep with a
missile, sometimes you do not wake up in the morning.
In Israel, we have homes that are equipped with air raid
shelters to save people from bombs; in Lebanon, they
have homes that they equip to launch missiles, taking
into account that those people could be killed.

Today, we say that we are truly sorry for the
people of Lebanon and for the people who were killed.
I have never heard Hizbollah say that they are sorry for
5
a single Israeli - woman, child, elderly person,
civilian or innocent - who has been killed. Never.
Why? Because they target us specifically. That is their
declared aim, and that is what we are fighting. And
while for us every dead Lebanese child is a horrible
mistake and a tragedy, for them every dead Israeli child
is a victory and a cause for celebration.

I am saying emphatically at this table that I
would not be surprised, because of their cynicism and
brutality and total disregard for human life, if this is
exactly what Hizbollah wanted to happen. I would not
be surprised if this is something that they wanted and
wished for precisely today, the day when Secretary
Rice is in the region trying to reach a settlement.
Because members of the Council know better than I
that on any given day when we are so close to reaching
a settlement, the terrorists, the extremists, the
fundamentalists snatch it away from us, because they
do not want a settlement.

And I must say that I feel that what is happening
around this table today is exactly what they wanted to
happen. Today, while there is mourning in Israel and in
many other places around the world, there may very
well be jubilation in Tehran, in Damascus and in the
Hizbollah strongholds, because this is exactly what
they want to happen. They want the Council to be
called up to arms and to seize the fire. They want it to
do exactly what it is being asked to do today. They
want the Council to react the way in which it does.

I know that these are harsh words, but I believe
them with all my heart. I beseech members not to play
into their hands, not to provide them with what they
seek while they sacrifice their own people as human
shields and as victims.

And today, of all days, I would like to ask my
Lebanese friend: tell your people, the brave people of
Lebanon, the Government that you represent and your
brave Prime Minister, for whom we have a lot of
respect, that the demonstrations held today in Beirut
should not be against the United Nations; they should
be against Hizbollah. Hizbollah is the one that has
caused you all this pain. Hizbollah is the monster that
you have allowed to grow. If you had taken care of it
before, if you had deployed your forces in the south,
this would never have happened. And if the Security
Council had enforced resolution 1559 (2004), this
would never have happened. Tell your people to
demonstrate not for blood, but for peace and for hope.
6

If we want to live together in this tough
neighbourhood and in this blood-ridden region, we
need to create a culture of hope rather than a culture of
violence. We need to create a culture in which the
children who were hurt in Qana would have been at
school today rather than huddled together as hostages
for Hizbollah - a culture in which the children of
Qiryat Shemona would have gone to school today
instead of being scared and huddling in bomb shelters
because of Katyusha rockets. We need to change the
culture of hatred. We need to teach our children about
hope. And we should not let what happened today -
tragic and horrible as it is - change the facts and the
truth. And that is that Hizbollah must be totally
disarmed. Otherwise, if there is a ceasefire today and if
Hizbollah remains with its capabilities and its huge
arsenal of arms, it will raise its ugly head again. And it
will rise not just against us and against the people of
Lebanon, but against the whole region and civilization
as we know it. Do not let Iran and Tehran, the sponsors
of Hizbollah, have their day. Make it clear that this
must end - not that hostilities and fire must end, but
that terror and Hizbollah must end, because until they
do, there will be hostilities and there will be fire, and
more innocents will pay the price.

