The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Austria, Barbados, Colombia,
Ecuador, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Japan, Kenya, Lesotho,
Mozambique, Nepal, New Zealand, Nigeria, Senegal,
South Africa and the United Republic of Tanzania, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Pfanzelter
(Austria), Miss Clarke (Barbados), Mr. Franco
(Colombia), Mr. Alemdn (Ecuador), Mr. Sharma
(India), Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia), Mr. Hasan
(Iraq), Mr. Akasaka (Japan), Mr. Kuindwa
(Kenya), Mr. Mangoaela (Lesotho), Mr. Santos
(Mozambique), Mr. Sharma (Nepal), Mr. Powles
(New Zealand), Mr. Mbanefo (Nigeria), Mr. Ka
(Senegal), Mr. Kumalo (South Africa) and Mr.
Mwakawago (United Republic of Tanzania) took
the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. OIara Otunnu, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Otunnu to take a seat at the Council
table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Ms. Carol Bellamy,
Executive Director of the United Nations Children's
Fund.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Ms. Bellamy to take a seat at the Council
table.

Unless I hear any objection, I shall take it that the
Security Council decides to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Mrs.
Sylvie Junod, Head of the delegation of the
International Committee of the Red Cross to the United
Nations.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 24 July 2000 from the
Permanent Representative of Malaysia to the United
Nations, which reads as follows:

"I have the honour, in my capacity as
Chairman of the Islamic Group of the United
Nations, to request that the Security Council
extend an invitation under rule 39 of the
provisional rules of procedure of the Council to
Mokhtar Lamani, Permanent Observer for the
Organization of the Islamic Conference to the
United Nations, during the Council's discussion
on children and armed conflict."

That letter has been issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/2000/734.

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Lamani.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2000/7l2, which contains the text of a
report by the Secretary-General on the implementation
of resolution 1261 (1999) on children and armed
conflict.

I call on the Deputy Secretary-General.

