Mr. Vrailas (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU). The
candidate countries Turkey, Croatia, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Montenegro; the
countries of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Serbia; the European Free Trade
Association country Liechtenstein, member of the
European Economic Area; as well as Ukraine and the
Republic of Moldova align themselves with this
declaration.

We were deeply saddened by the loss of life in
the brutal attack on the United Nations building in
Abuja today. We extend our heartfelt sympathies to the
families and friends of the victims, the Secretary-
General, our United Nations colleagues and the
Government and the people of Nigeria. The European
Union strongly condemns that senseless act of violence
towards the United Nations and its personnel.

The answer to the question of whether
peacekeeping works is a clear and resounding "yes".
That is the conclusion of one of the many studies in the
recent past to have sung the praises of peacekeeping.
Bringing in peacekeepers reduces the risk of war
recurring by no less than 84 per cent, according to
factual evidence cited in that particular study. It is
definitely a fact that we cannot take such a success rate
for granted. Peacekeeping needs to keep up with a
world constantly changing and the partnership
underpinning it needs constant nurturing. That is why
the EU would like to thank Council President India, a
major troop-contributing country, for having organized
today's debate. It represents an important opportunity
to take stock and prepare for the future, to paraphrase
the useful concept note before us (S/2011/496, annex).

In the future, the United Nations can continue to
count on the EU's unwavering support for
peacekeeping. The United Nations and the EU see eye
to eye on crisis management, with a vision of all
instruments - political, civilian and military - being
mobilized in the interest of peace. Aside from the
considerable direct support of the EU and its member
States, our own EU missions buttress the United
Nations peacekeeping efforts, depending on the
strategic context and situation. Such EU missions come
in different shapes and sizes, for example stand-alone,
bridging and stand-by operations.

Peacekeeping stands or fails by the partnership
among the Security Council, General Assembly bodies,
contributing countries, host parties, regional and other
partners and the Secretariat. To act in the spirit of
partnership means, for example, that the Security
Council involves contributing countries as early and as
much as possible. It means that we all work to preserve
a culture of consensus decision-making, where it
exists, and the commitment of all partners to the
objective of financially realistic and field-driven
peacekeeping.

I say "field-driven" because our men and women
on the ground are often a few steps ahead of us, as we
saw during last month's useful meetings of the Security
Council (see S/PV.6592) and Committee of Thirty Four
(C-34) with Force Commanders. Whether we are
talking about robust peacekeeping, the protection of
civilians, early peacebuilding, implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda, or the better use
of intelligence for early warning, they know what it
takes to get the job done. The EU supports the proposal
of more regular contact with Force Commanders via
video link. Such contact offers all of us at the
Headquarters level a chance to learn how we can adapt,
for example, peacekeeping doctrine, policy documents
and training modules, including on the implementation
of protection mandates, to make for a better fit with the
field.

Aside from taking stock, we would like mostly to
use today's debate to prepare for the future. Allow me
to briefly touch upon a number of current challenges.

First of all, we must further clarify and concretize
the peacekeeping-peacebuilding nexus. Now that, after
years of expansion, peacekeeping seems headed
towards a consolidation phase, this is a policy area that
demands our attention. Last year's New Horizon
progress report rightly highlighted that. Peacekeeping
operations can help national authorities and other
partners to set peacebuilding priorities, facilitate their
implementation by providing security, and take on
some early peacebuilding tasks themselves.

However, as the C-34 stressed this year, we need
clarity and our peacekeepers need clarity. From the
earliest stages of planning onward, they need to know
exactly what is expected of them in that field and what
is not. The EU hopes that the upcoming strategy for
critical early peacebuilding tasks undertaken by
peacekeeping operations will contribute to that. Of
course, we also look to the Peacebuilding Commission
to continue to play its role in further clarifying and
concretizing the peacekeeping-peacebuilding nexus.

A closely related challenge is the implementation
of the recommendations of the comprehensive review
of international civilian capacities (S/2011/85).
Civilian aspects of peacekeeping operations, such as
election monitoring, police reform and support for the
promotion and protection of human rights, have proven

to be instrumental to mission performance. Recruiting
civilian specialists for those newer peacekeeping tasks
was identified as a particular challenge in the New
Horizon report, and the comprehensive review came up
with many ways in which we could rise to that
challenge. Quite a few of the recommendations could
be implemented without delay, and the EU encourages
the Secretariat to do so. Other recommendations may
require further elaboration, and we look forward to the
upcoming report of the Secretary-General to flesh them
out. The EU has ample experience in that field through
our Common Security Defence Policy operations, and
we are ready to share it, while systematically seeking
synergies with the United Nations.

Besides civilian capacities, we also need to
secure military capabilities, including critical
equipment. That is the third and last challenge that the
EU would like to briefly highlight today. These days, a
peacekeeper needs more than a blue helmet. As we can
read in the New Horizon report, "new peacekeeping
tasks demand new equipment, from night vision and
modern communication equipment to naval vessels". In
that regard, we know that there is a pressing need for
military helicopters, especially where the area of
operations is vast and the infrastructure limited. The
urgency of the matter at hand calls for pragmatic and
swift solutions, and the EU looks forward to studying
and discussing the Secretariat's forthcoming proposals.

More generally, whether it concerns civilian
capacities or military capabilities, the EU continues to
support the Secretariat's ongoing efforts to put in place
a comprehensive, capability-driven approach to
peacekeeping. Of course, making peacekeeping more
effective is about more than ensuring that the different
pieces of the puzzle are on the table. They also have to
fit together. In other words, we need to work hard on
close cooperation among the civilian, military and
police components of a mission, including through
clear doctrine and comprehensive strategic and
operational planning.
Before I close, the EU would like to pay tribute
to our men and women on the ground, serving in
peacekeeping missions around the world, some of
whom have paid the ultimate price in the pursuit of
peace. Earlier this month, we sadly lost four
peacekeepers of the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei. We hope that the results of the
ongoing investigation into the circumstances of their
deaths will soon be considered.

Finally, the EU wants to thank former Under-

Secretary-General Le Roy for his dedication and

determination. It wishes him all the best as he sets
sights on new horizons.

