Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): We thank Mr. Inzko,
High Representative and European Union Special
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for his
briefing. We welcome the Chairman of the Presidency
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, His Excellency
Mr. Siladeie, and thank him for his statement.

We commend the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina for its important contribution to the
stability of the country. We also commend the High
Representative for his efforts in facilitating the
implementation of the Dayton Agreement. It is
important that all leaders in the country continue to
commit themselves to dialogue and peaceful
coexistence.

We note with concern from the briefing the
reported political actions questioning the sovereignty
and sustainability of Bosnia and Herzegovina's State
institutions, as well as the continuing challenges to the
authority of the High Representative and the Steering
Board of the Peace Implementation Council. We call
on all leaders, particularly the authorities of Republika
Srpska, to refrain from anti-Dayton rhetoric that
challenges the sovereignty and constitutional order of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is important that all parties,
including the neighbours of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
uphold their commitments in the spirit of good
neighbourliness and peaceful coexistence, as enshrined
in the United Nations Charter.

The European Union Force in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (EUFOR) has continued to play a critical
role in providing the crucial reassurance needed by the
citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We note that it has
assisted the Office of the High Representative and
other international organizations in fulfilling their
respective mandates. We therefore salute EUFOR, in
collaboration with the armed forces of Bosnia and

Herzegovina, for contributing to a safe and secure
environment. It is important, however, that every effort
be made to support the role of the national security
forces so that they can assume responsibility for
protection.

We welcome the progress that has been achieved
in the country in the entrenchment of the rule of law.
We acknowledge the efforts of the European Union
Police Mission, in coordination with the High
Representative, to support police reform and
coordinating the policing aspects of combating major
and organized crime.

We note, however, that the situation of refugees
and displaced persons remains outstanding. This is a
potentially destabilizing matter if not addressed in a
holistic way. We therefore call on the authorities to
address this matter with a view to ensuring their return
and resettlement.

Bosnia and Herzegovina has made tremendous
economic progress. However, the global economic
crisis has had an adverse impact and the country needs
to mitigate the effects of the global slow-down on the
economy, particularly by protecting the most
vulnerable population. We therefore call upon the
authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina, with the
support of the international partners, to focus on
addressing these issues, which could have serious
implications for the stability of the country.

Finally, we once again commend the High
Representative and his staff for the good work that they
are doing.

