Mr. Takasu: I would like to express my deep
appreciation to the United Kingdom for its leadership
and timely initiative in convening this open debate. I
am grateful for the invitation to attend in my capacity
as the Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission. I
am also grateful for the very kind words expressed to
the Peacebuilding Commission by many speakers this
morning.

The Peacebuilding Commission was established
to address the complex challenges of post-conflict
reconstruction. I have made conscious efforts to guide
the attention of the Commission to peacebuilding gaps
in achieving a smooth shift from peacekeeping
activities and transition to development. I therefore
welcome the opportunity to discuss the issues
highlighted in the President's concept note.

First, the Commission's experiences confirm the
centrality of national ownership, which is not only for
priority activities selected by the Government. It must
also serve as the prime mover in carrying out political,
security and economic reform. Such leadership and
commitment by national Governments are prerequisites
to any successful peacebuilding effort. National
ownership must be complemented by partnership with
local stakeholders and the international partners. In
that regard, I would like to stress the important role of
the United Nations leadership on the ground.

In both Burundi and Sierra Leone, the Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General facilitated the
promotion of dialogue among all stakeholders on the
ground. Through that process, the integrated
peacebuilding strategy was developed to serve as a
framework for the coordination of various existing and
evolving activities. The leadership of the United
Nations representative is also crucial to monitoring
2
progress and issuing early warnings on shortfalls in
implementation.

The United Nations representative needs to be
equipped with appropriate mandates and resources to
execute leadership. At the same time, leadership must
be exercised in an informal and flexible manner to
mobilize the full cooperation of all stakeholders.
Peacebuilding efforts can be more effective when a
lead country takes direct charge in supporting a
particular country, working in tandem with the United
Nations, and brings in new, non-traditional partners.

Secondly, national leadership requires functional
institutional and human capacities at the State and local
levels. Those capacities are usually limited in most
countries emerging from conflict, as many speakers
mentioned this morning. It is essential for international
partners to ensure the timely deployment of civilian
expertise to assist in rebuilding national capacities.
Peacebuilding requires the active involvement of
multifaceted partners with varied expertise and
specialties in such areas as governance, the rule of law,
the security and judicial sectors, civil administration -
including financial management - basic services, the
rehabilitation of infrastructure and private sector
development.

The deployment of such expertise should be
based on a clear prioritization of peacebuilding needs
in each particular phase, linked to priority areas that
the Peacebuilding Commission has identified. We
welcome the efforts of several Governments, including
that of the United Kingdom, to train and maintain a
roster of civilian specialists with the various skills and
capacities necessary for peacebuilding efforts. We
should examine an appropriate mechanism in the
United Nations to mobilize those experienced
specialists in a speedy manner to support post-conflict
capacity-building.

Thirdly, speedy and flexible funding to meet
urgent requirements has been a major concern. The
Peacebuilding Fund was established to provide
catalytic funding in order to fill the immediate funding
gaps in the critical areas, activate potential multiplier
effects for stability, and induce additional resources for
longer-term sustained support. While its volume has
surpassed the original target of $250 million with
contributions from 45 donors, it would be desirable to
see a higher level of resources in light of increasing
demands. I would like to take this opportunity to
08-34772
appeal to all Member States to make generous
contributions to the Fund.

The Peacebuilding Fund has been successfully
assisting several post-conflict countries, but it is not
expected to meet all peacebuilding needs. To achieve
maximum impacts on the ground, we should improve
the coordination of multilateral and bilateral donors in
the country. It will also be important to seek additional
means of mobilizing resources to complement the
catalytic and therefore limited role of the
Peacebuilding Fund. We welcome any innovative
proposal, including those of the United Kingdom and
others, to increase resources to post-conflict countries
that will complement the existing mechanisms and
ensure the coherence and effectiveness of all funding
resources.

It is clear that there are still many conceptual and
operational questions that need to be addressed to
better respond to the enormous challenges of post-
conflict peacebuilding. The Peacebuilding Commission
is ready to engage in further consideration on some of
the issues the Security Council has discussed today. I
hope that today's discussion will inspire specific
actions that we can move forward to strengthen United
Nations peacebuilding activities. Finally, I would like
again to thank the Security Council for its support for
the Peacebuilding Commission.

Before I conclude my statement, allow me to say
just a few words in my national capacity.

As Prime Minister Fukuda of Japan expressed in
January this year, Japan is determined to play a further
active role in the international community as a peace-
fostering nation. To that end, we have taken a variety
of initiatives to support peacebuilding activities all
over the world. Among other things, Japan has
extended substantial support to strengthen the
peacekeeping and peacebuilding capacities of many
African countries, including five peacekeeping
operation centres. Last year, we launched a pilot
programme for peacebuilding human resources
development, which will contribute to meeting some of
the gaps I have discussed today. Twenty-nine graduates
of the course from Japan and neighbouring countries in
Asia are currently working in countries including the
Sudan, Timor-Leste and Nepal. The initiative will be
expanded into a fully scaled-up programme next year.

Moreover, peacekeeping and peacebuilding will
be one of the priority issues to be considered at the
08-34772

Fourth Tokyo International Conference on African
Development, to be held in Yokohoma this month, and
at the Group of Eight Summit to be held in Toyako,
Hokkaido, in July. Japan remains committed to making
the utmost efforts to strengthen international
peacebuilding activities and to enhance global capacity
in this field.

