Mr. Negroponte (United States of America): Of
course I subscribe to the remarks that were just made
by my colleague, Ambassador Jones Parry, and I only
wish to add a couple of points.

First of all, I agree that we have had a productive
discussion today. I also appreciate the tone and the
substance of the comments that have been made by
Council members. I would like to elaborate a little on
several of the specific questions that were posed.

Ambassador Pleuger asked about the transitional
administrative law.

The Iraqis are hard at work on that law at the
moment, and of course, as the Council knows, there is
a deadline for its promulgation. There is a drafting
committee within the Governing Council that is
working on it. We also recognize the importance of
ensuring that a wide range of Iraqis are consulted on
the process of developing the transitional
administrative law. The Coalition Provisional
Authority has played an ongoing consultative role in
that regard with the Governing Council. Our
understanding is that the Iraqis have made significant
progress towards the completion of the law and
continue to work hard towards the achievement of the
28 February deadline, although it is not certain that the
deadline will be met exactly.

With respect to the question of United Nations
involvement in that process, I would note that the issue
of the transitional administrative law was not covered
in Mr. Brahimi's report - in the sense of advocating
any United Nations involvement - or in the objectives
of the fact-finding mission. I do not think it is the case
that we would not welcome such a role under other
circumstances, but given the time constraints and the
scheduling issues, at this time we do not envisage a
United Nations role in the process of drafting the
transitional administrative law. As the Council knows,
the focus of their efforts has been on other subjects,
such as the conduct of elections and now going
forward, I think, on the question of the transitional
mechanism.

Ambassador Pleuger then asked about the next
steps and what ideas we have on a transitional
mechanism. I agree with Ambassador Jones Parry that
it would probably be imprudent to speculate at this
point on what the various options are. There is some
discussion of that in the Secretary-General's report. But
I think we all agree - and this was a point that Mr.
Brahimi made to us at the luncheon with the Secretary-
General - that we would like to see this emerge from
a process of discussion. We think it is important that
there be as much buy-in and association with the
outcome as absolutely possible on the part of the
Iraqis.

I would also note in that regard that
recommendation eight of the report makes the point
that the fact that the resolution of the question of the
timing of elections has now been decided - which I
think is one of the most important outcomes, if not the
most important outcome, of the report thus far -
provides time and space for a more measured
discussion of the issue of the transitional mechanism.

Ambassador Pleuger and a number of other
delegations raised the question of security and the
matter of a bilateral security agreement. I think I would
limit my remarks here to saying that this is one of a
number of topics that is currently under discussion in
Baghdad with the Governing Council and that those
discussions will continue.
Finally, let me say that as we did after the
previous consultation, after reviewing the record of our
meeting today, there may be some questions on which
we wish to come back and respond to Council members
in greater detail, and we will seek an opportunity to do
that, whether it is in some written form or through the
providing of a briefing, as we did in the case of
transitional justice after the last meeting, or perhaps
during the course of the Council's consultations in the
consultations chamber.

Again, Mr. President, I would like to thank you
and colleagues for the opportunity to hold what we
think has been a very interesting discussion today.

