Ms. Mejia Velez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for the
invitation to speak in today's debate at a crucial time
for Haiti when, with the support of the Security Council
and the Group of Friends of Haiti of the Organization
ofAmerican States, ofwhich Colombia is part, Haitians
are taking a new step in the right direction in order to
build an environment of sustainable peace, now with a
special emphasis on justice. I would also like to thank
Ms. Sandra Honore Braithwaite, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General in Haiti, for her briefing on
the Secretary-General's report (S/2017/604) and for the
long years of commitment that she has shown to the
Haitian people and to the United Nations in carrying
out her duties.

On Friday, during the General Assembly's adoption
of resolution 71/ 314, on the new United Nations approach
to cholera in Haiti, of which my country was a sponsor,
it became clear that the United Nations has a greater
impact on the ground with regard to its ethical duty
when it implements its mandates on the basis of precise,
comprehensive road maps that take into account the
specifics of each case, thereby enabling it to improve
its allocation of resources and efforts designed to deal
with conflicts, humanitarian crises and, in this case,
the consolidation of peace. My country acknowledges
the political process that Haiti has made, as the report
and the Ambassador of Haiti describe, and which has
unquestionably helped to bring an official end, starting
on 25 October, to the activities of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), and to
usher in a new phase that can now focus on support to
justice through the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH).

Colombia firmly believes that the path towards
peaceful, inclusive and prosperous societies goes hand
in hand with the strength of their democratic institutions
and the rule of law - a battle we will support Haiti in
carrying out. The efforts undertaken to ensure that the
Haitian people can count on a professional and more
robust national police force enjoy the support of the
Government of Colombia by way of our deployment
of police, men and women, as well as the training
provided in our country to women contingents of the
Haitian National Police, to which we today commit to
continue to support. Nevertheless, the next step must of
course be to make progress in strengthening thejudicial
system in such a way that the path towards justice
includes the establishment ofa foundation conducive to
improvements in the socioeconomic conditions of the
entire population.

In its 2017 report, the Ad Hoc Advisory Group on
Haiti makes it clear that it will continue to work so that
there is greater coordination among all actors involved
in addressing the challenges facing Haitians when it
comes not just to cholera, but generally with regard to
human rights, political participation and sustainable
development, so that they can respond to the challenges
they will face once MINUSTAH departs and the
new mission begins, while also improving prospects
for development.

The history of friendship and cooperation between
Haiti and Colombia goes back to our own independence,
when Haiti afforded Simon Bolivar an opportunity to
restructure his troops and again take the path towards
the independence of our peoples. We would therefore
not be here were it not for that support. It is for that
reason that I would like to recall the words expressed
here by President Santos Calderon when we presided
over the Security Council in 2011:

"Haitians yearn to be heard. An international
community that does not take Haitians' views of
their problems into account does not serve Haiti."
(S/PV6510, p. 3)

