Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): Before I start on Colombia, let me thank you, Mr. President, for having arranged the two moments of silence and also used this occasion to pay tribute to His late Majesty Sultan Qaboos of Oman. Turning to Columbia, I would like to welcome the Foreign Minister. We are very pleased to have her here and wish her all the best in her new role. I also thank the Special Representative for his report and for his briefing to the Council today. We very much share his analysis of events in Colombia over the past three months. This reflects both the achievements and the challenges of theimplementation of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace. I should also like to welcome the announcement by President Duque that he would like the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia to stay in that country for the duration of his Government. That is an important indication of the Government's commitment to peace. October saw the first local elections since the accords were reached and the first in which the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Comtin (FARC) political party took part. Despite the concerning levels of violence during the campaign, election day showed the strength and inclusivity of Colombian democracy, with more candidates from across the political spectrum competing than ever before and the highest turnout in modern times. We were encouraged, too, by the overwhelming commitment of those elected to continue along the path to peace. The newly elected local authorities have a key role in the implementation of the peace agreement, especially through the development programmes with a territorial focus. We welcome the Government's support for these programmes, including through expanded financing, and encourage coordination between national, departmental and local authorities to ensure effective implementation. However, there are some areas in which urgent efforts are necessary to preserve the gains of the past three years. Fortunately, the mechanisms to address them already exist; the challenge is to make more effective use of them. First, we are deeply concerned about the persistent level of violence and threats towards human rights defenders, community leaders, including women, and former Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP) combatants. We have highlighted this point on previous occasions, but we are concerned that the situation is not improving despite the Government's stated commitment to tackling the issue. In that connection, we welcome last week's meeting of the National Commission on Security Guarantees and encourage full, ongoing use of that mechanism, including engagement with civil society, to further implementation. We encourage prioritization of the action plan of the Intersectoral Commission on Security, Women Leaders and Human Rights Defenders, which has the potential to transform departmental security conditions for the better. We also welcome recent steps to strengthen the protection of former FARC-EP combatants and note yesterday's announcement of an operation to thwart a plan to attack FARC political party leader Rodrigo Londofio Echeverri. We encourage the Government to ensure the extension of protection measures to territorial areas for training and reintegration and informal settlement of former FARC-EP combatants. Secondly, we urge the Colombian Government to accelerate reintegration programmes, which are crucial to maintaining the faith of ex-combatants and communities in the process. Efforts should be made to ensure legal accreditation and access to income-generating projects for former FARC-EP combatants living both inside and outside the former territorial areas for training and reintegration. More widely, we encourage the Government to work with all stakeholders to resolve outstanding questions about the long-term status of those areas, particularly concerning the land on which they are located. Finally, in his report, the Special Representative emphasizes the interconnected nature of all elements of the peace process. Implementing individual components of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace may produce limited outputs, but the outcome of inclusive, stable and lasting peace in Colombia will not be possible unless all components progress simultaneously and in a coherent fashion. In that regard, we encourage the Colombian Government to take advantage of the national dialogue process it began following the recent protests to build consensus with diverse sectors and ensure that implementation continues in an effective and comprehensive manner. The United Kingdom recognizes the important progress that has been achieved so far in Colombia. We look forward to continuing to support the Colombian Government to ensure a lasting peace enjoyed by all.
