Mr. Jeremie (Serbia): In 1947, then-President of
the General Assembly Oswaldo Aranha of Brazil
eloquently defined what he termed the principal
mission of the United Nations - to unveil the truth
and to face reality in all its complexity, enabling our
actions to be properly guided in the maintenance of
peace and security of all peoples. As we gather here for
another meeting of the Security Council, in accordance
with resolution 1244 (1999), we should remind
ourselves of his words.

With all due respect to differing points of View,
when it comes to Serbia's province of Kosovo and
Metohija, a manifest truth is that its status remains
bitterly disputed more than two years after its ethnic
Albanian authorities attempted secession through a
unilateral declaration of independence (UDI).

Pristina's UDI has clearly divided the world and
brought into question the fundamental tenets of the
contemporary international system. It has neither
contributed to Balkan stability nor enhanced regional
cooperation. A substantial majority of United Nations
Member States and of those seated today on the
Security Council have stood firm against efforts to
impose the forcible partition of my country. They have
continued to respect our sovereignty and territorial
integrity. On behalf of my nation, I would like to
10-36420
reiterate our deep gratitude for their support as we seek
to resolve Kosovo's future status through patient
diplomacy.

Before turning to the Secretary-General's report
(S/2010/169), I want to emphasize that the principled
position of Serbia's democracy remains set in stone.
We will never yield and recognize UDI. We will
continue to vigorously defend our position in a non-
confrontational manner, using all diplomatic means at
the disposal of a peaceful sovereign State.

I would like to extend a warm welcome to
Special Representative Lamberto Zannier and thank
him for his work. The United Nations remains an
indispensable actor in Kosovo. It is therefore critical
that the Council keep supporting the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
as a crucial pillar of peace and stability.

We deeply appreciate the constructive approach
of the United Nations and organizations that operate
under its overall authority, such as the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX). They have
set the stage for responsible stakeholders to work
together on improving the lives of ordinary people
irrespective of their ethnicity. Disagreements on status
must not impede our ability to act in concert on
resolving practical issues.

As a result of this approach, the unstable
equilibrium on the ground has been largely kept in
check. This has ensured that the overall situation in
Kosovo remains "relatively calm but fragile", to quote
the report.

Kosovo's ethnic Albanian authorities have on
numerous occasions failed to embrace pragmatic,
status-neutral engagement, notably in the rule of law
area. For instance, the 2 March visit by the head of
EULEX, Yves de Kermabon, to Belgrade resulted in an
agreement on how to move forward rapidly on the
judiciary issue, in particular as it affects the North
Mitrovica courthouse. Despite having been duly
apprised of its contents beforehand, Pristina publicly
rejected the terms after they were embraced by
Belgrade.

The international community's executive
authority has yet to be used to put this breakthrough
into effect and thereby pave the way for a constructive
dialogue on the matter of customs. Instead, these two
areas of shared interest - integral parts of the
5
Secretary-General's report - remain open to the
detriment of the Kosovo Serb population in particular.

Regrettably, the Secretary-General's report
downplays a number of growing challenges in Kosovo,
from organized crime and corruption to police
misconduct and judicial dysfunctionality. The
European Commission's most recent progress report,
on the other hand, paints a more realistic picture. It
states that organized crime and corruption continue to
be issues of "serious concern" and affirms that the
judicial system is "weak, vulnerable to political
interference and inefficient".

More recently, EULEX Acting Chief Prosecutor,
Johannes van Vreeswijk, stated that Pristina's so-called
Minister of Transport and Telecommunication, Fatmir
Limaj, together with a tight-knit group of associates, has
been under investigation since May 2009 for "money-
laundering, organized crime, misappropriations of office,
fraud in office and soliciting bribes". The EULEX Acting
Chief Prosecutor has also suggested that the so-called
Prime Minister of Kosovo, Hashim Thaci, along with
other Pristina-based figures, have strongly discouraged
him from moving forward in his work.

In another high-profile case, the Kosovo
Liberation Army (KLA) War Veterans Association
made threats against EULEX after the recent arrest of
former KLA commander Sabit Geci. He was charged
with crimes related to organ harvesting committed on
ethnic Serb civilians in the well-known "yellow house"
in neighbouring Albania.

Several Serbian officials, including Minister
Goran Bogdanovie and his deputy, were illegitimately
expelled by Pristina under armed escort, despite being
legal residents of the province. At around the same
time, unilateral force was used by a Kosovo special
police unit on Serbian mobile and fixed telephony,
disrupting the ability of Kosovo Serbs to communicate
beyond their enclaves - a serious breach of
contemporary humanitarian norms. No warning was
given. It was quick and Violent, apparently catching
many international actors in Kosovo off guard.

Thankfully, the situation on the ground is
improving and the technical damage is being repaired.
We must make sure this sort of unilateralism does not
happen again. In this context, I would like to welcome
the statements by UNMIK and EULEX that
disassociated them from the controversial strategy for
northern Kosovo. This unilateral scheme was

sponsored by the so-called International Civilian
Office. Its intent was to forcibly implement the
delegitimized Ahtisaari proposal, in Violation of
resolution 1244 (1999).

The precarious state of Serbian patrimony
remains a deeply troubling part of the reality on the
ground in Kosovo. The report of the Secretary-General
highlights a number of disturbing incidents, including
church vandalism, graveyard desecration, the looting
of icons and other relics, and the denial of property
rights. Inexplicably, it continues to remain silent on the
lack of progress in reversing the outrageous decision to
pave over with concrete the remains of the twice-
destroyed Serbian church in the centre of Djakovica.
Serbia is today raising for the fifth time in the Council
the fact that nothing has been done to reverse that
awful act of cultural cleansing.

These illustrative examples are not isolated
incidents. They cause, result in and reinforce each
other, all at the same time. They are an integral part of
the post-UDI reality on the ground that directly affects
the return of the 205,835 expelled Kosovo Serbs
registered by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).

Especially in south Kosovo, the police seem
unable to prevent acts of intimidation and violence
against Serbs exercising their right of return. For
instance, the reconstructed village of Zac was
repeatedly attacked over several months: homes were
vandalized, power lines were cut, car tyres were
slashed and children were stoned. As a result, most of
its inhabitants decided to leave Kosovo. And just three
days ago, one of the returnees who chose to remain
was shot at by an unknown assailant while he sat in the
tent in which he lives.

Senior UNHCR official Eduardo Arboleda has
stated that "the return of displaced persons has literally
stopped". This has been echoed by the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), which
has written that local authorities in Kosovo "have done
little to encourage displaced persons to return". The
well-respected Minority Rights Group International has
gone further, saying in a recent report that since UDI
the situation for Kosovo Serbs and other
non-Albanians has worsened, and that this is forcing
them to leave Kosovo "because they face exclusion and
many instances of discrimination".

Notwithstanding numerous statements by the
province's ethnic Albanian authorities that have
claimed the return of internally displaced persons
(IDPs) to be a priority, the reality on the ground is that
in the past year, only a few hundred Kosovo Serbs have
returned to their homes. That amounts to less than one
half of one per cent: a staggering figure. It represents a
failure of monumental proportions that must urgently
be addressed. The Republic of Serbia nevertheless
continues to be dedicated to finding a way to overcome
these and many other concrete challenges in status-
neutral ways consistent with Council resolution 1244
(1999).

In this context, I should like to underline that an
understanding was recently reached with UNHCR to
establish three specialized offices in central Serbia that
will enable IDPs to receive Kosovo Property Agency
decisions. We hope this will pave the way for more
than 40,000 claims by Serbs to be finalized, leading to
the recovery of illegally seized property without
further delay, after more than a decade of
prevarication.

The Republic of Serbia has continued to work
with the international community in a number of other
important areas of mutual concern. We greatly
appreciate UNMIK's concerted efforts to, in the words
of the report, "decrease tensions and focus on common
needs" (S/2010/169, para. 12) in north Kosovo. Its
irreplaceable role in resolving practical problems is
very welcome, as is the offer to chair a number of
multi-ethnic task forces composed of representatives of
north Kosovo institutions and local ethnic Albanian
authorities. We also support the European Union's
(EU) enhanced status-neutral presence in north Kosovo
and look forward to European Union House beginning
to function at full capacity in the near future.

I am pleased to underline that day-to-day
cooperation between Serbia and the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) on issues of
police, justice and customs has also continued apace.
Information is exchanged on a regular basis, and
technical discussions in a number of important
competency areas have proven to be useful to both
sides. Close working relationships have developed,
leading to increased understanding of the needs and
priorities of everyone concerned.
I would like to salute the international
community's indispensable role in protecting Serbian
cultural and religious heritage in Kosovo. A positive
development that took place during the reporting
period was the status-neutral appointment by the
European Union of the head of Greece's liaison office
in Pristina, Ambassador Dimitris Moschopoulos, to the
position of facilitator for the protection of Serbian
heritage in the province. We have already begun to
work with him in accordance with Council resolution
1244 (1999) and the Secretary-General's six-point
plan.

Serbia is encouraged by early signs of
accomplishment. For example, Ambassador
Moschopoulos has been able to convince the local
ethnic Albanian authorities in the municipality of
Vucitrn to redress a terrible wrong. For a decade, the
Church of Saint John the Baptist in the village of
Samodreza had been used as a garbage dump by the
nearby elementary school. This shrine is particularly
important for the Serbian people, as it was built on the
foundations of the church in which the martyrs of 1389
took communion before going into the historic battle of
Kosovo.

I would like to express cautious optimism that
issues related to the supply of electricity for Serbian
communities throughout the province will be resolved
in the near future. Thanks to the constructive role
played by UNMIK and especially the EU, it appears
that a status-neutral solution is being worked out.

I come to the matter of the Kosovo Force
(KFOR). Its unique ability to bridge existing
communal divides and maintain peace and stability on
the ground remains acknowledged by all. The Republic
of Serbia will continue to work with our partners to
ensure that KFOR's role is not diminished, especially
in the context of safeguarding Serbian patrimony. We
believe that proposals to hand over operational
jurisdiction for guarding a number of these sites to
local police units would not contribute to improving
the fragile security situation. This is especially
important given the opposition to such plans clearly
expressed by the affected monastic communities.

Despite recent setbacks on the ground, I believe
we are approaching a new, more promising moment on
Kosovo. In the time ahead, we should concentrate our
efforts on coming together to find a solution through
dialogue. In October 2008, the General Assembly
tasked the International Court of Justice with
determining whether the UDI conforms to international

law. Late last year, a crucial stage in the judicial
process - oral hearings - came to an end, with a
record number of countries presenting their views,
including all five permanent members of the Council.
That has made it the largest case in the history of the
Court.

The Court is close to completing its deliberations
and we all have an obligation to take that fact very
seriously. The judges' work should be allowed to run
its course unhindered by political pressures, such as
further recognition of the UDI. It is deeply regrettable
that in recent months a couple of States have chosen to
do this anyway, reportedly under foreign pressure,
which amounts to disregard for the principal judicial
organ of the United Nations.

Once the International Court of Justice reports
back to the General Assembly, an unprecedented
opportunity will be created to build momentum for
achieving the ultimate goal: a strategic compromise
between Serbs and Albanians. There is no doubt that
the roots of the many problems we face in Kosovo are
buried deep in history. Those problems are made even
more difficult by the consequences of unilateral action.

Yet I strongly believe that we have the ability to
look beyond the divisions of the past and create a new
environment that will make future solutions possible.
We must summon the will and courage to do what this
moment in history demands. This can only be achieved
through peaceful dialogue which results in a mutually
acceptable outcome that provides for lasting stability in
the region and the wider world.

A solution through dialogue * and not
unilateralism - is our goal. We ask for the support of
all United Nations Member States in solving this
problem once and for all. This year can be the year of
our shared success. I want to assure this Council that
Serbia stands ready to flexibly engage in all sincerity,
for our intent is neither to freeze the conflict nor to
triumph or subjugate.

The issue of Kosovo cannot be solved by forcing
conditions of submission on a party that would be
compelled by circumstances to accept, for that would
be done in humiliation, under duress and at an
intolerable cost to democracy. It would inevitably leave
a deep stain of resentment, a bitter memory upon which
the terms of a one-sided outcome would rest - not
even permanently, but only as upon quicksand.

On the other hand, a solution that leaves no one
defeated can unite the world and contribute to
advancing regional priorities within the framework set
forth by international law. Only such a solution, built
with the free consent of all responsible stakeholders,
can last. Only such a solution can erase the divide
among United Nations Member States caused by the
UDI. Only such a solution merits the support of the
world - not UDI.

Serbia will pursue a compromise with Pristina
constructively and in good faith, as if they had never
opted for UDI. But make no mistake: we are equally
prepared to resist UDI unremittingly, as if no
compromise were on the horizon.

I trust that the limits of the achievable can be
extended because of the commitment by all to the same
cause - and that cause is European integration.
Dialogue between Serbs and Albanians that produces a
fair and balanced agreement will provide a critical
boost to securing a peaceful European future for the
whole of the Western Balkans. Membership in the EU
is Serbia's central strategic priority. We strongly
believe in the shared destiny of all European nations.
And we remain dedicated to embracing Robert
Schuman's dream of an organized and living Europe
indispensable to the maintenance of peaceful relations
among States.

These ideas stand at the foundation of our
democracy and our genuine desire for reconciliation.
They remind us of the importance of cooperation,
compromise and consensus-building, while prompting
us to move beyond all of our differences and
disagreements to achieve common prosperity. Even
though there have been many hardships along the way,
and even though much sorrow has resulted, we believe
the moment has come to put aside the fear. And we
believe that together we can transform the plot of land
that is Kosovo and Metohija - dear to both peoples -
from one of contention to one of harmony.

Let us therefore gather our strength and start
preparing for the end of this historic journey. "All
endeavour calls for the ability to tramp the last mile,
shape the last plan, endure the last hours' toil", Henry
David Thoreau said, adding that this is the virtue we
must possess if we are to face the future as finishers.
This is the task at hand: to create momentum and then
sustain it until we achieve peace and security for all
through peaceful dialogue.

Waiting around for an indeterminate period in the
vague hope that one side will eventually give in is a
recipe for freezing Kosovo's limbo, and that is most
certainly not what any responsible stakeholder wants.
The only way forward is to bring about a just
compromise that balances the desires and interests of
our two peoples. That is the goal of Serbia, and we will
pursue it until it is achieved, for no stopping point
short of agreement will ever be justified.

