Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I would
like to thank you, Madam President, for organizing this
important meeting and for your personal leadership
and leadership of the Nigerian delegation on the issue
of advancing security sector reform. It is critical and
appropriate that the Security Council emphasize the role
of security sector reform in making local institutions
more effective and accountable and fostering both a
sense of and actual safety and security. I would also
like to thank Assistant Secretary-Generals Titov and
Nakamitsu and Special Representative Bangura for
their briefings.

As the Security Council reaffirmed in April 2014
when we adopted the first ever resolution focused solely
on security sector reform (resolution 2151 (2014)),
such reform is an essential aspect of prevention, and
focusing on preventing conflict or relapses into it is
something that we must all do more of and become
better at doing. Security sector reform helps build
accountable, effective and efficient institutions and
provides a foundation for resilience in fragile States.
It also provides a foundation for the rule of law and
respect for human rights. Resolution 2151 (2014)
rightly emphasized national ownership; indeed, some
of the Security Council's most complex missions,
such as in Kosovo and Timor-Leste, have succeeded
because of the national authorities' commitment to
achieving reforms in partnership with the international
community. In Liberia, efforts have led to an increase
in the number of women working in the security sector,
a strong focus on community policing and increased
training on human rights and gender issues. Sierra
Leone has taken a holistic approach to security sector
reform that has included disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration, the establishment of a special court
and the reform of security institutions.

But we have also seen, for example in the recent
history of the Central African Republic, that when
attention fades, progress may too. The Government
of the Central African Republic launched a vigorous
security sector reform campaign in 2008, starting with
an international security sector reform assessment
of the country's needs and the establishment of
a timeline for achieving its security sector goals.
While the Government was making progress, having
implemented some 70 per cent of the plan within a
year, its programmes were both financially costly
and politically difficult. They fell by the wayside.
Instead of pursuing the integration that was needed,
the Government held on to its resources, never fully
integrated the police and the army, and allowed the
process to get caught in political patronage and internal
bureaucratic wrangling, all of which contributed to the
violence that surged up again in 2012.

Sustaining the reform of security institutions
is critical not only to making people safe but also to
preventing relapses into war. National ownership of
security sector reform is essential, but it should not
mean that the international community in general, or
the Security Council in particular, should be passive as
time goes on. When the memory of conflict begins to
fade, and host Governments are confronting the hardest
and most difficult challenges, that is when we have a
particular responsibility to support, encourage and
press for completion of security sector initiatives.

We welcome the idea described by Assistant
Secretary-General Titov of a security sector reform
compact between the United Nations and host
Governments. When a Government's focus on
completing reforms wanes, we have a responsibility to
use the Security Council and the good offices of the
Secretary-General to remind national leaders of their
part in such a compact. There are few places where the
relapse into conflict represents a more pressing issue
than in South Sudan. We have seen the devastation
that war has wrought on the country's security sector
and, indeed, on every other sector. A new country,
once a source of great hope, has become a painful
and horrifying humanitarian catastrophe. Crimes that
shock the conscience are being perpetrated against the
people of South Sudan and they are being perpetrated
with impunity. It is time for leaders to act to end the
carnage. The region and the friends of South Sudan are
united.
The choice confronting the Government is plain,
and it is incumbent upon us to make the consequences
of failing to choose the path of peace equally clear.
We must do so in support of the region, in support of
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, in
support of the people of South Sudan, and in support of
peace. War has ravaged South Sudan. It has vanquished
hope; it has set back a generation; it must, and it can
end. While it is our collective hope that the Government
of South Sudan will sign the peace agreement that is on
the table, it is also our collective responsibility to act if
it does not. There is no other choice. Maintaining the
status quo is only a recipe for more rape, more murder,
more hunger and more devastation. It is time for us to
move forward together to make the choices confronting
the parties unambiguously clear and to render equally
apparent our commitment to holding those who reject
peace and choose the path of war accountable.

Police have a growing role in peace operations,
developing host-Government institutions capable of
taking over law-enforcement capabilities and often
providing critical civilian protection functions. We
can and should strengthen the role of United Nations
policing in our peacekeeping missions by providing
more institutionalized training and equipment for
foreign police units and individual police advisers,
and, importantly, increasing women's participation in
security forces. We have seen in Darfur, with the all-
female formed police unit, that increasing the number
of women in policing roles advances security and helps
build trust and confidence in security forces.

The entire community shouldbebroughtinto security
sector reform initiatives, rather than marginalized
by them. We welcome Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Bangura's engagement in working
with Governments to make their institutions more
effective and accountable. The participation of women
in post-conflict security services is crucial to creating
structures that are representative, trusted, legitimate
and able to meet the security needs of all. Our collective
investment in helping strengthen security sectors is
an investment in creating reliable partners to not just
build safe and stable societies at home, but also to
play an active role in defeating transnational threats
everywhere. It is an investment in protecting conflict,
and it is an investment in peace and stability.
