Mr. Fedotov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): Allow me first, on behalf of the Russian
delegation, to congratulate you, Sir, on your accession to
the Presidency of the Council for the month of November
and to express our confidence that under your wise
guidance the Security Council will carry out its work
successfully and effectively. Our delegation is prepared to
help in any way to achieve that end. We should also like
to express our gratitude to Ambassador Gambari and his
entire delegation for Nigeria's skilful guidance of the
Council last month.

 

The Russian delegation, together with other members
of the Contact Group, is a sponsor of the draft resolution on
the violation of human rights in the territory of the former
Yugoslavia. The conflict that has been raging there for
several years has led to much suffering, without precedent
in post-war history, for peoples that up to then had been
living in peace as good neighbours. The civil wars in the
former Yugoslavia have become a real human tragedy,
numbering hundreds of thousands of peaceful inhabitants
among its victims, as a result not only of hostilities, but
also of countless cases of gross and massive violations of
human rights.

Russia strongly supports the draft resolution's
condemnation of all violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights in the territory of the former
Yugoslavia, regardless of who committed them. We are
seriously concerned by reports on violations of international
humanitarian law in Srebrenica and Zepa, as well as by the
fact that representatives of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the International Committee of
the Red Cross and other international agencies have still not
been allowed access to the regions where those violations
are thought to have occurred.

The wording of the draft resolution in this respect is
tough but fair. At the same time, the draft resolution sets
out clearly the Security Council's conviction that there must
not be a selective approach to the protection of human
rights in the former Yugoslavia.

The continuing large-scale violations of the rights of
the Serbian population in the former Sectors West, North
and South - including burnings, the looting of homes,
forced repatriation and the killing of civilians - are
causing serious concern. The Serbian inhabitants of Krajina
must have the right to return in conditions of safety. Any
attempt to introduce time-limits for them to reclaim their
property is unacceptable. The draft resolution contains clear
demands in this respect.

Russia supports the demand to all States and parties in
the former Yugoslavia to cooperate with the International
Tribunal, and again confirms its position with regard to the
inadmissibility of the use of the Tribunal's activities to
"demonize" any of the parties to the conflict. The task of
the Tribunal is to elucidate the truth and to punish
appropriately those specific persons whose guilt of crimes
against humanity has been established, regardless of their
ethnic or religious affiliation.

We also continue to be alarmed at the fact that
hundreds of thousands of people have been forced to
leave their native homes as a result of the latest hostilities
in Croatia and in Bosnia. A humanitarian crisis of
unprecedented scale has arisen, which requires a swift and
appropriate reaction by the international community.

The Russian Federation, for its part, is increasing its
efforts to provide humanitarian assistance for refugees and
displaced persons, whose situation is deteriorating further
owing to the onset of a cold and snowy winter. With
regard to the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, we must
not forget that a sanctions regime is still in force,
substantially complicating these humanitarian efforts. The
time is ripe to discuss the question of lifting these
sanctions, particularly in the light of the successfully
developing process of peaceful settlement.

Russia has prepared an appropriate initiative and
hopes that it will be considered in the next few days.
Time does not wait; it requires swift and responsible
decisions.

