Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank you, Sir, for convening this meeting, and we
welcome the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, to the Council. We thank
her for introducing her the sixth report to the Council
on the topic under consideration.
Guatemala believes that all the authorities in Libya
have an obligation to respect the work of the Court and
the Office of the Prosecutor. To that end, we need to
guarantee that they can work without impediment or
restriction. We hope that the Government will provide
all the necessary support to the staff of the Court and
the Office of the Prosecutor so that they can conduct
their investigations in an appropriate manner. In that
regard, we welcome the memorandum of understanding
that was recently signed between the International
Criminal Court and the Government of Libya. We
are convinced that the document will help to promote
close cooperation between the two parties and lay the
foundation for achieving a more direct relationship
between the Court and the Government of Libya.

Moreover, it is vital that both the Court and
the Office of the Prosecutor enjoy the support and
necessary assistance of States parties and those that
are not yet party to the Rome Statute. We value the
work of the Office of the Prosecutor of the Court to
date, but we also see the involvement and interest of
the Libyan authorities in the process as a positive sign.
We welcome the progress achieved by the Office of the
Prosecutor in the cases of Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi
and Abdullah Al-Senussi.

We trust that, as the transition process continues,
greater institutional consolidation will take place,
which will enable Libya to create a State that can
guarantee human rights, the rule of law and an end to
impunity. Nevertheless, we must not forget the climate
of insecurity that prevails in Libya today. Mr. Tarek
Mitri, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
in Libya, pertinently has stressed in this Chamber that
security remains the principal concern in Libya (see S/PV.7031). Attacks on diplomatic missions and their
staff, armed conflict between military forces, bomb
attacks on public offices and even the abduction of
high-level Libyan Government officials are only some
of the acts that reflect the gravity of the situation that
the people must face on a daily basis. It cannot be
denied that, in such a landscape, the judiciary and the
institutions responsible for preventing crime are at high
risk.

Guatemala therefore appreciates the efforts of the
international community to resolve or at least alleviate
the pressure created by that situation. We believe that
the Council can play a fundamental role in expanding
such aid and support. However, we also think that those
problems cannot be resolved in the short run. Change
will take time. Much will depend on the impartiality,
independence and capacity that the Libyan judiciary is
able to develop. Only through the strengthening of the
judicial system can one speak of the true rule of law in
Libya.

As to the investigations conducted by the Office
of the Prosecutor on other crimes committed in Libya,
we believe that they are of the utmost importance. We
urge the Office of the Prosecutor to pursue its very
important efforts in that regard. We reaffirm our call
for the investigation of all possible violations of human
rights and of crimes against humanity committed
in Libya, regardless of their perpetrators. We are
extremely concerned about gender-based crimes that
took place during the conflict, and we hope that the
investigation into those grave crimes will result in
justice for their victims. Investigations into all crimes
committed against detainees and minority groups must
also continue.

Finally, we reiterate our support and commitment
to the Court and the Office of the Prosecutor. We
hope that their good work in Libya will continue and
that cooperation and understanding achieved in that
instance will serve as a model for other cases.

