Ms. Blandino de Los Santos (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation would
also like to thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo for her
informative briefing.

The Dominican Republic acknowledges the
collective effort of the international community to
support the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)
at its annual international donor conference, held on
25 June in New York City. Representatives of States and
institutions unanimously praised the Agency's role in
preserving the rights and dignity ofPalestinian refugees.
We applaud UNRWA staff for the commitment to offer
support for the human development of 5.4 million
Palestinian refugees in the Near East.

On another note, in 2016 the Security Council
adopted resolution 2334 (2016), which asks all parties
to put an end to territorial claims, to respect sovereignty
and to liberate the occupied territories. Unfortunately,
since then, the situation has not changed. The reality
is that the occupation has expanded illegally without
any consequences, thus preventing peace from
drawing nearer.

We note with concern the large increase in
demolitions in the West Bank, particularly in East
Jerusalem. Those demolitions create a coercive
environment for the inhabitants, which could lead to
the forced relocation of the population that is being
affected. It is particularly disconcerting that the work of
human rights organizations has been restricted through
the reduction of civic space, especially in Gaza, where
the humanitarian situation remains critical and where
their work is therefore indispensable.

The Dominican Republic continues to defend the
existing international consensus that the only way
forward for the Palestinians and Israelis is to negotiate a
two-State solution, with negotiated borders based on the
1967 lines. We reiterate that the main objective should be
the restoration of a political horizon for the resumption
of a meaningful peace process that puts people at its
centre and is consistent with international law.

Regarding the Palestinian attacks against Israel,
the Dominican Republic maintains its position. We
strongly condemn any type of Violence and call on
Hamas and the other groups to put an end to their
instigation and related operations. Finally, we urge all
parties involved to work together to open the doors
of negotiation and to avoid acts of provocation and
inflammatory rhetoric. We are convinced that the work
of international organizations is essential to alleviate
and reduce the risks of violence and to seek a solution
to the current unfortunate situation.

