Mr. Safaei (Islamic Republic of Iran): I also
apologize for requesting the floor at this late hour.
My delegation would just like to react to some of the
baseless accusations levelled by the Ambassador of the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia against my country.

It was ironic that he accused Iran of farming the
flames of sectarianism and that he preaches against
it. Despite what he claimed, it is common knowledge
where the takfiri ideology comes from and what its
objectives are. It is also common knowledge who is
putting that ideology into practice. The example of the
inflammatory statements against various Islamic sects
by influential Saudi clerics and officials, including the
Government-appointed imam of the Grand Mosque
in Mecca, clearly shows who is spreading sectarian
rhetoric and inciting sectarian hatred. Indeed, a recent
sermon, delivered on 31 March 2015 by Abdul Rahman
Al-Sudais, the Government-appointed imam of the
Grand Mosque of Mecca, contains hate speech and
incitements to violence against Shiites.

"Our war with Iran, say that out loud, is a war
between Sunnis and Shiites. Our war with Iran . .
. is truly sectarian. If it was not sectarian, we will
make it sectarian. . . . Our disagreement with the
Rafidha will not be removed nor will our suicide
to fight them . . . as long as they are on the face of
the Earth".

It is quite clear who consider themselves to be the
only true believers and who have set out to destroy
and annihilate the other sects in the Islamic world,
including those outside the Islamic world.

In that respect, a cursory look at history books will
easily reveal that the proponents of the takfiri ideology
began their sectarian drive in the year 1805, when they
launched an attack against the holy shrines in Najaf and
Karbala and set them ablaze. A criminal sectarian act
of that kind was committed in June 2014, when they
horrifically massacred 1,700 Iraqi air force cadets in
Tikrit, simply because the cadets were of a different
Islamic sect.

We can agree that creating centres and financing
organizations aimed at fighting terrorism is a good
thing. But there should be no doubt that action is
needed to weed out the elements that incite hatred and
intolerance against those who are different. We believe
that action against those who spread hateful takfiri
ideology and against their proponents inside Saudi
Arabia constitutes a necessary action that needs to be
carried out in that country.

The Saudi Ambassador also referred to Hizbullah
as a sectarian, terrorist organization. Here, too, it is
common knowledge that Hizbullah forms part and
parcel of the Government and parliament of a United
Nations Member State. It is the group that helped drive
the Israeli occupiers out of Lebanon and, in numerous
cases, stood up to and fought the Israeli regime that
is occupying the Palestinian lands. It is astonishing
that an Islamic country finds common ground with the
Israeli regime and issues exactly the same claims as do
the heads of that regime.

Such statements run contrary to the interests of
the Islamic world and damage the unity that we need
to build in order to advance the well-being of Muslim
people everywhere.

