Ms. Shalev (Israel): Last Saturday, Israel
launched a military operation aimed at protecting
Israelis living in southern Israel from the incessant
barrage of rocket and mortar shell fire. Israel was
compelled to resort to a military operation after many
weeks - indeed, months and years - during which its
civilians were subjected to deliberate terrorist attacks
carried out by Hamas and other Palestinian terrorist
organizations operating from the Gaza Strip. Israel
demonstrated the utmost restraint before launching that
operation, but there comes a time when a sovereign and
responsible Government must take decisive action to
protect its citizens and send a clear message to the
Hamas terrorists: enough is enough.

In the past two weeks, prior to Israel's reaction,
we witnessed a steep escalation in Hamas attacks
against Israel. Israel has been subjected to more than
300 rockets and mortar shells, which were launched
indiscriminately, striking cities and towns, schools and
playgrounds, commercial centres and synagogues. In
its military operation Israel has exercised its inherent
right to self-defence, which is enshrined in Article 51
of the United Nations Charter. Any other State would
have acted in the same manner when faced with similar
terrorist threats.

N0 sovereign State would allow more than half a
million people to constantly be held hostage by a
terrorist organization. No sovereign State would allow
its citizens to become the target of thousands of rockets
and mortar shells. A mother sending her children to
school must know that they will come back safely. No
person should fear leaving his house because he may
have to scramble for cover. No construction worker
should fear dying while earning his living, as we
witnessed just two days ago. Israel cannot, and will
not, allow its citizens to be sitting ducks for terrorist
attacks. Israel will continue to take all necessary
measures to protect its citizens and stop terrorism.

Members of the Council must ask themselves
what they would do in the same situation if their
citizens were terrorized on a daily basis. Protecting the
lives and well-being of one's citizens is not only a
right, but also a responsibility of every sovereign State.
With its military operation, the State of Israel is
fulfilling that responsibility.

Let us all remind ourselves what Hamas is all
about. Hamas is a terrorist organization that promotes a
radical agenda of hatred and violence. It is supported
financially and militarily by Iran and other extreme
forces in our region. Ideologically, is tightly connected

to Al-Qaida. It does not recognize Israel and calls in its
charter for Israel's destruction. Hamas rejects peace in
the Middle East. Like other terrorist organizations,
Hamas strives to achieve its political goals by targeting
innocent men, women and children, without hesitating
to use its own population as a human shield. Hamas
controls Gaza not through democratic means, but
through violence and force against its political rivals.

It is regrettable that the Palestinian observer
failed to mention Hamas, an organization that declared
war on its own people and that holds them hostage.

Hamas stands against the very principles and
purposes which the United Nations was founded upon
and seeks to promote. It stands against any peaceful
solution for the conflicts in our region.

Let me be very clear. The targets of this operation
are the terrorists and their infrastructure alone. We are
not at war with the Palestinian people, but with Hamas
and other terrorist groups in Gaza. As such, we are
doing our utmost to minimize civilian casualties.
Hamas, on the other hand, places civilians in the line of
fire, carrying out its activities from densely populated
areas, and directs its attacks towards Israeli civilian
targets. The current operation has exposed once again
the fact that Hamas stores weapons and explosives in
homes, schools, mosques and hospitals. It is Hamas
that bears the sole responsibility for the current
escalation and for any civilian casualties, Israelis and
Palestinians alike.

While determined to protect the lives of its
citizens, Israel continues to ensure passage of
humanitarian goods and supplies to the people of Gaza.
As Prime Minister Olmert emphasized at the outset of
the military operation, we will make every possible
effort to avoid any humanitarian crisis in Gaza. The
people of Gaza do not deserve to suffer because of the
killers and murderers of the terrorist organizations.
Since the operation commenced, more than 350 trucks
loaded with food and medical supplies have entered
Gaza. As we speak, supplies and donations continue to
flow into Gaza from international organizations and
State donors.

At the same time, Hamas continues to target
crossings and to obstruct the provision of humanitarian
relief to the Palestinian people.
Our region is facing crucial times that will shape
its future. The international community must reject the
agenda of the extremists and support that of the
moderates calling for coexistence and the realization of
two States living side by side in peace and security.

Only two weeks ago, the Security Council
adopted resolution 1850 (2008), reaffirming the
Annapolis process. Israel, for its part, will continue its
efforts to pursue peace with the Palestinian people and
its moderate leadership, while taking all necessary
measures to protect its citizens from terrorism.

