Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Mr. Mark Lowcock for his
briefing. I commend him and his team for their efforts
to ease the humanitarian crisis in Yemen.

The conflict in Yemen, which has been going on
for more than three years, has plunged the country
into an acute crisis. Today, as the conflict escalates
in Al-Hudaydah and other places, disruption to
humanitarian access is looming large, aggravating
the risk of famine and cholera outbreaks, which is a
dire consequence that no one - neither the Yemeni
people, the countries of the region nor the international
community - can endure. It is therefore incumbent on
the international community to empower the parties
in Yemen to set aside their differences in the spirit
of reconciliation so as to avoid the spread of conflict.
This must be done as a matter of urgency in order to
prevent further aggravation of the humanitarian crisis
in the country.

The international community should scale up
humanitarian assistance and provide medicine, food
and other supplies in accordance with needs on the
ground in order to mitigate the suffering of the Yemeni
people. We should urge the parties concerned in
Yemen to take measures to tame price hikes and keep
commercial goods moving. That would also go some
way towards easing the crisis. The parties concerned
should work together to improve humanitarian access
so that assistance to the Yemeni people can be delivered
unimpeded, safely and securely, paving the way for
better humanitarian outcomes in the country.

There is no alternative to a political solution if
Yemen is to have lasting peace and put an end to the
humanitarian crisis once and for all. The Yemeni parties
should return to the political track as soon as possible.
Special Envoy Martin Griffiths has recently continued to
engage with a broad spectrum of stakeholders, pushing
for the resumption of intra-Yemeni peace talks and the
implementation of confidence-building measures.

It behoves the international community to support
the United Nations and the Special Envoy in stepping up
their good offices to establish a sustainable mechanism
for dialogue and negotiation. China supports the
preservation of Yemen's sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity. China also supports the
Yemeni parties in arriving at that inclusive solution
as soon as possible through dialogue and negotiations
based on relevant Security Council resolutions, the Gulf
Cooperation Council initiative and its Implementation
Mechanism, and the outcome document of Yemen's
National Dialogue Conference.

Alongside the international community, China
stands ready to support the Special Envoy's efforts
and will continue to play a constructive role towards a
political solution to the Yemeni issue.

