Mr. Braun (Germany): Mr. President, I would like
to thank you for convening today's debate. Germany
aligns itself with the statement delivered on behalf of
the European Union.

As illustrated by recent attacks in Turkey,
Belgium, Nigeria, C6te d'Ivoire and Pakistan, terrorist
organizations such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL), Al-Qaida and other groups continue to
commit atrocities and extreme violations of human
rights. While the threat level has increased also in
Europe, terrorism remains highly concentrated, as most
of its activity occurs injust five countries: Iraq, Nigeria,
Afghanistan, Pakistan and Syria. This disturbing
observation dramatically belies one of the core claims
of radical Islamic terrorist groups. The hatred and
fanatical rhetoric may be directed towards the Western
world, but their actions predominately target Muslim
societies, which is a sad and very deplorable fact.

The spread of violent extremism transcends
religious and ethnic boundaries. It requires enhanced
international collaboration and a unified response.
A collective effort is of the essence, an effort that
simultaneously addresses all of the underlying factors
conducive to terrorism and violent extremism. It is a
truism that the fight against this scourge to humankind
cannot be won solely by military means, nor can we
gain the upper hand by exclusively relying on enhanced
cooperation among our law enforcement agencies or
enhanced information sharing between intelligence
services. In addition, economic, social and educational
aspects need to be addressed. What that means is that
what is needed is a smart combination of all those tools.

But of course the fight against terrorism has to be
conducted militarily, as is illustrated by the international
alliance against ISIL in Iraq and Syria. Germany lends
material and personnel support and is leading the effort
to train and equip Kurdish forces in northern Iraq in
the fight against the terrorist organization. Terrorism
cannot be defeated in the long run without focusing on
its root causes. Germany supports the Plan of Action to
Prevent Violent Extremism presented by the Secretary-
General. We commend the all-of-United Nations
approach expressed in the Plan of Action, which makes
presenting a violent extremism a cross-cutting issue of
a number of the United Nations bodies and agencies.
What we also need now is a unanimous approach by all
Member States to addressing these issues.
While the process of radicalization differs in
each individual case, the Internet undoubtedly plays a
decisive role in terrorist propaganda, recruitment and
financing. It may be at its most powerful during the
early stages of the radicalization process. Germany is
working with service providers to increase awareness
about the use of social media platforms by terrorist
organizations to gain new recruits. We should also
think creatively about what else we can do to curb
terrorist use of the Internet, while maintaining its open,
secure, stable, accessible and peaceful character.

It is a task for society as whole to actively counter
the narrative of organizations such as ISIL and
Al-Qaida by revealing their ulterior motives that aim
to abuse a religion under the pretext of martyrdom. It
is essential that their fanatic statements be countered
by sound arguments from moderate religious leaders.
The romantic image of the jihadist struggle must
be demystified by the fact that behind of every dead
jihadist there is a broken family that has lost a son or
a daughter. Most importantly, we need to refute the
alleged opposition between the West and Islam by
pointing out that Muslim citizens are an integral part of
Western societies.

The fight against terrorism needs to be fought by
the international community on many fronts and with
many different tools. It is a collective effort that will
take years, if not decades. Germany is fully committed
to playing its part.

