Mr. Serrano: Thank you, Madame President, for
giving the floor to the European Union (EU). At the
outset, I also wish to extend deep condolences to the
Government and people of New Zealand for the loss of
lives during the earthquake that shook Christchurch.

The candidate countries Turkey, Croatia, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and
Montenegro, the countries of the Stabilisation and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia and the European
Free Trade Association country Norway, member of the
European Economic Area, as well as the Republic of
Moldova, align themselves with this statement.

Let me start by greeting the Prime Minister of
Timor-Leste, Mr. Xanana Gusmao, who has addressed
the Council today for the first time. As a close partner
of his country, the European Union is very pleased with
its progress in many fields, in particular its strides
towards long-term stability and its remarkable
economic recovery. We commend his leadership and
the closer cooperation of the stakeholders in Timor-
Leste. Improved national dialogue and greater
inclusiveness in the democratic process are delivering
results, just as are the strong political commitment to
fostering peace, unity and development. Let me also
commend Timor-Leste's active engagement at the
regional level, such as in the Regional Forum of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations.

I also welcome Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Ameerah Haq, who has again
provided an insightful and encouraging briefing on the
situation in Timor-Leste, The European Union would
like to thank her for the close cooperation in Dili and
the good management of donor coordination, as well as
the quality of her work.

As many speakers before me have stressed, the
general elections in 2012 will be an important
milestone for the country and its young democracy.
The European Union has started to assist the
preparations of the elections through training and
capacity-building activities in several fields, such as
gender empowerment, civic voter education and voter
registration. We stand ready to consider further
requests for assistance with a friendly eye.

Additionally, the European Union strongly
supports the continuation of United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) with a view to the
critical period of the elections, as proposed by the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative. We
believe that the limited and gradual decrease in the
Mission's police personnel serves to adapt UNMIT's
capabilities to the progress towards the full resumption
of primary policing responsibilities by the Policia
Nacional de Timor-Leste, while allowing UNMIT
police to assist with the important institutional
development and capacity-building tasks in the
security sector, including training on human rights,
gender awareness and domestic violence, and to
provide operational support if needed.

While the European Union welcomes the progress
made by the national police, we would also like to
stress in this context that it needs to live up to the
highest standards of professionalism and integrity. The
EU firmly supports the United Nations position about
the certification of 52 national police officers who face
serious disciplinary and criminal charges. Along with
the Secretary-General, we urge the Government to take
all necessary measures to ensure the credibility and
accountability of the national police. The European
Union also recognizes the continued importance of a
comprehensive review and reform of the entire security
sector.
While 2011 will mainly serve to consolidate
achievements, address outstanding issues and prepare
for 2012, the EU deems it of great importance to
discuss the architecture of the future United Nations
presence early and to prepare the exit strategy for
UNMIT carefully, in order to ensure a sustainable
transition and to help secure a continued stabilization
of the country. In view of that, we welcome the fact
that the joint High-Level Committee on Transition held
its second quarterly meeting earlier this month and we
look forward to regular updates on its work.

As the international presence transitions from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding tasks, particular
attention must be paid to strengthening institutional
and human capacities, activities that are at the heart of
the EU assistance programme. Moreover, possible
additional support for selected Millennium
Development Goals has just been announced to the
Head of State.

The European Union is pleased with progress in
the build-up of the judiciary, to which the EU
contributes in the framework of a democratic
governance programme. We have also followed with
great interest Timor-Leste's efforts in coming to terms
with its difficult past. It is true that Timor-Leste has
taken some steps towards addressing impunity and
improving accountability for crimes, but we would also
like to encourage a full implementation of the
recommendations of the United Nations Special
Commission of Inquiry report of 2006.

We also believe that reconciliation is an
important precondition for long-term stability, and is
strongly in the interest of people of Timor-Leste itself.
It is with that in mind that we are concerned about the
recent decision of the National Parliament to
indefinitely delay the debate of the draft laws on the
public memorial institute and reparations. We urge the
resumption of their consideration at the earliest
possible occasion, as well as other steps to implement
the recommendations of the Commission for
Reception, Truth and Reconciliation.

In conclusion, Timor-Leste has seen accelerated
progress in many aspects of its political, economic and
social development. At the same time, the country still
faces challenges and needs the continued assistance of
bilateral and multilateral partners in order to fully
realize its potential for equitable and sustainable
development. For its part, the EU stands firmly by
Timor-Leste's side and cooperates with it closely. After
the visit of President Ramos-Horta to Brussels in
October last year, EU Commissioner for Development
Piebalgs will travel to Dili in the beginning of March
to continue consultations with the Timorese leadership.

