Mr. Lie Cheng (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Special Envoy De Mistura and Mr. John
Ging for their briefings. We greatly appreciate their
efforts in terms of facilitating the political process and
alleviating the humanitarian situation in Syria.

The international community has been active
recently in advancing the political process in the
country. The Special Envoy has engaged with various
parties to the Syrian question in intensive in-depth
consultations on such issues as the formation of the
constitutional committee and the relaunching of the
Geneva peace talks. Certain progress has been made.
It is hoped that the Astana dialogue will continue to
play a role in maintaining the ceasefire in Syria and in
advancing the Geneva peace talks.

A political settlement is the only way out. The
international community should actively support the
United Nations as the main channel for mediation,
support the Special Envoy in his efforts to restart
the peace talks in Geneva, and push the Syrian
Government and the opposition to move towards the
same goal. The current priority is to move forward the
process of establishing the constitutional committee
so as to a solid foundation as early as possible for a
comprehensive dialogue on such topics as political
governance, elections and counter-terrorism. At the
same time, all the relevant regional actors should bear
in mind regional peace and stability and create a good
environment for the political settlement process.

The sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity of Syria should be fully respected. We have
taken note of the recent reports of attacks against
targets in Syria. We call on the parties concerned to
remain calm, act with restraint and avoid taking any
actions that may lead to an escalation of the situation.

The Syrian conflict is now in its eighth year. The
humanitarian situation remains grave. A large number
of civilians have been displaced. China has taken
note of the recent report by the Secretary-General on
cross-border humanitarian assistance and operations
(S/2018/617). We express our grave concern about the
suffering of the Syrian people. We will continue to
provide assistance to Syria and its neighbours affected
by the influx of Syrian refugees, within the limits of
our capacities.

We have taken note of the conflicts in parts of
Syria. We express our concern and hope that they will
not lead to harm to innocent civilians.

Attacks by terrorist organizations in Syria continue
to hamper the United Nations humanitarian relief
effort. The international community should strengthen
counter-terrorism cooperation, harmonize standards
and resolutely combat all terrorist organizations listed
by the Security Council. We urge the parties involved
to work together to exert influence and ensure that
resolution 2401 (2018) is effectively implemented. The
United Nations and the international community should
strengthen communication and coordination with the
Syrian Government, provide assistance to all areas in
Syria needing it, support mine-clearance operations
in affected areas and assist people in returning to
their homes.

