Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ghassan Salame, for his briefing and his tireless efforts to find a political solution to the Libyan crisis. I would like to reiterate France's full support for Mr. Salame. We support his efforts and those of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) and of the Secretary-General. The Berlin international conference on Libya, in which the President of the French Republic, Mr. Emmanuel Macron, participated, allowed for the strengthening of the international consensus necessary for a solution to the crisis. The commitments made by international actors at that Conference must be honoured and followed by action. The arms embargo must be respected. We deplore the fact that more than 50 violations were recorded by UNSMIL last week. Foreign interference and military support fuel the conflict and must stop. I refer in particular to Turkey, as the President of the French Republic highlighted yesterday. We must eschew military force and proxy wars. We are particularly concerned about the growing presence of Syrian and foreign fighters, who continue to flock to Libya in flagrant breach of the commitments made on 19 January in Berlin. The most recent developments give rise to fears of a regional escalation of the Libyan conflict and threaten the security of the Maghreb, the Sahel and Europe. France calls on the Libyan parties to resume constructive dialogue on economic and oil issues as soon as possible, in order to allow for the equitable and unobstructed distribution of oil resources for the benefit of all Libyans. It is important that Libya's neighbouring countries, above and beyond those represented at the conference in Berlin, such as Algeria and Egypt, be fully involved in monitoring and implementing the conclusions of the Berlin conference. We refer in particular to Tunisia, Morocco, the Niger and Chad. After a truce lasting two weeks, the escalation of tensions on the ground is extremely worrisome and must stop immediately. The Libyan parties must act responsibly. They must first agree on a credible and lasting ceasefire. France therefore expects the Libyan parties to meet with the Joint Military Commission - in the so-called 5+5 talks - as soon as possible. The Committee should also enable the two parties to agree on issues of common interest, such as the dismantling of militias and the unification of Libyan security institutions. More broadly, the parties must engage in good faith in constructive dialogue on various tracks to discuss security, economic and political issues. The Libyan parties must find a political solution that meets the expectations and aspirations of all Libyans. The dialogue should be conducted in an inclusive format and lead to the formation of a genuinely inclusive and representative Government that acts for the benefit of all Libyans, so that they can freely choose their representatives. The resumption of dialogue must be achieved with the support of the African Union and Libya's neighbours, which have a specific and legitimate right to support a resolution of the Libyan crisis. We welcome the initiative taken by the African Union to host an inter-Libyan reconciliation meeting, which could be held in Addis Ababa in the spring. It would be an important contribution to ending the crisis in Libya. In order to maintain the positive momentum of the Berlin conference and to support the resumption of the political process, the members of the Security Council, in unison, must send a strong message to all actors with respect to Libya. To that end, we must quickly and decisively endorse the conclusions of the Berlin conference by adopting a robust resolution. This resolution must provide strong and unequivocal support for United Nations-led mediation in Libya. This support should be substantial and operational - whether it be to monitor the ceasefire, to ensure compliance with the arms embargo or, more broadly, to see to the simultaneous implementation of the six elementsaddressed in Berlin. In this respect, we will, first and foremost, strengthen UNSMIL. The Council must act, and it must act quickly. The Security Council can count on France's full commitment and mobilization in the quest for a solution to the Libyan crisis. The French authorities will continue to take action, together with their European partners, the African Union and Libya's neighbours, with the support of the United Nations, to achieve peace and stability in Libya.
