Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank Special Representative
Tadamichi Yamamoto for his informative and
clear briefing.

I listened very carefully to our colleague
Ambassador Mahmoud Saikal as he explained his
views on the situation in his country.

I would like to begin by expressing Japan's deep
condolences to the families of the victims of the
terrorist attack that occurred on 31 May in Kabul, and
deep regret for all acts of violence committed in the
country since our last debate in March (see S/PV.7896).
Such brutal attacks have deprived countless Afghans of
their futures. They also crystallize our concerns about
the deteriorating security situation noted in the latest
report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/508). We are
alarmed by the fact that it was not possible to prevent
these appalling crimes from being conducted in the
heart of the capital city.

In order to improve the security situation, the
international community has continued to provide
political support to the Government of Afghanistan, and
financial support and training to the Afghan security
sector. Unfortunately, we see little fundamental change
in the security situation in Afghanistan.

More fundamentally, the seeming erosion of
unity in the National Unity Government is profoundly
concerning. The flare-up ofpolitical and ethnic tensions
within the Government must be absolutely avoided
given the enormity of the challenges Afghanistan faces.
There need to be more effective measures for engaging
with ethnic communities, which are underrepresented
in the Government. The Government must return to its
2014 commitments, which underscored the necessity of
equitable representation, with attention to inclusiveness
and the unique political and societal composition
of Afghanistan.

Also among the unmet commitments are the long-
overdue parliamentary elections, which should have
been held in 2015. We are aware that elections have
the potential to worsen existing tensions and create
new ones, leading to further fragmentation, as noted
in the Secretary-General's report. However, continued
delays are also problematic, and we urge the Afghan
Government to demonstrate its commitment by
announcing the timeline for parliamentary and district
council elections. I was pleased to hear today from
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
in this Chamber that there may be an announcement
soon from the Afghan Government. The Government
can make good use of the extensive United Nations
experience in electoral support to ensure that the voices
of Afghan voters are heard through the parliamentary
and district council elections, as well as the 2019
presidential election.

The devastating terrorist attack on 31 May was a
tragic wake-up call for Afghanistan and the international
community to recognize the urgency of revitalizing the
peace process. The Kabul process meeting on 6 June
was a good opportunity for Afghanistan to show its
strong commitment to making progress in the peace
process with the support of international and regional
partners. Japan emphasizes that the Government must
not only express willingness, it must also deliver
concrete results to the Afghan people. Support from
regional and international stakeholders is also crucial.
We therefore welcome the 10 June talks in Astana
between Afghanistan and Pakistan, where they agreed
to reinvigorate the Quadrilateral Coordination Group.

Japan is pleased to note positive efforts in the area
of displacement. We have seen improved protection of
civilians as well as coordination among Afghanistan,
Pakistan, Iran and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees. In a recent informal
meeting with Council members, the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees noted improved
Afghan Government efforts to absorb and integrate
the dramatically increased number of returning
refugees from neighbouring countries. We welcome
the Secretary-General's visit to the internally displaced
persons camp in Kabul on 14 June, which sent a very
encouraging signal to some of the country's most
desperate people. This visit underlines the necessity
of international and United Nations support for the
Afghan people's aspirations for peace and stability.

In these challenging circumstances, the
implementation of resolution 2344 (2017), which
mandated the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) to support the people and
the Government of Afghanistan in achieving peace
and stability, is essential. We also await the results
next month of the strategic review authorized by the
resolution. We look forward to the Secretary-General's
fresh inputs into the review following his visit to Kabul.
Japan believes that the review must be an objective and
impartial guideline for Council members in considering
next steps. Once we have received the review, Japan,
as the lead country on this file, will work with other
Council members and stakeholders participating
in today's debate to determine UNAMA's role in
overcoming the difficult realities we currently face.

