Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): First, let me join
you, Mr. President, in warmly welcoming the ministers
who have come here to join us for this debate. I hope
they found it worth their while to travel all the way to
New York for this open meeting. I also want to join our
colleagues in commending you for organizing this
debate on Central Africa. I believe that this is the first
time that the Council is actually having a debate on
Central Africa as a whole. We cannot say that for sure
because we have been on the Council for only two
years. We do not have the long institutional memory of
the permanent members, but whatever little research
that we have done suggests that this is the first time
that the Council is addressing Central Africa as a
whole, rather than addressing just Burundi, Rwanda,
the Great Lakes and so on. So, we commend you for
opening a new frontier in the Council's work. We also
want to thank you very much for the background paper
(S/2002/ 1179) and also thank the Secretariat for
providing us with a paper this morning on this region.

In our view, the problem is, in fact, clearly
enunciated in your paper, Mr. President. Indeed, you
have been remarkably candid in the opening paragraph
of your paper where you say,

"Despite enormous potential and vast
mineral, water and agricultural resources, Central
Africa in the broad sense has been slow in
embarking on its economic and social
development, and projects to the world the least
positive image of all the subregions of Africa."
(S/2002/11 79)

We commend you, Mr. President, for stating the
problem so clearly. At the same time, the question that
came to our mind was how could this debate today
make a difference to the situation? How can we ensure
that at the end of the day, after this open debate, we
have actually made a contribution to solving the
problem that you have described?

We think that there are at least four different ways
in which such a debate can be helpful. The first way is
that, clearly, such a debate generates a lot of awareness
of the problem. I am a bit disappointed by the lack of
participation of Member States from outside the
subregion. But even so, I think the sheer fact that the
debate has been held and will be reported in the United
Nations Journal and in the provisional verbatim record
will, I think, generate a lot of interest. Certainly,
Mr. President, your paper alone, for example, has
taught us that there is a tremendous multiplicity of
initiatives in the region. For example, you talk of the
regional cooperation being based on a tripod
comprising the Central African Economic and
Monetary Community, the Economic Community of
the Great Lakes Countries and the Economic
Community of Central African States. And, of course,
you talk of the role of the Council for Peace and
Security in Central Africa, too. We think that all this
information is very valuable. It is a debate such as this
that generates the information that we need to make a
judgement.

The second way in which such a debate can be
helpful is if as a result of it we develop a desire to have
a certain degree of conceptual coherence in the work
done by the United Nations system and by others in the
region. Frankly, until we listened to the statements
today, we had no idea of the range of initiatives and of
the work being done. I think that at some point in time
someone somewhere - we are not sure who
actually - but clearly somewhere in the United
Nations system, someone has to take the responsibility
for seeing whether these different initiatives fit
together. I thought, for example, Ambassador
Williamson from the United States made a concrete
suggestion. He said that there are six Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General in the region.
The obvious question to ask is: do the six Special
Representatives coordinate their work or do their work
in individual parcels with no coordination? I am not
sure what the answer to the question is, but apparently
yesterday at the Ad Hoc Working Group on Africa,
chaired by Ambassador Koonjul, a discussion has
begun on how to coordinate the work of the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General. I hope that
will make a contribution. But it is not just the Special
Representatives because, if you listen to the statements
made today, there is a tremendous variety of work
coming. And if I heard the Minister from the Central
African Republic correctly in translation, he said that
given the multiplicity of initiatives, we must develop
synergy among the initiatives that occur in the region.
Again, I hope that today's debate will result in a sort of
synergy of all the initiatives that we have seen so far in
the region.

The third way in which this debate can be helpful
is for us to try to focus on the concrete follow-up
action that needs to be taken after today's meeting and
after the statements that have been made today. Clearly,
one of the structural weaknesses of the Council - of
course, we all know how powerful the Council is
internationally and all that - but one of its built-in
structural weaknesses is its inability to monitor
whether its resolutions, presidential statements and
press statements have been implemented. There is
literally no mechanism that follows through on all this.
Of course, in the Central African region, we have a
tremendous number of resolutions, presidential
statements and various calls for action. I think that at
some point in time we have got to sit down and do an
audit of what we have decided, then look at what we
have actually implemented and what we have not
implemented. And if we have not implemented, we
should also see why not. To take just one example that
has been mentioned by several speakers in today's
discussion: there is clearly a need to convene an
international conference on the Great Lakes. That is
one of the themes that I have heard being discussed.
The question is, when do we begin work on such a
conference? What is required to ensure its success?
How does the Council need to prepare for it? I hope
that today's debate generates the awareness that we
need to see this sort of follow-up action.

The fourth way in which this debate can be
helpful is by making everyone aware of their respective
responsibilities to ensure success in the region. As we
all know, development is a partnership. It is a
partnership between the donor community and the
countries of the region. For that partnership to succeed,
both sides have got to see eye to eye on what each side
can do. If I heard the statements from the donor
countries here accurately, I thought they were sending a
fairly nuanced statement, saying "We can do so much if
we get this from you". That was the sort of message
that they were sending. If, as a result of today's debate,
a better understanding develops within the donor
community, the recipient countries and, of course,
within other organizations such as the United Nations
Development Programme and the World Bank, if all
can see eye to eye on their respective roles in the
region, it would make a difference to the region.

For all these reasons, Mr. President, we commend
you for organizing this debate, even though the
participation from outside the region has not been as
good as we would have liked it to be, we believe that
you will make a contribution. And we hope that the
provisional verbatim record of this meeting will serve
as a very valuable resource for the Council in future.

