The President: I shall now make a statement on
the outcome of the Berlin conference in my capacity as
the representative of Germany. Please forgive me for
taking the floor at the outset of this meeting, but we
thought that, as representative of the host country, we
would, from our point of view, familiarize members
with the results of the Berlin conference, held last week
from 31 March to 1 April.

Let me say first that I would like, on behalf of the
delegation of Germany, to thank Under-Secretary-
General Guehenno for his very comprehensive
briefing, which I fully support, and for the kind words
addressed to my Government. I also align myself with
the statement of the presidency of the European Union,
to be made later at this meeting by the permanent
representative of Ireland.
The official title of the Berlin conference was
"Afghanistan and the International Community - A
Partnership for the Future". This title reflected
accurately the central message of this conference.
Further reconstruction of Afghanistan remains, after
the conclusion of the Petersberg Process, a common
endeavour of the international community and
Afghanistan, under the auspices of the United Nations.

The presence at this event of 65 delegations,
including all State members of the European Union, the
Group of 8 (G-8) and NATO, as well as Afghanistan's
neighbours and other particularly interested
countries - many at the Foreign Minister level -
underlined the continued international commitment to
creating a secure, stable, free, prosperous and
democratic Afghanistan.

At the same time, Afghanistan's ownership has
clearly increased, as demonstrated not only by the
Afghan role as co-host and co-chair of the conference,
but also by Afghanistan's input and extensive
commitments, announced by President Karzai in his
opening speech, as he himself was leading the Afghan
delegation.

The Berlin conference produced specific and
measurable results that exceeded even optimistic
expectations.

The documents that I am quoting from right now
are available outside this Chamber for all interested
members to review. The extensive final documents
describe in detail the path ahead. The Berlin
declaration, as the final communique of the conference,
describes the vision of the future new Afghanistan; the
work plan, drawn up by the Afghan Government,
shows how Afghanistan wants to approach that vision
in the coming two years, while the progress report
endorsed by the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) summarizes the
implementation status of the Bonn Agreement. Lastly,
the Berlin Declaration on Counter-Narcotics is an
agreement between Afghanistan and its neighbours,
which is not only a major contribution to combating
narcotics, but is also a further boost to viable regional
cooperation after years of isolation of Afghanistan.

The Afghan Government has established a
timetable for the next steps in the political transition
process. President Karzai announced at the conference
that parallel elections for the presidency as well as for
the lower house of parliament will be held in
September.
At the same time, the Afghanistan Government
committed itself to an ambitious timetable for the
disarmament of militias, as a significant condition for
free and fair elections. In return, financing for the
elections was largely secured through a separate
pledging by the major donors. The Afghan Government
presented a detailed programme of work - the so-
called work plan - that contains mainly short-term,
one- to two-year goals - for the institution-building
and development processes that are concretely
verifiable. This was Afghanistan's major political
contribution to the conference.

The Berlin conference was also successful from
the pledging perspective. The international donor
community made pledges for Afghanistan totalling
$8.2 billion for the next three years, the period ranging
from 2004 to 2006, of which $4.4 billion is earmarked
for the current Afghan fiscal year. Major pledges were
announced, among many others, by the United States,
the United Kingdom, Japan, Germany, the European
Commission, India and Canada, to mention only a few.

The long-term investment programme put forth
by the Afghan Government under the title "Securing
Afghanistan's Future", which has calculated a need for
$28 billion in foreign aid for a period of seven years, is
thereby fully financed for Afghanistan's current fiscal
year. As set out in the Berlin declaration, the further
implementation of this investment programme will
depend on achieving the objectives set by the Afghan
Government itself. I fully agree with what
Mr. Guehenno has said, that the further needs should
not be underestimated and that if we want to meet
them, the continued commitment of the international
donor community will be required.

Concerning the provision of security, all
participants at the conference appreciated the role of
the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) and
Operation Enduring Freedom. Both ISAF and
Operation Enduring Freedom are ready to assist in
securing the forthcoming elections. The prominent role
played by NATO in Afghanistan was underlined by the
participation of its Secretary-General at the conference.
In the Berlin declaration, NATO has committed itself to
the establishment of five additional provincial
reconstruction teams (PRTs) by this summer and
further PRTs thereafter.

The conference showed universal concern over
the narcotics situation, which threatens to jeopardize
all that has been achieved in Afghanistan since 2001.
The re-entrenchment of narcotics production and
trafficking and the involvement of warlords and
terrorist structures are worrying. The Berlin
Declaration on Counter-Narcotics, mediated by the
United Kingdom as the lead nation for counter-
narcotics and signed during the conference by
Afghanistan and its seven neighbours, is an important
advance in this context. The relevant parts of the work
plan likewise underscore Afghanistan's determination
to combat narcotics by all available means.

Last, but not least, a wide range of satellite events
accompanied the conference, complementing it and
rounding it off thematically. The German Foreign
Office supported a conference with actors from Afghan
civil society, which the Friedrich Ebert Foundation - a
German think-tank - and Swiss Peace had arranged.
An investors' conference was organized by the
Federation of German Industries and attended by
President Karzai. And a G-8 security working group
meetings discussed the details of security sector reform
on the basis of a comprehensive paper and of
presentations by the five lead nations.

We are confident that the Berlin conference will
be regarded as a milestone in the political and
economic reconstruction of Afghanistan. And beyond
that, we are convinced that the reaffirmation of a
lasting partnership between Afghanistan and the
international community reflects a promising model for
a common endeavour of the international community in
nation-building and in its fight against terrorism.

These remarkable results deserve an explicit
acknowledgement and endorsement by the Security
Council. To this end, my delegation initiated
negotiations with Council members and with members
of a core group of particularly interested States, with a
view to agreeing on the content of a presidential
statement.

It is my understanding that such an agreement
among experts has been reached and that we are going
to adopt this presidential statement at the end of this
public meeting. I would like to thank all partners for
their cooperation during the preparations for the
conference and in the course of the conference itself, as
well as in the follow-up here in New York. Germany
would like to specifically express its gratitude for the
efforts by the other three co-chairs of the Berlin
conference - the United Nations, the Government of
Afghanistan and Japan.

I shall now resume my function as President of
the Council.
Since there is no list of speakers for this meeting,
I would like to invite Council members who wish to
take the floor to do so, after having indicated to the
secretariat, as from now, that they wish to speak. I shall
now give the floor to those who have indicated their
wish to speak.

