Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I should like, at the
outset, to thank you, Mr. President, for having come to
New York to preside over this important meeting on
Somalia. I wish in particular to welcome the presence
of the Prime Minister of Somalia, whom I also thank for
having come to New York and for having shared with
the Council his vision of the new Somalia. I also thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
his briefing, and the permanent Observer ofthe African
Union for participating in this meeting as well.

The Angolan delegation welcomes the convening of
this debate on the situation in Somalia at a crossroads
for the country's future. The briefings delivered here
have provided a better understanding of the progress
achieved and of the challenges being faced by the
people and the Government of Somalia, the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), the United
Nations and international partners, which have joined
forces to help to build the new Somalia in peace and in
stability.

In 2016, Somali is expected to hold elections, which
will represent a crucial landmark in the implementation
of Vision 2016, the road map established by the Somali
authorities regarding the federal and State-building
process, the constitutional review and preparations for
elections. However, despite the significant progress
achieved so far, we must acknowledge deep concerns
over the political crisis and tensions among State actors
at the highest level.

Last year, political tensions between the President
and the former Prime Minister resulted in considerable
delays in the establishment of vital parliamentarian
organs and overall progress in the implementation of
the Vision 2016 inclusive political framework. After
decades of instability, Angola expects that the political
actors will put the highest interests of the State and
the people at the centre of their concerns, instead of
political agendas.

The leaders and the people of Somalia must stand
united and remain focused on the country's political
priorities, which, in accordance with the national
and international consensus, are the preparations
for and holding of elections in 2016, to advance the
State-building process and fight against Al-Shabaab
terrorists.

In this regard, we welcome the second Ministerial
meetingoftheHigh-levelPartnershipForum,the creation
of the National Independent Electoral Commission,
the Boundaries and Federation Commission and the
Independent Constitutional Review and Implementation
Commission. The avowed possibility that a one-person,
one-vote election may not be held in 2016 is a matter
of concern, and we look forward to the setting up of an
alternative electoral ballot method, taking into account
the need for inclusivity and the enfranchisement of all
Somalis.

Inclusiveness and commitment are key issues in
the Somali political and constitutional process. The
meeting on the constitutional review process recently
held in Mogadishu produced a road map for an inclusive
and participatory process. It established benchmarks
for the adoption of a new constitution by March 2016,
which we hope will be met.

The most recent report of the Somalia and Eritrea
Monitoring Group on Somalia (see S/2015/801) raises
alarming questions related to the misappropriation of
resources by the political and business elite, corruption,
human rights violations by anti-Al-Shabaab forces,
delays in the establishment of vital parliamentary
organs, and activities of individuals or groups referred
to as "spoiler networks in Somalia". Everything must
be done to impede those alleged spoilers to jeopardize
the efforts and hopes of the whole nation, especially
Somali youth.

Regarding the fight against Al-Shabaab after the
success achieved by Operation Eagle and Operation
Indian Ocean, it is Vital to establish State authority
in the areas recovered from the terrorists, establish
services that benefit the population and, by so doing,
remove some of the root causes of support for terrorist
groups. In that regard, we welcome the progress made
in building the capacities of the Somali National Army
and State police forces and in the implementation of
the national programme for disengaged combatants,
while expressing concern over the lack of sufficient
funding for those crucial projects. The National Army
and police will be called upon to play a crucial role in
securing the elections during the electoral period, when
the Al-Shabaab terrorists are expected to try actively to
disrupt the electoral process.

In that context, we are deeply concerned that the
Somali Government is experiencing difficulties in
paying salaries to the Somali National Army and other
security forces. That situation might gravely impair the
preparations, readiness and the security and stability
of the country in general. Nevertheless, we commend
the support that the United Nations Support Office for
the African Union Mission in Somalia is providing
to the Somali National Army and that of all Member
States contributing to the United Nations Multi-Partner
Trust Fund established at Somalia donor conference.
We also commend the countries contributing troops to
the African Union Mission in Somalia and the troops
themselves, who are engaged in an extremely difficult
mission. Angola takes this opportunity to express a
heartfelt tribute to all those who have paid the ultimate
sacrifice in the fight against the forces ofterrorism, and
for the attainment of freedom and, ultimately, for peace
in Somalia.

With regard to the human rights situation, we deem
it particularly important that the Federal Government
and the regional authorities ensure strict compliance
with international standards and respect for the rule of
law in security operations.

In conclusion, despite the substantial progress
achieved to date, the situation prevailing in Somalia
is still fragile. It is up to the international community,
particularly the Security Council, to remain vigilant
and supportive in ensuring sustainable peace, stability,
economic and social development, and respect for
human rights and the rule oflaw in Somalia. The Somali
Federal Government and all stakeholders must remain
committed to those goals in order to continue enjoying
the confidence and support from the international
community for the attainment of the goals which
involved a great investment to guarantee a better future
for the people of Somalia.

