Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): I wish
to thank Ms. Sandra Honore, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH),
for her briefing. I also congratulate and thank the
representatives of Chile and the United States of
America for their efforts in leading the Security
Council's visit to Haiti in January, which allowed us
to have a direct look at the situation on the ground. I
welcome the presence of the Permanent Representative
of Haiti at this meeting.

Chad notes with satisfaction that Haiti's political
situation is progressively and rapidly reconfiguring.
After a long period of political tension and a relative
institutional vacuum, intensive consultations and
the restoration of trust between the President and the
opposition parties have led to consensus and renewed
institutional activities. In that regard, the nomination,
on 25 December 2014, of a new Prime Minister, the
signing of a tripartite agreement among the heads of
the three branches of power, as well as the signing,
on 11 January, of a political accord among 16 political
parties, the constitutional amendment on extending
the terms of the parliamentarians, the establishment
of the provisional Electoral Council and the electoral
calendar for the forthcoming municipal, parliamentary
and presidential elections between July and December,
all demonstrate the remarkable achievements made in
only four months.

Chad welcomes and encourages all actors and
thanks them for their good offices, as well as the
facilitators and mediators for their tireless efforts to
stabilize and thereby normalize the political situation
in Haiti.

We welcome the Haitian Government's significant
participation and investment of $13.5 million in
preparations for the elections, which will be decisive in
reinstating democracy. We therefore encourage partners
and the international community to scale up efforts in
providing the technical, logistical and financial support
necessary to ensure transparency and credibility in the
long-awaited free and democratic elections.

Moreover, we believe that the normalization of the
political situation will allow political, economic and
social stakeholders to concentrate on the major social
and economic challenges facing the country. Poverty,
the earthquake and other natural disasters have left
deep scars, thus requiring consistent efforts to relaunch
the country's economy.

About 3 million people suffer food insecurity,
while 600,000 others, including 100,000 children
under-five years of age, are severely impacted. The
report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/157) also
notes that at the end of December 2014, about 80,000
internally displaced persons remained in 105 camps
across the country. We therefore call upon the national
authorities, humanitarian agencies and the international
community to find sustainable solutions to relocating
and reintegrating those vulnerable people.

With respect to public health, the report notes
a substantial increase in 2015 of cholera cases. Chad
encourages the national authorities and specialized
agencies to develop and implement strategies,
particularly in the area of public health, to help families
and the impacted communities.

We take due note of the fact that United Nations
agencies have made progress in the financing of more
than 80 projects in the areas of economic integration
and human rights. We also call on the Government to
scale up its efforts to bring about economic and social
stability for the people in need.

Regarding human rights, we are concerned
about the situation of those in prison, in particular
women. We welcome the steps taken and the technical
support provided in the drafting of the penal code.
Nevertheless, as we await an appropriate solution to the
problem of prison overpopulation, we would encourage
MINUSTAH to continue to support the improvement
of detention-centre infrastructure, with respect for the
rights of women ensured through the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000).

On the security front, Chad notes that the situation
remains relatively stable, although the street protests
organized by opposition parties that did not sign the
agreement, as well as those against the increase in petrol
prices, exacerbate anti-Government sentiment. Public
order is also threatened by crime, including killings
and kidnappings perpetrated by gangs and criminal
groups. Other public issues include road blockades,
the destruction of property and attacks against police
officers.

Given this situation, we are pleased with the
ongoing improvement in the response and capacity of
the Haitian National Police, whose operations usually
are carried out without MINUSTAH's operational
contribution. We encourage MINUSTAH and the
national authorities to continue their efforts to train
15,000 personnel by 2016. We welcome the positive
cooperation between MINUSTAH, the United Nations
police and other United Nations agencies, and the
Haitian authorities aimed at attaining that objective.

Regarding the reconfiguration of the Mission, we
support the two-phase drawdown plan proposed by the
Secretary-General, as set out by resolution 2180 (2014).
According to the rotation arrangements for certain
contingents, troop levels were already adjusted to 4,615
at 18 February 2015, and should be declining gradually
to just above 2,370 in 2016. We take due note of the
appeal for the strengthening of the police component
so as to handle follow-up and provide support for the
electoral process. We hope that MINUSTAH will have
the staffing levels and the training and effectiveness
necessary to provide the technical and logistical
assistance necessary for the holding of the elections. We
would like here to reiterate our support to Ms. Sandra
Honore, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of MINUSTAH, and we thank her
and all of her team for their commitment.

In conclusion, Chad reiterates that overcoming
the political stalemate represents a crossroads on the
road to stabilization for the country. Right now, it is
important for all stakeholders to take this opportunity
for peace and development.

