Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): With
your permission, Mr. President, before discussing the
item on the agenda for our meeting, I should like to
mention an interesting fact. Given that the main task
of the Council is the maintenance of international
peace and security, I recall that 50 years ago today,
on 14 February 1967, in Mexico City, the Treaty of
Tlatelolco, which banned nuclear weapons in Latin
America and the Caribbean, was signed, thereby
establishing the first nuclear-weapon-free zone
in the world. We believe that the establishment of
nuclear-weapon-free zones is a first great step in the
maintenance of international peace and security. We
therefore thought it was worthwhile to recall that, half
a century ago, the political leaders of Latin America
and the Caribbean took that revolutionary step.

I wish to thank you, Sir, for organizing this
briefing. I would like to thank in, particular, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Modibo
Toure, and Ambassador Mauro Vieira, in his capacity
as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission.

The political situation in Guinea-Bissau remains
in a stalemate. Still, tireless international and regional
efforts are being made to find a way out of this impasse.
Despite the difficult political situation, fortunately, for
the present time, the security situation in the country
remains calm, and no serious incidents have been
reported. Perhaps we can find in this a positive result
of the adoption of sanctions imposed by the Security
Council in 2012 on those who had undermined the
institutionality of Guinea-Bissau, and perhaps it is a
good reminder about easing tensions that could arise
in some areas.

However, it should not be forgotten that the
borders of the country today are extremely porous
and vulnerable to such threats as terrorism, drug
trafficking, arms trafficking and all types of activities
associated with transnational organized crime.
Furthermore, we should point out as a positive element
that there have been no reports of serious violations of
human rights. Nevertheless, the Council is aware of
the difficult political history of Guinea-Bissau, as well
as the enormous challenges that lie ahead. Therefore,
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) must continue to provide
the support needed for the country to reach a solution
to the crisis.

In any case, there is no doubt that those who are
primarily responsible for the current situation are the
political stakeholders of Guinea-Bissau, who have not
honoured the commitments undertaken in Conakry,
and it must be clear that the current Prime Minister has
not been appointed in compliance with the consensus
agreed in Conakry. As a result, we must stress that
they must comply with their commitments under the
road map and the Conakry Agreement and show that
they are truly committed to a peaceful and negotiated
political solution.

The results ofthe strategic review mission that took
place last December were very clear in pointing out
that UNIOGBIS must give priority to its good offices,
political facilitation and the coordination of efforts.
Another element that the mission underscored and to
which Uruguay attaches importance is the introduction
of reforms to promote the rule of law and human
rights, in particular to fight impunity and improve
State capabilities. The fact that the strategic review
mission presented possible reference parameters for the
departure of the UNIOGBIS continues to be a positive
element. At the same time, however, we agree with the
Secretary-General's recommendation that the presence
of UNIOGBIS be extended for another year.

