Mr. Mukhtarov (Kazakhstan) (spoke in Russian):
I would like to thank the presidency of the Kingdom
of the Netherlands, for organizing today's debate
on a very important issue. I am also grateful to the
Secretary-General, Mr. Anto'nio Guterres, as well
as to Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the
African Union Commission, and Ms. Fatimata Toure,
the Director of Groupe de recherche, d'etude et de
formation femme-action, for their very informative and
inspiring briefings.

While peacekeeping operations have fostered
peace and stability in many areas of conflict, some
missions have been going on for decades as a result
of a lack of political solutions. Peacekeeping missions
carry out their activities in conditions where the local
power structures are unable to fully ensure security.
Asymmetric threats are growing and peacekeepers
are becoming targets for attacks. Since 2000, many
reports have been issued on improving United Nations
peacekeeping, including three in 2015 that made
specific recommendations.

While changes have been introduced into
peacekeeping, the number of deaths has increased,
especially in five of the largest United Nations
missions in Africa. All of that shows that conflicts,
especially protracted ones, need a collective approach
and efforts to improve peacekeeping operations
conducted through the joint actions of all interested
parties. In that regard, through analysis of the measures
and processes undertaken by the United Nations in
the areas of peacekeeping and peacebuilding, we
would like to share with the Council the following
observations and conclusions, which are based on our
approaches and our colleagues' experience within
the framework of Kazakhstan's examination of the
practical aspects of deploying military contingents to
peacekeeping operations.

To begin with, finding solutions to today's problems
of security and development requires a comprehensive,
three-pronged approach, whose main elements are, first,
the interconnectedness of security and development. We
firmly believe that if we are to achieve long-term peace
and security, we must also implement programmes
designed to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals
at the same time. We also need a regional approach to
dealing with cross-border challenges and threats rather
than the more frequently applied narrow, country-
specific approach, since solutions to current problems
are not to be found within the borders of a single State.
Then there is the principle of one United Nations,
with greater coordination, streamlining and efficiency
at Headquarters and in the field. We must avoid the
excessive fragmentation of programmes and projects,
combining the efforts of the various parts of United
Nations programmes in order to implement steps
towards achieving the Sustainable Development Goals.

Secondly, peacekeeping operations must strictly
abide by the purposes and principles enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations, and all new proposals
and conditions must be carefully reviewed by the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations.

Thirdly, since peacekeeping operations today
reflect the issues present in a very complex security
environment, we must focus on ensuring cooperation
among all States Members of the United Nations by
building trust among the permanent members of the
Security Council in order to harness all available
mechanisms. Through increased cooperation with
regional and subregional organizations and the
effective division of responsibilities, we can improve
overall efficiency.

Fourthly, peacekeeping operations need clearly
defined mandates, objectives, command structures and
adequate resources based on realistic assessments of
the situation and long-term sustainable financing. We
need fresh approaches that are practical, achievable and
realistic. That demands increased situational awareness
with the potential for rapid responses in combating

asymmetrical challenges and threats.

Fifthly, since peacekeeping contingents are
not appropriate mechanisms for counter-terrorism
operations, we want to point out that regional forces
are generally better able to combat terrorist groups, as
many such cases have shown. At the same time, United
Nations peacekeepers must maintain their strictly
defined role should they be jointly deployed with
regional forces.

Lastly, developing a culture of peace should be
a priority for all peacekeeping operations, as well as
for the United Nations system, country teams on the
ground, international partners, the local media and civil
society. The participation of women in all stages and
at all levels of our peacekeeping activities will make
them more effective. We should also make creative and
innovative use of social media and digital technology
for more effective leadership, as well as in combating
violent extremism and gender-based violence.

Modern conflicts are so complex that peacekeeping
operations alone cannot resolve them. In that context,
the key to the success of our actions includes thoroughly
analysing the key causes of conflict, investing in
development, combating climate change and addressing
food insecurity and water and energy shortages. Such
an approach can help to develop an effective plan of
action for establishing and strengthening peace. In
other words, the key to success lies in eradicating the
drivers of instability, not just managing its symptoms.

