Ms. Wilson (Australia): Ijoin others in expressing
our sincere condolences to our Russian colleagues for
the sad events of today in Istanbul and for the passing
of their Ambassador. I very much sit with others in
feeling the weight of that awful situation.

We thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2016/1049) on Afghanistan and all today's briefers.

As 2016 draws to a close, we reflect on a year
for Afghanistan of formidable efforts, concrete
commitments and sobering challenges. Under the
leadership of President Ghani and Chief Executive
Abdullah, the National Unity Government continued
progress towards improved governance under
difficult circumstances. The Government has proven
resilient despite the challenges that persist. We urge
perseverance in addressing underlying tensions to build
on the gains of 2016 and ensure that the National Unity
Government remains the sturdy foundation to which
the international community looks.

We commend efforts towards an Afghan-led peace
process and acknowledge the peace agreement as a
historic achievement. Ongoing attention to the success
of that deal is crucial as Afghanistan works towards a
broader peace process as the sustainable path to security
and stability. We are also encouraged by progress in the
anti-corruption agenda and the electoral program, and
urge attention towards the work that is still to be done
on planning for elections in 2017. We also welcome
the continued high-level focus on improving gender

equality in Afghanistan and echo the words of the
representative of Canada with regard to the importance
of such efforts.

The commitments made at the NATO Warsaw
Summit and the Brussels Conference on Afghanistan
hosted by the European Union demonstrate strong
sustained international support for Afghanistan to 2020,
despite competing demands for resources and attention
in response to crises elsewhere. Regional economic
cooperation in support of Afghanistan that has seen
Kabul build close relationships and partnerships with
neighbours is a welcome development as Afghanistan
works towards improving its economic performance.
As others have done, we note also the important
opportunity provided by the Heart of Asia-Istanbul
Process to move forward regional dialogue and create
opportunities for economic growth. And because
external support is necessary but not sufficient, we are
glad that the Afghan-led and Afghan-owned National
Peace and Development Framework is driving the
broader agenda.

Significant challenges remain. Moreover, for
Australia, the deteriorating security situation is of
particular concern. We see the Afghan National Defence
and Security Forces continuing to fight bravely. Australia
is committed to maintaining its strong contribution to
Afghanistan alongside our international partners. We
have extended our deployment of Australian Defence
Force personnel to the NATO-led Resolute Support
Mission into 2017 and committed $750 million to
security-sector sustainment and development over the
next four years.

As winter sets in, we are conscious ofthe great human
costs of the ongoing conflict, with women and girls
particularly vulnerable. The large number of civilian
casualties in 2016 and the growing needs of returning
refugees and internally displaced persons highlight the
dire humanitarian situation that cannot be ignored. As
we look towards 2017, security, governance and the
reform agenda will remain key priorities for building
Afghanistan. We remain committed to supporting this
agenda in close partnership with the Government of
Afghanistan, NATO and the international community.
We share a collective stake in Afghanistan's future.

