Mr. Al Bayati (Iraq): Allow me, at the outset, to
express my appreciation to you, Madam President, for
holding this important meeting to discuss a sensitive
issue related to the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. We also wish to thank Mr. Jan Egeland for his
informative briefing.

My delegation has examined the report of the
Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict (S/2005/740). We agree with the
Secretary-General in stressing the importance of the
international community's commitment to better
address the tragic plight of civilians living in situations
of armed conflict and of our taking stock of
developments, assessing the collective achievements
that have been made and reflecting on those areas
where action remains inadequate.

While we appreciate the conclusions of the
Secretary-General's report, which concentrates on the
protection of civilians - including measures to be
adopted by the concerned parties to the conflict and the
international community - we believe that the factors
that contribute to armed conflicts should receive
similar or even greater consideration. Addressing those
factors comprehensively would prevent the eruption of
armed conflict. One of the most important means for
preventing the emergence of armed conflicts lies in our
capacity to eradicate poverty and achieve sustainable
development, respect and protect human rights,
enhance political dialogue, and promote the principle
of tolerance and national reconciliation. We hope that
the Peacebuilding Commission will play a vital role in
that regard.

The report of the Secretary-General and Mr.
Egeland's briefing refer to Iraq, and we would like to
highlight the suffering of innocent civilians there. We
have to recognize that Iraq has become one of the main
fronts in the fight against terrorism. Regardless of the
reasons behind terrorist operations in Iraq, the common
factor in the majority of those operations is that the
victims are innocent civilians. The terrorist operations
have started to take a more destructive and dangerous
approach by targeting civilians in an attempt to
provoke a civil war in Iraq.
The terrorist acts that are taking place in Iraq
have reached a level that cannot be justified by or
accepted under any reason or pretext. The number of
deaths from violence and terrorism during the past five

months has grown to more than 6,000, representing
civilians from all sectors of society. Violence and
terrorism have also targeted the infrastructure, water
and power supplies, hospitals, oil pipelines, United
Nations staff and diplomatic personnel, women and
children, doctors and engineers, and even retired civil
servants who were recently murdered in a terrorist
attack while they gathered to receive their retirement
pension.

The brutality of the terrorist operations
perpetrated by terrorists in Iraq led the Security
Council to adopt resolution number 1618 (2005), in
which it strongly condemned terrorist operations in
Iraq, including the killing of more than 32 children in
one suicide terrorist act that was considered to be a
threat to international peace and security. It also
strongly urged all Member States to prevent the transit
of terrorists to and from Iraq, the provision of arms to
terrorists, and financing that would support terrorists. It
also emphasized the importance of enhancing
cooperation among all countries in the region,
especially those neighbouring Iraq.

It is not possible for a single State to confront
terrorism on its own, and that applies to Iraq more than
to any other country. While we realize the importance
of international cooperation in combating terrorism,
however, regional cooperation remains the cornerstone
of efforts to eliminate that phenomenon.

As members of the Council know, Iraq set some
strategic goals to stop the violence and defeat the
terrorists following the formation of its Government,
constitutionally elected for a full four-year mandate. As
a good-will initiative, the Government recently
released 2,500 detainees for whom there was no proof
of their involvement in committing crimes. The
Government has also presented a reconciliation plan
consisting of 24 articles in which it offers an olive
branch to all Iraqi people to peacefully participate in
the political process, abandon violence, and start
building and reconstructing the country. The plan also
includes an amnesty for all those who have not been
involved in terrorist acts or committed crimes against
humanity or war crimes. It also includes the prohibition
of human rights violations, allows for the punishment
of those involved in torturing detainees, and permits
international organizations to visit Iraqi prisons and to
check up on the condition of prisoners.
Moreover, internally displaced persons are to
return to their homes, and the Government, in
cooperation with the security forces, will assume
responsibility for their protection from terrorists and
insurgents and compensate them for the damages they
have suffered. The question of displaced persons is
currently under discussion in the Iraqi Council of
Representatives in an attempt to find an appropriate
solution. Furthermore, in its continuing efforts to unify
the Iraqi people so that they may live peacefully in a
democratic, unified and federal Iraq, the Government is
also making preparations to host a national
reconciliation conference under the auspices of the
Arab League in August this year.

While the aforementioned measures will
contribute to the prevention of violence and terrorism
in Iraq, they will also constitute the main pillars of the
Government's plan to eliminate the suffering of
civilians, who are the main victims of acts of violence
and terrorism in Iraq.

