Mr. Esaw (Togo) (spoke in French): I would like
to join the Secretary-General and previous speakers in
thanking the South African presidency of the Security
Council for the organization of this debate on the
important issue of the cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union (AU) in the
maintenance of international peace and security. I also
welcome the presence in the Chamber of His
Excellency President Jacob Zuma of South Africa to

preside personally over this debate, thereby illustrating
his country's adherence to the principles of cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
especially the African Union. The presence here today
of representatives of the African Union and subregional
economic communities is testament to the high degree
of attention that such cooperation enjoys in the daily
management of United Nations and African Union
affairs.

The latest comprehensive and very informative
report (S/2011/805) of the Secretary-General on that
cooperation, which is rooted in Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations, should be commended.
My delegation welcomes it. The report addresses the
crucial issues on which that cooperation is based,
namely, ensuring peace and security through
peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations; security
sector reform; the protection of civilians; humanitarian
efforts; and human rights. More than just cooperation,
as the report repeatedly highlights, this is about a
partnership. The report also indicates that the two
organizations acknowledge a shared responsibility in
the maintenance of international peace and security on
the African continent, even as it is understood that, in
accordance with Chapter VII of the Charter, the
primary responsibility in that regard falls above all on
the United Nations and, in particular, the Security
Council.

That partnership has taken root throughout the
years, with joint efforts having been undertaken that
have produced conclusive results. The establishment,
in July 2010, of the United Nations Office to the
African Union was aimed at strengthening cooperation
and coordination between the two organizations in the
area of peace and security. The establishment, on
25 September 2010, of an AU-United Nations working
group on peace and security reflected the desire to
strengthen the strategic partnership covering various
areas, including the protection of civilians and human
rights. The coordination that took place at the highest
levels last year on the situations in Cote d'Ivoire,
Libya, the Sudan, South Sudan and Somalia, which
continues today, illustrates the desire of the United
Nations, in cooperation with the African Union, to find
peaceful ways to resolve many crises and conflicts on
the African continent, which makes up more than
60 per cent of the issues on the agenda of the Security
Council.
It is by drawing lessons learned from past
experience and from the cooperation between the two
organizations with regard to peacekeeping operations
on the African continent, as was the case with the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID), that this strategic partnership takes
on its full significance.

Indeed, with respect to AMISOM, the frequent
lack of coordination, delays in mobilizing logistical
support and inadequate financial resources have long
been at the very heart of the Mission's mixed results.
Although the situation may have changed, it remains
true that AMISOM. continues to experience all sorts of
difficulties.

My country believes that one aspect of the United
Nations-AU partnership that should be a priority is
cooperation in conflict prevention and mediation. In
presidential statement S/PRST/2010/14, adopted
following the open debate of 16 July 2010 (S/PV.6360)
organized by the Nigerian presidency on the
instruments of preventive diplomacy, notably in Africa,
the Security Council deemed it necessary to make
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations in Africa closer and
more operational in order to create regional and
national capacities to use the instruments of preventive
diplomacy, including mediation, data collection and
analysis, early warning mechanisms, prevention and
peacemaking.

From a subregional perspective, the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) has
long made prevention, mediation and the peaceful
settlement of disputes a pillar of its policy. The
adoption in 2001 of an additional protocol on
democracy and good governance was part and parcel of
such efforts. We welcome the active role being played
by the United Nations Office for West Africa in that
initiative, pursuant to its mandate. In the final analysis,
preventive diplomacy remains by far the most cost-
effective of all peacekeeping activities because it is
less expensive and allows the use of weapons to be
avoided. It should therefore be favoured.

The most recent report of the Secretary-General
on the activities of the Office (S/2011/811) notes its
many activities, organized jointly with ECOWAS, on
matters as diverse as drug trafficking, piracy at sea,
organized crime and the proliferation of all manner of
weapons, in particular in the Sahel. The United Nations
has developed improved cooperation with the African
Union and subregional organizations in these areas in
recent years. The fight against these scourges must be
stepped up.

My country welcomes the establishment of a
similar office in Central Africa on 1 January 2011. The
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
became operational on 2 March of that year. The
security problems encountered in that region require
the United Nations ongoing presence.

Another important aspect of United Nations-AU
cooperation is the protection of civilians. In helping the
African Union to develop guidelines in that field, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations has shown
that peacekeeping operations have made such
protection a priority. The training of troops in the
implementation of the guidelines should be extended
and supported financially.

As we have seen, there are many areas in which
cooperation exists between the United Nations and the
AU. Progress has been made, but much remains to be
done. The United Nations and the African Union have
therefore agreed to create a series of mechanisms,
including the joint support and coordination
mechanism within the framework of UNAMID.

Despite such efforts to coordinate the activities of
both organizations in order to allow them to manage
crises more efficiently, certain shortcomings remain in
United Nations-AU cooperation. The management of
the Ivorian and Libyan crises last year demonstrated
the dysfunction between the two organizations, and in
particular the Security Council and the AU Peace and
Security Council. The prevarication concerning the
action to be undertaken in those crises was very
harmful to the populations involved. Decisions must be
taken jointly and responsibilities defined in serious
situations.

Clearly, the need for the participation of regional
and subregional organizations in the settlement of
conflicts is irrefutable. Regional actors play a crucial
role, because subregional organizations have their own
conflict-settlement mechanisms based on the cultural
and social particularities of the countries and regions in
crisis. The rules they establish for conflict prevention
must be observed on a priority basis.
My country firmly believes that the opinions of
regional and subregional actors must guide the joint
action of the AU Peace and Security Council and the
Security Council. Our organ, which has the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, must be attuned to the needs of the
regional and subregional organizations, including
regional economic communities, and avoid getting
bogged down in speculation, which is harmful not only
to the Council's authority, but also to the lives and
security of people in distress.

Another problem facing United Nations-AU
cooperation is the lack of sufficient resources to
support the peace operations established by the African
Union. AMISOM. is often cited as one example of that.
While Somalia has experienced an unprecedented
situation for the past 20 years, the efforts of the
international community still fall short of what is
needed to resolve that lengthy conflict. The
displacement of people within that country and the
thousands of refugees in neighbouring countries are the
result of the crisis. Wishing to solve the problem of
refugees and the hungry without settling the basic
conflict could be considered the equivalent of trying to
cauterize a wooden leg.

In the light of all these observations, we need to
strengthen the partnership between the United Nations
and the African Union, especially with respect to the
challenges raised by new threats to international peace
and security. I refer in particular to terrorism and
transnational organized crime in the Sahel, and to
piracy at sea, which threatens the peace and security of
the countries of West Africa and on the Gulf of Guinea.
In both cases, capacity-building and the allocation of
financial resources are crucial challenges to be
addressed by the partnership between the United
Nations and the AU and subregional organizations.

We also believe that a clear definition of
complementarity and subsidiarity, as well as the
predictable allocation of resources, would help to make
the partnership between the two organizations more
effective. Togo sincerely hopes that today's debate will
be an opportunity for the Security Council to
strengthen and promote the bases of its necessary
cooperation with the African Union Peace and Security
Council with a View to taking more effective,
coordinated and swift action in peacekeeping and the
management of crises on the continent.

