Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): Can I begin
by joining colleagues in thanking Special
Representative of the Secretary-General De Mistura for
his briefing on the report (S/2009/102) of the
Secretary-General. I would also like to pay tribute to
the Permanent Representative of Iraq for the
remarkable progress that Iraq has made in recent
months, as set out in his statement.

The United Nations continues to play a vital role
in Iraq's development as a stable and democratic
country that is increasingly in control of its own
destiny. On behalf of my Government, I would like to
thank the United Nations Iraq team for its work.

No country has taken up more of the Security
Council's time and energy over the past 20 years than
Iraq. It is wonderful to see Iraq restored to a fully
respected position in the international community, and
for the Council to be able to deal with its few
remaining responsibilities in such an encouraging
atmosphere. Since we discussed the last report
(S/2008/688) of the Secretary-General, in November,
Iraq has passed two more important milestones. The
first was at midnight on 31 December 2008, when the
Government of Iraq took responsibility for maintaining
security throughout the country. That is a testament to
the progress that has been made by both the
Government and the Iraqi security forces over the past
almost six years. With violence at its lowest levels
since 2003, Iraq's security situation continues to
improve.

The second milestone was the provincial
elections, about which Mr. De Mistura has reported in
detail. The Secretary-General has termed them the first
fully Iraqi-led and Iraqi-owned elections. The electoral
legislation was Iraqi. The Independent High Electoral
Commission of Iraq, working with the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), put in place the
processes and mechanisms to ensure a free and fair
ballot, and the Iraqi security forces provided
comprehensive security and ensured that there were no
significant security incidents on election day.
Significantly, the elections were both competitive and
inclusive. Voting was conducted in a relaxed
atmosphere and freedom of expression was widely
respected. The diverse representation in the new
provincial councils shows that democracy is taking
root in Iraq.

As the Secretary-General acknowledges in his
report, it is now important for Iraq's political leaders to
prioritize national dialogue and reconciliation, finding
common ground on issues such as the hydrocarbons
legislation and the review of the Constitution. The
United Kingdom strongly supports UNAMI's efforts
behind that process, in particular its work on disputed
internal boundaries and on the status of Kirkuk, which
the Special Representative reported on. We look
forward to the report on Kirkuk from the article 23
committee of Iraq's Council of Representatives, which
we expect at the end of next month.

We also welcome the establishment of Iraq's
Independent High Commission for Human Rights. We
encourage it to work with the Ministry of Human
Rights in helping to ensure that the rights of all Iraqis
are respected.

The United Nations is doing vital work across all
the policy sectors in Iraq, from supporting elections,
constitution and political development, the rule of law
and humanitarian assistance to economic development.
We are encouraged by the Secretary-General's
intention to continue to expand the engagement and
presence of the United Nations throughout Iraq. We
also await with interest his report pursuant to
resolution 1859 (2008) on the Saddam-era resolutions.
We should look carefully at all the additional
obligations imposed on Iraq during the Saddam era,
with a predisposition to removing them so that Iraq can
achieve the international standing equal to that that it
held before the Council's adoption of resolution 661
(1990).

I would like to conclude by outlining the further
evolution in the United Kingdom's close relationship
with Iraq. The British Prime Minister announced on
18 December 2008 that British combat troops will
withdraw from Basra in the coming months. Our
current military tasks should be completed by 31 May,
allowing the majority of our forces to withdraw from
Iraq by the end of July. Our military drawdown reflects
the improvements in the security situation in Iraq. It
marks a change in the nature of our commitment to
Iraq as Iraq increasingly stands on its own feet. The
United Kingdom's future relationship with Iraq will be
one of partnership and friendship across the board,
encompassing economic, commercial, cultural and
educational cooperation, as well as assistance with
security and defence.

The United Kingdom strongly believes that a
strong and stable Iraq that is at peace with its
neighbours and has taken its rightful place in the
international community will make a crucial
contribution to strategic stability and peace throughout
the Middle East.

