The President (spoke in Arabic): As this is the
first meeting of the Security Council for the month of
June, I should like to take the opportunity to pay
tribute, on behalf of the Council, to Mr. Kishore
Mahbubani, Permanent Representative of Singapore to
the United Nations, for his service as President of the
Security Council for the month of May 2002. Our
thanks go also to all his colleagues in the Permanent
Mission of Singapore. I am sure that I speak for all
members of the Council in expressing deep
appreciation to Ambassador Mahbubani for the great
diplomatic skill with which he conducted the Council's
business last month.

Tribute to the memory of Ambassador Joseph
Nanven Garba, former Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Nigeria and President of the General Assembly

The President (spoke in Arabic): On behalf of
the members of the Security Council, I should like to
express profound grief and sorrow at the death of
Joseph Nanven Garba, former Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Nigeria and President of the General
Assembly at its forty-fourth session. Mr. Garba also
served with distinction as Chairman of the Special
Committee against Apartheid for five years until 1989.

Mr. Garba dedicated his entire life to his country,
to Africa and to the cause of peace. His loss will be
greatly felt by us all.

On behalf of the Security Council, I should like to
convey to the Government and the people of Nigeria
and to the bereaved family the Council's deep
condolences.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo


The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda.
In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite that representative
to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ileka
(Democratic Republic of the Congo) took a seat
at the Council table.


The President (spoke in Arabic): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council condemns in the
strongest terms the acts of intimidation and
unfounded public statements against the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC), in particular
attempts by the Rassemblement Congolais pour la
Democratie-Goma (RCD-Goma) to 'ban' the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and the 'expulsion' of several MONUC and other
United Nations personnel from areas under its
control. It reaffirms its full support for the
Special Representative and for the dedicated staff
of MONUC.

"The Security Council stresses that these
unjustifiable attacks are directly contrary to the
process of peace and national reconciliation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and to RCD-
Goma's interest.

"The Security Council reiterates its
condemnation of the killings and attacks against
civilians and soldiers that followed the events that
took place on 14 May and thereafter in Kisangani
and looks forward to receiving the joint
MONUC/UNHCR report and recommendations
on the violence in Kisangani. The Council holds
RCD-Goma, as de facto authority, responsible to
bring to an end to all extrajudicial executions,
human rights violations and arbitrary harassment
of civilians in Kisangani and all other areas under
RCD-Goma's control.

"The Security Council demands that RCD-
Goma immediately: cease its harassment of
United Nations officials and assist with the
deployment and operations of MONUC; fully
the

cooperate with all investigations of violence in
Kisangani and the surrounding areas; and comply
with all relevant resolutions of the Security
Council, in particular by demilitarizing
Kisangani.

"The Security Council calls upon Rwanda to
exert its influence to have RCD-Goma meet
without delay all its obligations under the
resolutions of the Security Council and this
presidential statement.

"The Security Council encourages the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the Mouvement pour la Liberation du
Congo (MLC) and RCD-Goma to hold new
discussions as soon as possible and in good faith,
taking into account the progress in the inter-
Congolese dialogue achieved in Sun City, in
order to reach an all-inclusive agreement on the
political transition. In this respect, the Council
supports the efforts of the newly appointed
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the
inter-Congolese dialogue, Mr. Mustapha Niasse."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2002/19.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 4.35 p.m.

