Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Madam President, we are pleased to welcome
you as you preside over today's meeting of the Security
Council. We welcome the participation at today's
meeting of President Jacob Zuma, Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon, African Union (AU) Commissioner
Ramtane Lamamra, and the Chair of the AU Peace and
Security Council, Mr. Moses Wetangula.

The African Union and subregional organizations
in Africa are playing an increasingly active role in the
settlement of conflicts and crises on the continent,
demonstrating the preparedness and ability to shoulder
responsibility for resolving their issues. We are pleased
to note that they attach great importance to the political
and diplomatic settlement of conflicts. In many cases,
that has won significant results. In particular, many
mediation efforts undertaken by retired and active
African politicians have proven their effectiveness. In
other cases, very useful and constructive proposals
have been put forward, but by no fault of African
partners have not been acted upon.

The effectiveness of multilateral approaches to
settling contemporary crises should logically lead the
United Nations to develop a partnership with the
African Union. Such cooperation must be underpinned,
first and foremost, by Chapter VIII of the United
Nations Charter, which assigns to the Security Council
the primary responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security, while underlining the
complementarity of United Nations efforts and those of
regional organizations, and encouraging each to draw
on its own comparative advantages. We are convinced
that scaling up such partnerships will significantly
bolster the global capacity to respond to crises and
promote peace on the African continent through, inter
alia, early warning of crises, their timely settlement
and post-conflict rebuilding.

We believe it important to further and actively
step up the African Union's initiatives on the continent
in preventive diplomacy and the peaceful settlement of
disputes. Of particular relevance in that regard is the
implementation of the 10-year capacity-building
programme for the African Union. We hope for
tangible, practical results, from the establishment of a

continental system of early warning and the African
Standby Force, which would be able to react swiftly to
emerging crises in African countries, with the
participation, if necessary, of the Security Council. It is
important to provide dynamic assistance in bolstering
the African peacekeeping toolkit and establishing a
pan-African security architecture so as to ensure that
mechanisms of conflict settlement and prevention on
the continent are fully exploited.

Russia supports the growing independent role of
African organizations in maintaining peace on the
continent and has consistently called for the steps taken
by the African Union in that regard to be backed by the
authority of the Council. Against that backdrop, it is
encouraging to note the consistently evolving forum of
partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union.

Hybrid peacekeeping forces in Darfur are
effectively operating under the auspices of the United
Nations and the AU. Active efforts are being made to
move the Darfur peace process forward and overcome
the issues between the Sudan and South Sudan. A
cooperation mechanism to resolve the situation in
Somalia has been launched. Those are examples of
innovative models of cooperation, which can and must
be drawn upon in the future, provided that the
necessary improvements are made.

We support the Secretary-General's proposal for
the United Nations Secretariat and the AU Commission
to prepare joint assessments and recommendations,
which would be used in taking decisions on crises in
Africa, as was the case, for example, with the Council-
mandated African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur.

An important component of coordination could
be the United Nations Office at the AU headquarters in
Addis Ababa. Given the unique purview of the Security
Council, which under the United Nations Charter is
tasked with the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of peace and security, we advocate the
further development of practical cooperation between
the United Nations Security Council and AU Peace and
Security Council so that targeted solutions can be
identified. Those solutions would frame that
cooperative relationship and ensure that emerging
military and political crises on the continent are met
with swift, agreed and effective responses.
As a permanent member of the Security Council,
Russia works to improve strategies for the settlement
of African conflicts and plays an active role in drawing
up and implementing international cooperation and
assistance programmes in Africa, including the
preparation and training of African peacekeepers in
Russian institutions.

We stand ready to continue to provide assistance
to African peacekeepers and multifaceted aid as part of
efforts to resolve African issues on the basis of an
open, equitable and mutually beneficial partnership
12-20534
that does not involve a supervisory mentality,
ideological stereotypes or nationally biased
approaches.

