Mr. Essonghe (Gabon) (interpretation from French):
We are meeting once again to discuss a question that has
already been the subject of numerous debates in both the
General Assembly and the Security Council. The
expectations raised by these discussions have so far proved
illusory, given the striking lack of progress in normalizing
the situation in the Middle East. On the contrary, like
causes produce like effects, and we are now witnessing yet
another increase in tension between the parties in that
region of the world.

Together with the rest of the international community,
we are worried by the precarious nature of the current
situation in the light of recent developments. The Madrid

 

agreements of 1991 and all the meetings that followed
them, especially those in Oslo, made it possible to create
an ideal framework in which to build peace in that part of
the world. We believed that such a framework would help
resolve all the questions that were a major obstacle to any
degree of progress in the peace talks between the parties.
Now, however, we are bound to note that there has been
a general reverse in the peace process. However, there is
no solution but to work through the mechanism to achieve
a comprehensive peace.

That is why all the parties should, above all, apply
themselves to fulfilling their obligations and avoid taking
any measure likely to create barriers to the
implementation of the peace agreements. The loss of
ground in the peace process clearly demonstrates that the
international community should become more involved in
the search for a settlement to this grave crisis. In this
respect, we are convinced that, given the current
deadlock, the United Nations has major political role to
play in that part of the world.
Our country, Gabon, long ago embraced the
principle of dialogue. We believe that only dialogue will
enable the parties to eliminate the remaining areas where
there is lack of understanding between them. The
international community should work towards this end.

