Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Martin
Griffiths, Mr. Mark Lowcock and Mr. David Beasley
for their briefings.

We welcome the unanimous adoption of resolution
2481 (2019) on the renewal of the United Nations
Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement and call
on all actors to facilitate its full implementation within
a reasonable time frame.

We note with satisfaction the results of the latest
meeting of the Redeployment Coordination Committee
(RCC), held in Al-Hudaydah, including the agreements
on de-escalation and the concept of operations for
the first and second phases of the redeployment. We
call on all parties to fully implement the withdrawal
agreement, to respect the ceasefire in full and to resolve
the outstanding points of disagreement, including the
issue of local security forces. We continue to call on
all parties to implement the Stockholm Agreement in
its entirety, including the prisoner-exchange agreement
and the memorandum of understanding on Taiz.

Moreover, Belgium continues to encourage the
Special Envoy to continue to prepare the next steps
in the political process, which must be inclusive. The
Al-Hudaydah agreement is of particular importance to
the humanitarian situation, but the core of the conflict
requires a sustainable and inclusive political solution.
We reiterate our full support for the efforts of Special
Envoy Martin Griffiths.

Violence in the rest of the country continues,
exacerbating the lack of trust between the parties. In
addition, such violence has an impact on humanitarian
access. We call on all parties to cease hostilities
throughout the country. Belgium remains deeply
concerned over the high number of child victims,
particularly as a result of air strikes and ground fighting,
and urges all parties to take immediate measures to
protect children. Furthermore, we strongly condemn
the attacks with drones and missiles on civilian targets
in Saudi Arabia claimed by the Houthis. Those attacks
are unacceptable.

Efforts are needed to improve the humanitarian
situation, which remains catastrophic, as we have heard
once again this morning. We commend the humanitarian
agencies for their outstanding work, despite difficulties.
It is imperative for all parties to facilitate access for
humanitarian assistance and to respect international
humanitarian law. In particular, we strongly condemn
any misuse of humanitarian aid. Assistance must be
provided to those who need it. We are concerned that
the situation in Sana'a remains unresolved. As David
Beasley announced, we hope that an agreement will be
signed soon.

We note with concern the financial situation, as
described by Mark Lowcock. Belgium has paid its
contribution to the Yemen Humanitarian Fund and calls
on other contributors to do the same.
Lastly, it is crucial to continue to look into the
violations committed in the territory. We call on the
parties to respect their obligations and commitments
under international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. In that regard, Belgium is alarmed by
the imposition of the death penalty by the Houthis on
30 people in Sana'a. Those people are on the list for the
exchange of prisoners. The agreement on the prisoner
exchange must be implemented as soon as possible.

