Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
too would like to begin by congratulating you, Madam
President, and your delegation on your assumption of
the presidency. Peru wishes you every success and
extends the support of its delegation to you. We also
congratulate the United Kingdom on its very successful
presidency and the professional way in which it led
our deliberations.

I would also like to say that we fully support you,
Madam President, on the provisional programme of
work you presented for this month. We agree with you
about the importance of many of the meetings you have
planned. With regard to the meeting on the maintenance
of peace in particular, we want to emphasize that we
also think that the issue of the link between corruption
and peace and security is a new theme, but we would
like to hear more details about how it is being planned.

With regard to the issue of Nicaragua, we would
like to point out that if this issue is presented as it
appears in the provisional programme of work, in the
framework of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations, that is, with regard to cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations, there is
a very specific article, Article 54, which says that the
United Nations should be kept informed of everything
being done in regional organizations with regard to the
maintenance of international peace and security. We
believe that in that sense the meeting would be pertinent
and we would be ready to support it. We believe what
has been said at various points with regard to the theme
of preventive diplomacy is very important. That applies
perfectly in this case, because there are Security Council
resolutions that specifically and emphatically point out
that serious abuses and violations of international law,
human rights and international humanitarian rights can
be an early indication of a simmering conflict. In that
sense, based on the merits of preventive diplomacy, we
would agree to holding such a meeting.

