Mr. Kandeel (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank Ambassador Sacha Sergio Llorentty
Soliz of the Plurinational State of Bolivia for his
interesting briefing and his ongoing efforts as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004). We welcome the adoption of the programme of
work of the 1540 Committee for 2017, in accordance
with resolution 2325 (2016), which was adopted by
the Security Council late last year with respect to the
comprehensive review of the resolution 1540 (2004)
regime. It is clear from that process that the international
community considers it still to be necessary to prevent
non-State actors, especially terrorist groups, from
manufacturing, acquiring and using weapons of mass
destruction. This is a threat that Egypt and the States
of the Middle East had to cope with last year. Indeed,
Da'esh resorted to the use of chemical weapons several
times, both inside Syria and elsewhere.

Our collective efforts, within the framework of the
joint programme, have focused on the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). Indeed, the Committee has
pursued the submission of comprehensive reports on
implementation and has sought to do so without any
appearance of interference.

It is essential to respect the sovereignty of Member
States, which is enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations. It is also very important to provide
adequate technical assistance to States that require
it, and as quickly as possible. Cooperation with the
various international and regional organizations and
subregional entities must also be promoted, and we
must seek to raise awareness and ensure transparency
through broad international participation.

Our goal in the framework of the new programme
of work is to improve the means for implementing
resolution 1540 (2004) at all levels, primarily through
key practical recommendations and efforts within its
four main working groups - in coordination with the
Expert Group of the Committee, which is carrying
out concrete and skilful work with the Secretariat, the
Office for Disarmament Affairs and other Departments.

