Mr. Messone (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Madame, for having convened this important
meeting under your presidency. Gabon wishes to echo
the messages of condolence to the Government of
Turkey in the aftermath of the earthquake that struck
the eastern part of the country, and to the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia on the demise of its Crown Prince. I also
thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his briefing
on the situation in the Middle East.

With respect to the Palestinian issue, my
delegation wishes again to stress, as it has always done
in previous statements on this matter, that, alongside
many other countries, it shares the fundamental goal of
the existence of two States, Israel and Palestine, living
in peace and security within recognized borders.
Reaching that goal and achieving lasting peace entails
working within the framework established by the
international community, within which the Quartet is
endeavouring to bring together the two parties. From
our perspective, it is against that backdrop that
Palestine's application to become a Member State
should be considered

My delegation would like to reiterate its
appreciation for the efforts of the international
community, especially the Quartet's latest proposal
aimed at relauching the peace process between Israel
and Palestine, and in particular the next scheduled
meeting between the Quartet and the parties. Although
it is true that the Quartet's proposals aim largely at a
timetable for continuing talks in the process, this new
initiative nevertheless has the merit of laying the
foundations for the resumption of direct negotiations
between Israel and Palestine, which have been at an
impasse since the fall of 2010.

My delegation hopes that the next meeting
between the Quartet and the parties sets a course
towards the resumption of negotiations on final status
issues, namely, borders, Jewish settlements, the fate of
Palestinian refugees and the status of Jerusalem. We
therefore call on the parties to refrain from any actions
that undermine trust among them and have a negative
impact on the restart of the negotiations.

Establishing trust also entails respect for
international law and the resolutions of the Security
Council. The announcement of new settlements and the
blockade of Gaza are not conducive to an atmosphere
for the resumption of negotiations. We condemn the
most recent announcements in that regard.

I cannot fail to commend the prisoner-exchange
agreement that was recently concluded between Israel
and the Palestinians, which led, on 18 October, to the
release of Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit as well as
Palestinian prisoners. We commend the role played by
Egyptian and German diplomacy in reaching that
agreement.

With regard to other situations in the region, I
should like first to turn to Libya. In that connection,
the developments of recent days should lead us to work
together with the National Transitional Council to
achieve peace, rebuild the country and re-establish
security.

We also commend the way in which Tunisians
have set in motion the process for establishing the
basis for democracy and development in that country.

With regard to Lebanon, my delegation welcomes
the calm in the area of operation of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon. We emphasize the need for
strict respect for resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701
(2006). We also underscore the need for the cessation
of violations of Lebanese airspace, which we believe to
be unacceptable.

Lastly, with regard to Yemen, we join the appeal
launched by the Secretary-General for a genuine
dialogue in order to bring an end to the deterioration of
the security and humanitarian situations in that country.
The efforts made to that end by the Gulf Cooperation
Council should be supported.

