Mr. Fichtl: I would like to echo the sentiments of
previous speakers as to the timeliness and relevance of
the workshop. I would like to focus my observations on
Sierra Leone. I believe this also offers important
lessons for developing a coordinated and
comprehensive approach towards Liberia.

A real window of opportunity for sustainable
peace and economic recovery exists following the
disarmament and demobilization of about 68,000 ex-
combatants in Sierra Leone and the re-election of
President Kabbah on 14 May 2002. Immediate
priorities are the return of displaced populations;
reintegration of ex-combatants; rehabilitation of the
basic social and economic infrastructure, especially in
areas most affected by the conflict; expansion of access
by the poor to social services, markets and assets; and
the facilitation of reconciliation.

A major challenge for the Government and its
international partners will be to address the needs of
the youth. Forty-five percent of Sierra Leone's
population is under the age of fifteen. Their potential
needs to be utilized, and they need to be equipped with
necessary skills to earn an income. This will depend, to
a large degree, on an environment conducive to
economic growth, in such a manner that a maximum
number of people benefit from the growth and have a
chance to find employment.

Looking at the lessons learned from the point of
View of the World Bank, clearly the early engagement
of development partners, including the World Bank, in
support of the lead role played by the United Nations,
ECOWAS, and the United Kingdom has paid off and
contributed to the significant progress made. We have
learned that in complex emergencies, coordinated and
complementary efforts focusing on humanitarian
assistance, political mediation, security sector reform
and early developmental efforts dramatically increase
the impact of the international community's response.
This coordinated and complementary approach led to
the success in Sierra Leone thus far.

We also learned that disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes (DDR), as important as
they are, cannot be used to break a political impasse,
nor can they guarantee security in a fragile
environment. DDR programmes are more likely to
succeed and to be sustained if they are anchored in a
larger peace process that is based on political
commitment and on the means to provide a minimum
of security.

Civil society understood that in Sierra Leone the
large majority of former combatants were both
perpetrators and victims, and that their reintegration
was key to rapid and sustainable recovery and
reconciliation. In that regard, the international
community correctly pursued a two-pronged approach,
focusing simultaneously on individual ex-combatants
and on supporting communities. Financial assistance to
complete those programmes should not diminish at this
critical juncture. We also believe that the nascent Truth
and Reconciliation Commission has an important role
to play for Sierra Leone's future. Complementing
investments in bricks and mortar, the Commission
deserves to be fully funded.

More specifically with respect to the World Bank
and its efforts through the International Development
Association (IDA) programme, the Bank is focused on
new financial assistance to support the transition out of
conflict through budget support to maintain key
Government functions, projects in support of the
disarmament and demobilization programme and the
reintegration of ex-combatants, and community-
oriented rapid rehabilitation efforts.

Complementing that financial assistance, the
Bank has provided technical support to empower the
Government to lead demobilization and recovery
efforts and to encourage partners to support a
comprehensive recovery framework. The Bank
supported the Government in donor coordination and in
broadening the initially very small donor base through
the establishment of a multi-donor trust fund in support
of the DDR programme. In collaboration with the
United Nations, and with the personal leadership and
support of Secretary-General Kofi Annan - which we
would like to acknowledge here - the Bank to date
has been able to raise $31.5 million in support of the
DDR programme, of which $28.5 million has been
disbursed thus far. In addition, as my colleague from
the United Nations Development Programme
mentioned, the Bank has facilitated regular donor
meetings and will convene a Consultative Group
meeting, most likely in Paris in October.

In these transition situations, Government
capacity is limited and constrained. In Sierra Leone,
the Bank helped the Government to establish an
independent and effective implementation mechanism
in two key areas: the demobilization programme and a
social fund to finance a community-oriented
rehabilitation programme.

In summary, IDA assistance, built on ongoing
humanitarian assistance - for example, the social fund
was disbursed directly to national and international
non-governmental organizations - focused its early
development assistance on complementing the efforts
of key partners in the political and security areas. We
find that timeliness and flexibility are of great
importance in a rapidly evolving post-conflict
situation.

As to the challenges ahead, stability in Sierra
Leone is linked to regional stability in Guinea and in
Liberia. Continued leadership and close cooperation of
the partners key to Sierra Leone's recovery -
including the Economic Community of West African
States, the United Kingdom, the United States and the
United Nations - are required for regional stability.
Disenchanted ex-combatants pose a threat if they are
not reintegrated into society and the economy;
reconciliation remains a major challenge. In addition,
the success of the transition to date is no guarantee that
the root causes of the conflict will be successfully
addressed in the future; the challenge is with the
Government and its development partners. For
example, if resources - including the proceeds from
mineral resources - are not used equitably and
transparently, there is a danger that latent tensions will
re-emerge and will undermine stability.

The Bank's strategy for the immediate future
builds on the Government's framework for poverty
reduction. It will focus on consolidating peace and
security through resettlement, rehabilitation and
reintegration, supporting governance, targeting
institutional reforms and economic growth through a
stable macroeconomic environment, expanding access
to the financial services infrastructure and expanding
the access of the poor to social services, including
through better public expenditure management.

The proposed lending programme for fiscal years
2002-2004 amounts to approximately $205 million.
New projects are being finalized this fiscal year, with
the Government supporting the areas of education,
health care and community rehabilitation, along with
continued budgetary support. The Bank has also
committed resources to assist the Government in
protecting Sierra Leone against the threat to which it is
most vulnerable in a post-conflict transition: that of
HIV/AIDS.

Lastly, Sierra Leone reached the decision point in
the framework of the Enhanced Heavily Indebted Poor
Countries (HIPC) Initiative earlier this year, in March.
HIPC relief amounts to approximately $600 million in
terms of net present value, of which $122 million will
be provided by the IDA.

In closing, allow me once again to thank you,
Madam President, for affording us the opportunity to
address the Security Council. Indeed, that reflects the
close cooperation we have enjoyed in working with the
United Nations and with other key partners in Sierra
Leone.

