Ms. Beerli: I am honoured to address the Security
Council on the impact of the illicit transfer, accumulation
and misuse of small arms and light weapons.

In its operations to protect and assist the victims
of armed conflicts and other situations of violence
worldwide, the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC) is a first-hand witness to the devastating
costs to civilians of the easy access to, and misuse of,
small arms and light weapons. Those are the weapons of
choice when men, women and children are deliberately
targeted, raped or forced out of their homes and their
property is destroyed.

The proliferation of small arms and light weapons
prolongs conflicts, facilitates violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law, and puts
civilians at high risk of death or injury from weapons-
related violence. The threat to civilians remains even
after armed conflicts have ended. The indirect impact
includes disease, starvation and abuse, which increase
when humanitarian organizations are the object of attack
and are forced to suspend operations or leave a country.
Human suffering continues, often for years, after
hostilities are over, as the widespread availability of
these arms engenders a culture of violence, undermines
the rule of law and threatens efforts at reconciliation.

It is imperative that States do much more to
address the impact of the poorly controlled availability
and misuse of small arms and light weapons. At three
international conferences of the Red Cross and Red
Crescent over the past 10 years, States party to the
Geneva Conventions of 1949 have recognized that
their obligation to ensure respect for international
humanitarian law requires adequate measures to control
the availability of weapons. To uphold that obligation,
we call upon the Security Council to ensure that small
arms and light weapons and their ammunition do not
end up in the hands of those who may be expected to
use them in violation of international humanitarian law
or human rights law.

In particular, we urge the Council to call upon all
United Nations States Members to promptly sign, ratify
and implement the Arms Trade Treaty. The Treaty is
a historic achievement. It establishes a global norm to
prevent arms transfers when there is a manifest risk
that war crimes or serious violations of human rights
will be committed. In parallel, States must continue
to comply with similar or stricter rules under regional
instruments regulating arms transfers to which they
are party. Unfortunately, a look at a number of current
armed conflicts reveals an evident gap between the
transfer criteria expressed in those instruments and the
practice of some States.

The problem of small arms and light weapons
must be addressed in a holistic manner. This requires
developing a comprehensive strategy that includes
reducing the vulnerability of people and communities
at risk from small arms violence, helping victims,
providing training in international humanitarian
law and human rights law for weapon-bearers, and
violence-prevention strategies specific to the context.
Within this approach, effective protection from
the misuse of arms requires improved respect for
the law, including international humanitarian law,
in situations of armed conflict. Enhanced respect
for the law can increase people's safety and security
and thereby contribute to reducing the demand for
weapons in response to danger. In the light of this,
continuous capacity-building efforts are required to
ensure that military police and security forces and
other weapon-bearers use weapons in accordance with
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
In this regard, the ICRC can provide practical support
to States in the training of Government forces. It also
promotes respect for international humanitarian law by
non-State armed groups.

It is crucial for the international community to do
far more to address in a comprehensive manner the
terrible and long-lasting human costs of the widespread
availability and misuse of small arms and light weapons.
The safety and well-being of millions of people around
the world depend on this

