Malta thanks the Indonesian presidency of the Security Council for having organized this high-level open debate on pandemics and the challenges to sustaining peace following the high-level debate organized last month by Germany on pandemics and security and the very welcome adoption of resolution 2532 (2020), signalling the continuity of the engagement of the Security Council on this issue. Malta fully aligns itself with the statement submitted by the European Union (annex 29) and would like to add a few remarks in its national capacity. At the outset, we would like to share the view expressed by colleagues that pandemics are not simply a health crisis and cannot be addressed solely as health issues. Important signs are already visible that the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) risks the deepening of pre-existing social, economic and political fissures. The pandemic is raising known risks for intensifying conflict, including food insecurity, hate speech, mass migration, instability in border areas and the unequal delivery of basic goods and services. Before the pandemic, 135 million people were already experiencing crisis levels of acute food insecurity. COVID-19 has exacerbated socioeconomic problems and pushed countries to the brink of famine. The importance of food security and agriculture has been highlighted in the global humanitarian response plan and has been recognized as one of the strategic priorities to mitigate the situation. If farmers do not have access to their fields or do not have the means or access to buy seeds and other inputs to plant or buy food for their animals, planting seasons will be missed, cultivation will drop significantly and animals will be lost. That means less food to nourish populations in both rural and urban areas. We must urgently recognize that our efforts need to be stepped up if we are to get back on track to fulfilling our commitments under the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. The agricultural sector is key to the provision of nourishment and to ensuring healthy living, and is the fulcrum if we want to end hunger. We need to continue working on achieving more sustainable agriculture through the adaptation of sustainable practices that respect our ecosystem and our environment. Earlier this year, at the height of the pandemic, Malta was facing an agricultural export crisis. A decision was taken to send 500 tons of potatoes to Namibia as an act of solidarity with its people because of the severe drought it experienced. That initiative fed around half a million persons in Namibia, prevented food waste in Malta and yielded an opportunity for the long-term benefit of both countries. COVID-19 is our common enemy, which requires us to do more together. Our actions today will affect tomorrow's generations. Our vision for a better tomorrow will become a reality only if we all work together today. We have to recognize that the only way we can overcome the challenges we are currently facing is by taking an innovative approach and adapting to the new circumstances. We cannot but support the view shared in the statement (annex 29) submitted by the observer of the European Union that the United Nations peacebuilding architecture needs to adapt to the new type of challenges that the world is facing, such as climate change and environmental degradation. In that context, Malta welcomes the recent report of the Secretary-General on Peacebuilding and Sustaining Peace (S/2020/773), which covers the continued implementation of resolution 70/262, on the review of the peacebuilding architecture. Above all, Malta believes that we need to maintain a high level of transparency with the Peacebuilding Commission, United Nations agencies and other actors to be better equipped with the necessary and correct information to better support efforts by conflict-affected countries to advance peacebuilding and sustaining peace during this and any future pandemic. That transparency can be achieved through sharing best practices, exchanging information and combating disinformation. That will ensure and further enhance mutual solidarity during these challenging times. We are now witnessing the direct and secondary consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic interacting with pre-existing crises, adding another layer of complexity to already fragile situations due to years of conflict that are engaged in peacebuilding processes. The pandemic is creating new problems and amplifying existing ones, such as socioeconomic division, gender inequality, increased insecurity for women and girls and other vulnerable groups, and mental health and psychosocial concerns. Fast-moving, complex emergencies such as COVID-19 require a whole-of-system and whole-of-society response through coordination, partnerships and an efficient use of our tools. We agree that there is a strong correlation between preventing violent conflicts and working towards sustainable development, poverty reduction and the protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms. Malta supports the EU's efforts in rallying behind the Secretary-General's initiative to coordinate a United Nations- wide response, and welcomes the comprehensive proposals enshrined in his policy papers addressing the impact of COVID-19. As highlighted by colleagues, COVID-19 represents a dramatic threat to life in war-torn countries. The impact of an outbreak of the virus could be nothing short of catastrophic. COVID-19 poses yet another serious obstacle to the well-being of the already-vulnerable civilian populations of war-stricken countries such as Libya, Syria and Yemen, particularly when one takes into account the state of the weakened health infrastructure and the over-crowded conditions in camps for refugees and internally displaced persons. The recent outbreak has additionally exacerbated the economic situation in conflict regions, resulting in a decline in aid deliveries and the drying up of remittances, which has led to spikes in poverty rates and hindered access to basic necessities, including food and medicine. In order to overcome those challenges, it is crucial for all relevant parties to desist from ongoing hostilities, take immediate action to protect civilians within their areas of effective control and ensure the depoliticization of the humanitarian infrastructure through the lifting of restrictions imposed on humanitarian workers and life-saving aid deliveries. Pandemics do not respect borders, functions or ranks. They pose a risk to the entire human race and further complicate the work of United Nations peacekeepers, who already serve in difficult environments. International efforts that seek to address this precarious situation, such as the EU's support for the Secretary-General's 23 March appeal for an immediate global ceasefire in the light of the pandemic, as well as the adoption of resolution 2532 (2020), are to be welcomed and provide a solid platform upon which further action needs to be considered. As the Secretary-General underlined in his report on peacebuilding and sustaining peace, the world's population continues to face increased poverty, inequality, exclusion, as well as threats to peace and security. Unfortunately, the situation has been further exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic. Refugees and other people displaced because of conflict are among to the most marginalized and vulnerable, and are particularly at risk during the COVID-19 pandemic. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) reported that, as of 13 July, the crisis in Syria, combined with the COVID-19 pandemic and the closure of a number of commercial crossings, is significantly jeopardizing the protection of displaced communities, who already face obstacles in securing livelihoods. Persons with disabilities, particularly women and girls, are ata heightened risk of experiencing violence, abuse and neglect. UNHCR and its partners must continue to be supported to ensure that the needs of the most vulnerable are met, for the benefit of all. During such unprecedented times, the impact of this crisis is disproportionally felt by women, with far-reaching consequences that are amplified in contexts of fragility, conflict and emergencies. The full, equal and meaningful participation of women must be at the centre of recovery efforts if we are to build a more peaceful, just and resilient world, ensure an effective pandemic response and promote peacebuilding. Malta joins the Secretary-General in calling on all States Members of the United Nations to forge a common and multilateral vision, show solidarity and use our common systems and capacities across the United Nations to adequately support Member States in their efforts to achieve inclusive, sustainable development and sustain peace. An integrated approach is key if we are to mitigate the effects of pandemics, and the inclusion of partners is more critical than ever. We need solidarity and must enhance our capabilities.
