Mr. Moriko (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation thanks Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix and
Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga for their briefings on the
evolving situation in Abyei, the operationalization of the
Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism
and the mandate of the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei (UNISFA). Their observations and
recommendations, whose relevance we welcome, have
moved my delegation to make the following comments
on the security, political and humanitarian situations,
as well as on the mandate of UNISFA.

With regard to the security situation, my delegation
notes with concern the persistence of criminal acts and
intercommunal violence despite the relative stability
that prevails in the Abyei Area. In that regard, my
delegation welcomes the stabilizing role of UNISFA
and the commitment of community leaders to engage in
dialogue as a means ofresolving their differences, which
is a good example of the inclusion of local populations
in peacebuilding efforts and the strengthening of
peaceful coexistence between the two communities
living in the Abyei Area. My country strongly supports
that commendable initiative and encourages UNISFA
and all the relevant actors to continue along that path.

My delegation remains concerned by the increase
in disturbances of the peace, which made it necessary
for the Sudanese and South Sudanese parties to jointly
establish the Abyei police service and rapidly deploy
formed police units, in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions and agreements between
the parties. Cote d'Ivoire calls on all parties to speed up
the process of implementing those procedures.

With regard to the political situation, my country
notes with regret that the parties have not been able to
capitalize on the recent improvement in their relations
to accelerate the implementation of the provisions of the
agreement between the Government of the Republic of
the Sudan and the Sudan People's Liberation Movement
on temporary arrangements for the administration and
security of the Abyei Area of 20 June 2011.

Cote d'Ivoire therefore urges the Sudanese and
South Sudanese parties to work towards the rapid
deployment of a common administration for the Abyei
Area with a view to consolidating the gains made with
the support of UNISFA. My country also urges local
communities to refrain from any actions that could
jeopardize the current stability, the conclusion of the
negotiations on the final status of Abyei and efforts to
build resilience.

On the humanitarian front, my delegation commends
the United Nations agencies and humanitarian
organizations, which in spite of the difficulties
encountered are making considerable efforts to provide
assistance on many levels to the people living in the
Abyei Area, thereby helping to respond to the urgent
health, education and subsistence needs of vulnerable
populations. My delegation is also ofthe view that those
efforts deserve the greatest attention and call for the
continued mobilization of the international community,
including the Security Council.

To conclude with the question of the implementation
of the mandate of UNISFA, Cote d'Ivoire commends
the invaluable support that it has provided to the Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism in
terms of stabilizing the Abyei Area, in accordance
with the relevant Security Council resolutions. The
Council's unanimous decision to extend the mandate of
UNISFA until 15 October reflects its recognition of the
progress made by the parties, in particular concerning
the implementation of the measures set out in paragraph
3 of resolution 2438 (2018). The Sudanese and South
Sudanese parties should see in that decision the
Council's encouragement to work harder to find lasting
solutions to their border disputes by implementing
the border agreements and operationalizing the Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism.

While Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the renewal of
UNISFA's mandate, it is also of the view that, in order
to maximize UNISFA's efficiency and to preserve
what it has achieved during its eight years in Abyei,
the mandate should be adjusted in order to reflect the
positive trends observed on the ground. In that regard,
Cote d'Ivoire takes note of the Secretary-General's
call for the strengthening of UNISFA's political
component, in support of the efforts of the African
Union Commission and the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel.

In conclusion, C6te d'Ivoire welcomes the
renewal of the mandate of UNISFA in the light of the
recommendations of the Secretary-General and all the
actors involved in the resolution of the Abyei issue, in
particular the Sudan, South Sudan, Ethiopia and the
African Union.

