Mr. Carrera (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): We
commend the initiative of the Australian presidency to
hold this important informational meeting at a critical
time in Yemen's political transition. We thank Mr. Jamal
Benomar, Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on
Yemen, for his comprehensive briefing on the situation
in Yemen and his assessment of its prospects in the
coming few months.

We also appreciate the presence of Mr. Abubaker
A. Al-Qirbi, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Yemen
and Mr. Abdul Latif bin Rashid Al Zayani, Secretary
General of the Gulf Cooperation Council, and thank
them for their statements, which show the commitment
on the part of both the Gulf Cooperation Council and
the Republic of Yemen to the transition process that
began in November 2011.

Since the beginning of our membership of the
Council, we witnesses the difficult road travelled by
the Yemeni people. That is why we applaud the progress
made to date in the National Dialogue Conference. We
are confident that, notwithstanding the delays in the
Conference, it will be possible to finalize all of the
reports of the working groups, which will provide the
basis and principles of the text of the constitution that
will forge a new stage of the democratic process in
Yemen.

The National Dialogue Conference has also provided
the people of Yemen with a historic opportunity that has
opened doors to groups that have been politically and
socially marginalized for decades to become involved
in the future of their country. In that respect, the
agreement fostered by the Gulf Cooperation Council
has established the grounds for an inclusive negotiating
process that have served as the basis of the new Yemen.
However, we must point out that any final agreement
achieved must take into account the issue of the South
and the operations of armed groups.

Guatemala believes that the transition in Yemen is
a process. That is why it must continue beyond the time
established in the transition agreement. The National
Dialogue Conference has set a stage that has made it
possible to reform the State and its institutions, which
must be replicated within the other power structures in
Yemen. The commitment made to marginalized groups,
including women and young people, must also be long-
term. Those groups must continue to be part of the
change. We salute the spirit of inclusion promoted by
Yemen during this period and hope that it will continue
to serve as an example to other countries around the
world.

We continue to consider it important, in addition
to all of the efforts undertaken to date, that general
elections are to be organized and held in February
2014. Nevertheless, we are aware that the elections do
not represent an end in themselves. The Yemeni people
and authorities must be prepared for future challenges
generated by that process.

We must not lose sight of the serious security
problems persisting in Yemen, including the ongoing
presence of Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula. In
that respect, we vigorously condemn the attacks of
20 September that killed more than 56 Yemeni soldiers
and police officers. Those terrorist acts must not go
unpunished. We hope that those acts will not interfere
with the security sector reforms made to date, and that
the reforms will bear fruit in the short term.

It is also important that the Yemeni authorities
understand that serious socioeconomic problems can be
resolved only once the security situation has improved.
Likewise, it is important for the Government to
develop national reconciliation policies based on social
development.

We welcome the ministerial meeting of the group
of Friends of Yemen, held on 25 September here in New
York under the co-chairmanship of Saudi Arabia, the
United Kingdom and Yemen. The meeting focused on
the political transition, the humanitarian situation and
reform of the security sector and of the economy. We
reiterate the urgency of financing the humanitarian
assistance programme for Yemen. It is disturbing that,
of the $703 million necessary to provide for the basic
needs of the Yemeni community, only 44 per cent
has been collected. Yemen is a country that is facing
multiple and concurrent humanitarian crises. That is
why it so urgently requires that assistance. The number
of displaced persons, the stalled economy and the
destruction of infrastructure represent only some of the
challenges facing the Yemeni people daily.

In conclusion, Guatemala is confident that the
Yemeni authorities will continue to progress on the path
of democracy and to implement policies to alleviate
the major social and humanitarian problems facing its
people.

