Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank Japan, the United
States and the Republic of Korea for asking for this
meeting to be convened this afternoon.

The missile test yesterday, of possible
intercontinental range, illustrates the determination of
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to continue
the development of its ballistic missile and nuclear
weapons programmes. That is a cause of great concern
for the region and, indeed, for the world.

Sweden condemns yesterday's test in the strongest
possible terms. We once again call on the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea to cease all development of
its ballistic missile and nuclear weapons programmes,
and to take immediate steps towards the programme's
complete, verifiable and irreversible dismantlement, in
accordance with relevant Security Council resolutions.

The continued unity of the Security Council in the
face of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea's
blatant violations of the Council's resolutions is of the
utmost importance, as is the effective implementation
of relevant Council resolutions by all countries.
Implementation ofthe sanctions against the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea remains insufficient and
highly inconsistent. We reiterate that all United Nations
Member States must do their utmost in that regard.

There is no military solution to the situation on the
Korean peninsula. There is an urgent need for redoubled
efforts to build confidence, avoid further escalation
and take steps to prepare for a peaceful, diplomatic
and comprehensive solution to the situation on the
peninsula and the wider region. All must contribute to
that end, and we welcome all initiatives to facilitate a
peaceful and comprehensive solution through dialogue.
Tensions have risen in recent months, and the potential
for mistakes, misunderstanding and miscalculation is
high. A regional security mechanism should be the
medium-term goal.

We remain fully committed to the denuclearization
of the Korean peninsula. We reiterate our solidarity
with the neighbouring countries and their peoples, who
are living under the constant shadow of the threatening
behaviour of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea. We again call on the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea to re-engage in a credible and
meaningful dialogue with the international community.
In the meantime, Sweden will stand united with Council
members in condemning any action that jeopardizes
international peace and security.

