Let me begin by thanking the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for his briefing. I want to say how grateful the United Kingdom is for the hard work of the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia. I am very pleased that the Council has extended its mandate for a further year to continue its valuable work. I am also delighted to see Foreign Minister Blum de Barberi and welcome her today. We were very encouraged to hear of President Duque Marquez's new commitment to Colombia in order to combat the serious impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. I want to say to him that all of our countries are struggling from the social and economic effects of the virus. We must seize this opportunity to build back better and create fairer, greener and more sustainable economies and societies. In Colombia, I think that will be impossible without the full and comprehensive implementation of the peace process. Minister Blum de Barberi is among friends and has our support today. We believe it is important to highlight some of the positive developments since our last discussion (see S/PV.8749). Let me start with what might seem an unusual one: the recent apology of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia- Ejercito del Pueblo for the thousands of kidnappings the group carried out and the suffering it caused, combined with its claiming responsibility for the death of Alvaro Gomez Hurtado. This was long overdue. It caused new pain as well as suffering, but it was also a vindication of the very purpose of Colombia's post-conflict transitional justice institutions. Truth and the acknowledgment of past crimes, however long ago they were committed, play a powerful role in a country's ability to heal and, I am sure, in Colombia's ongoing peacebuilding process as well. More generally, we were pleased to see the continued progress made by those institutions of transitional justice despite the challenge of COVID-19. We look forward to hearing from Foreign Minister Blum de Barberi's Government regarding a future role for the Verification Mission in supporting Colombia in monitoring compliance with the sanctions of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace. We also welcome the significant increase in the approval of protection measures taken by the National Protection Unit. This will bring some relief to the human rights defenders and social leaders facing constant threats, although additional resources are urgently required to continue this progress and to clear the backlog of requests. These social leaders cannot afford to wait. We remain very concerned by the high rate of killings of community leaders, human rights defenders and other activists, as well as the worrisome rise in multiple killings of civilians in recent months. It goes without saying that we condemn such violence, and we condemn the armed groups responsible. A powerful deterrent to such killings is the bringing to justice of those who ordered them and of those who carried them out. We echo the call for all relevant Colombian institutions to support the Special Investigations Unit in the Office of the Attorney General to ensure that those responsible for this violence are put on trial. More broadly, as we have emphasized in previous statements before the Security Council, the establishment of a public policy to dismantle illegal armed groups is vital for bringing lasting peace across Colombia. It is encouraging that the National Commission on Security Guarantees met during the reporting period. This should now be followed by concrete and realistic proposals for action to be implemented as soon as possible. The United Kingdom also welcomes the recent approval by the Colombian Congress of the use of additional funds from mineral royalties to implement the development programmes with a territorial approach, as well as the progress being made in this area. It is imperative for the remaining road maps to be finalized and for the development programmes to be implemented in order to bring peace and stability to relevant regions. The State needs to increase and strengthen its presence in these rural areas to allow peace and prosperity fully to take hold. In this anniversary month of resolution 1325 (2000), let me echo the Special Representative of the Secretary-General. As we recall, the Colombian peace process was notable for the importance it placed on the involvement of women and the mainstreaming of gender in the Final Agreement. In fact, I would go so far as to say that it is an example for others in terms of peace processes. All that we know is that an inclusive peace process is far more likely to be a sustained, lasting and successful peace process. We encourage all the parties in Colombia not to lose sight of this and to ensure the full implementation of the Comprehensive Programme for Safeguards for Women Leaders and Human Rights Defenders. Let me conclude by saying that we applaud the Colombian Government and the Verification Mission for the progress that they have continued to achieve despite a global pandemic. While many significant challenges remain, the need for a lasting and sustainable peace is clear, and the United Kingdom will continue to support Colombia on this journey.
