Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): Madam President, you spoke
on behalf of all of us when you expressed condolences
to our colleagues of Egypt on the barbaric terrorist
slaughter of innocent Egyptians. On behalf of my
Government, I condemn this heinous terrorist attack.
We will continue to stand with Egypt in this struggle.

We thank Special Representative Ms. Sandra
Honore for her briefing on the most recent developments
in Haiti and on the activities of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). We
take this opportunity to express appreciation to her,
as well as to the civilian and military personnel of
MINUSTAH, for all their efforts in carrying out their
mandate of restoring a secure and stable environment
to promote the political process, strengthening
Government institutions and rule-of-law structures, as
well as promoting and protecting human rights in Haiti.

In that regard, we welcome the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2017/223), which notes the
progress made in consolidating democracy and
stability in Haiti. The holding of the presidential
elections in a peaceful and orderly manner, in spite of
the post-hurricane challenges, and the inauguration of
Mr. Jovenel Moise as President of the Republic marked a
significant milestone in the restoration of constitutional
order in Haiti.

We also take note of the report on the progress made
in the overall security situation in the country, which
remains relatively stable in spite of tensions observed
during the electoral process, such as public protests
and disturbances in Port-au-Prince and its environs. It
is also encouraging that the Haitian National Police has
improved its performance in terms of crime prevention
and response, as well as public order management,
which contributed to creating a stable environment for
the holding of the elections.

Nevertheless, we understand the challenges that
the Haitian National Police continues to face, as
highlighted in the report of the Secretary-General
and strengthening, professionalizing and reforming it
remains a work in progress. We also note the challenges
in terms of justice reform. There is therefore a need
for sustained international support in that and other
areas and we recognize the work that has been done
by MINUSTAH to provide the necessary assistance
in that regard. Ethiopia is one of the MINUSTAH
police-contributing countries and we are pleased to
have made a very modest contribution to those efforts.

After the 2010 earthquake, Hurricane Matthew
also had a devastating impact on the Haitian people,
causing a serious humanitarian crisis. That was further
compounded by the outbreak of the cholera epidemic
and we note the apologies by former Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon on behalf of the United Nations for
not having done enough to contain the spread of that
disease. We realize that there is now a new approach to
dealing with the issue and to addressing the suffering
of the victims. It is important for the international
community to support the Haitian Government in its
efforts to eliminate the disease.

Hurricane Matthew and the outbreak of cholera
have had a crippling impact on the country's economy.
Haiti certainly needs long-term support to address its
vulnerability and economic fragility. That is why the
sustained engagement of the United Nations is critical.
We note the recommendation of the Secretary-General
for a gradual drawdown of MINUSTAH to maintain the
gains made over the past 13 years and ensure a successful
transition to another follow-up peacekeeping mission,
which will work to consolidate peace by strengthening
the institutions ofjustice and the rule of law, as well as
by supporting the institutional and operational capacity

of the Haitian National Police. Therefore, we support
the renewal of MINUSTAH's mandate for a final six
months to allow a smooth transition.

We also recognize regional and subregional
organizations, in particular the Organization of
American States, the Union of South American Nations
and the Caribbean Community, for their important
role in the process of stabilization and reconstruction
in Haiti.

Finally, we in Africa have a special attachment
with people of African descent in the diaspora and
we stand in solidarity and support with the people
and Government of Haiti, as they continue striving to
consolidate the progress made recently and address the
multiple challenges facing their nation.

