Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I would like first to extend our deepest
sympathy to the Chinese delegation in the wake of the
tragic earthquake that struck their country.

We are grateful to the Secretariat and Under-
Secretary-General Pascoe for the briefing on the
situation in the Middle East.

We would like to reiterate the Russian
Federation's policy of comprehensive support for an
Israeli-Palestinian settlement process, whose final goal
should be the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State living side by side in peace and
security with Israel. Of course, the priority in that
connection continues to be the launching of proximity
talks, which should eventually lead to direct dialogue.
It is clear that it will be extremely difficult for the
parties to achieve that. However, there is no alternative
to relaunching the peace process on an international
legal basis, as endorsed by the Quartet's Moscow
statement.

We would like to underscore the need for the
parties to fulfil the relevant provisions of the Road
Map, first and foremost ending settlement activity.
Unfortunately, many of the actions of the Israeli
leadership in the West Bank and East Jerusalem, where
there are plans for large-scale construction, can only
arouse serious alarm. The intention of Israeli
authorities to deport a significant number of
Palestinians from the West Bank is fraught with
additional risks of exacerbating tensions in Israeli-
Palestinian relations and the region as a whole, and
destabilizing the situation in the Palestinian territories.

We would also like to express our concerns with
regard to the ongoing tension in Gaza and the
continuing blockade of the Strip, the negative actions
of extremists, including rocket fire against Israeli
territory, and the disproportionate use of force by
Israel, all of which lead to the suffering and death of
civilians. The deterioration of the situation in Gaza in
March, which is the most serious since the end of the
Israeli military operation in December 2008 and
January 2009, is a very dangerous development. The
Russian Federation is working on that issue with the
leadership of Hamas. They have confirmed to us that
authorities in the Strip favour preserving calm and that
they have no interest in escalating tension. They are
taking relevant steps to prevent the firing of rockets
from Gaza.

We fully support Mahmoud Abbas as the leader
of all Palestinians and his policy aimed at seeking
political solutions to complex problems facing
Palestinians. At the same time, we would like to
underscore the need to restore inter-Palestinian unity
on the basis of the Egyptian initiative. Among other
things, that would strengthen Palestinian potential for
negotiations. Events in that regard continue to have our
full attention.

We would like to emphasize that a united Arab
position is very important in the current, very complex

situation in the peace process. We were pleased to note
that, at the League of Arab States summit held in
Libya, Arab States demonstrated a responsible
approach and expressed their commitment to the Arab
Peace Initiative. It is precisely in that spirit that Russia
presented its policy during the Quartet's meeting in
Moscow, to which I have referred. That very important
international step was intended to assist the immediate
participants in the dialogue so that they could again
begin to work on substantive agreements, with the help
of international diplomatic efforts in the Middle East,
including those of Senator Mitchell.

Our consistent policy is aimed at ensuring that
the Quartet consistently carries out its mission. While
we can all agree that the Quartet has not been entirely
successful in that regard, it is clear that there is no
alternative to the collective working methods adopted
in the framework of the Quartet. Close cooperation
between the Quartet and the League of Arab States is
one of Quartet's best tools for enhancing its
effectiveness. We expect that, once Israeli-Palestinian
consultations have resumed, more substantial dialogue
on an Arab-Israeli settlement will take place at the
Moscow Middle East conference.

I should now like to say a few words on Lebanon.
We are extremely alarmed by the growing instability
along the Blue Line and the statements coming from
both sides with regard to the possibility of resumed
full-fledged conflict in the zone. It is for that reason
that it is now very important to reverse the trend in
growing provocative actions, including, for example,
Israeli incursions into Lebanese airspace, so as to
prevent tensions from escalating into direct military
confrontation in southern Lebanon and to achieve strict
compliance by all sides with the requirements set out in
resolution 1701 (2006). We are convinced that, with
the assistance of United Nations forces, the Lebanese
Government is a position to provide stability there.
With the situation in the region currently alternating
between a return to negotiations on a comprehensive
Arab-Israeli settlement and a return to confrontation,
we cannot allow the Lebanese spark to again ignite
conflict in the Middle East.

