Mr. Gata Mavita Wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): As your
presidency of the Security Council nears its end, my
delegation is honoured to be able to congratulate you,
Sir, and express its satisfaction and appreciation for the
outstanding way in which the Netherlands has led the
work of the Council for the month of March.

My delegation is also grateful for the opportunity
you have given me to speak to the Council at today's
meeting, held to adopt resolution 2409 (2018), which
renews the mandate of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO). I also want to emphasize how
much we respect the Council and once again convey to
its members the gratitude of the Government and the
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo for
the consistent interest that the Council has taken in my
country's situation.
My delegation takes note of the Council's
adoption of resolution 2409 (2018), thereby extending
the mandate of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) to 31 March 2019. We believe
that in taking this action, the United Nations, through
the Council, has reaffirmed its willingness to spare
no effort to continue the struggle begun nearly two
decades ago to help us restore peace and stability in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

In that regard, what should the Congolese people
expectfromthemandate?Before answeringthatquestion,
it is worth mentioning here that, as we have always said,
MONUSCO is in the Democratic Republic of Congo
at the explicit request of the Congolese Government. It
has been operating there for almost 20 years. During
that time, the Security Council has renewed successive
mandates of the Mission despite the fact that none of
them have been implemented to the satisfaction of our
people, with the result that many friendly countries are
still wondering what this United Nations Mission has
been doing in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
for all those years. As Mr. Leonard She Okitundu, our
Vice-Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Regional Integration, underscored to the Council on
7 March (see S/PV.8198), my Government's view is that
the renewal of MONUSCO's mandate must not become
mere routine but should rather represent an opportunity
to assess the achievements and failures of previous
mandates so as to make the necessary adjustments and
corresponding improvements.

Accordingly, the renewal of the mandate should
take into account the expectations of the Congolese
people, whose greatest desire is to see the negative
forces and various armed groups that are running
rampant in the eastern part of our country totally
eradicated. In other words, the new mandate of
MONUSCO should be implemented in such a way as
to enable it to effectively achieve the goals that the
Council has set for it, so that peace will be restored
to the people in the country's eastern regions. As we
understand it, therefore, while the initial mission of the
United Nations forces in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo was about peacekeeping and later became part
of the efforts to stabilize the situation on the ground,
they should now be dedicated first and foremost to their
main, defined tasks.

Given that, we believe that today's resolution has
two major shortcomings that couldjeopardize the ability
to achieve its goals. They are the excessive number of
its tasks and its ordering and choice of priorities. With
regard to their excessive number, we should point out
that in the context of stabilizing the situation on the
ground, MONUSCO's first responsibility, as most
Council members have said, is combating armed
groups so as to protect civilians and restore the peace
and security that we so urgently need in the country's
eastern region. In that regard, we have to say that the
Congolese people find it difficult to understand why
MONUSCO has to take on other responsibilities when
it has still not satisfactorily fulfilled its primary task.
In our view, assigning it new tasks takes it even further
away from its essential mission.

With regard to the choice of priorities, we believe
that better results would be achieved by organizing
them starting with combating the armed groups and
protecting civilians. Members of the Council will
agree that the best way to protect our civilians must
be by combating the armed groups, considering that in
the eastern part of our country, which is embroiled in
armed conflict, civilians are suffering from the worst
misdeeds and every kind of abuse at the hands of armed
groups and negative forces. Considering the time that
MONUSCO has dedicated to resolving that issue, we
believe that the resolution could have included a timeline,
with a deadline for their eradication. Moreover, given
the close links between the armed groups' activities
and the illicit traffic in minerals, it would have made
a great deal of sense for the resolution to prioritize
combating the illicit trade in natural resources in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Needless to say, it
is an illusion to believe that we can protect civilians
without countering the armed groups, just as we cannot
eradicate the armed groups without addressing their
sources of funding and supply channels.

The second priority could have focused on
stabilization and implementing the disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation and reintegration (DDRR)
programme. In order to achieve stabilization in the
eastern part of the country, stabilization and the support
programme for DDRR need to be included among
the priorities of MONUSCO's mandate. As Council
members are aware, the DDRR programme is crucial to
reintegrating ex-combatants into their communities in
order to prevent them from being re-recruited by armed
groups. The third and fourth priorities could have been
reform of the security sector and, lastly, support for the
electoral process.

I should add to this the fact that the Council has
failed to take into consideration my Government's
position regarding its desire for a substantial decrease
in the numbers of MONUSCO's troops before the
Mission's final withdrawal, which we have expressed
to the Council for two years through the strategic
dialogue with MONUSCO and which was reiterated on
7 March by my Vice-Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Regional Integration. We believe
that the Council's position on this cannot be justified by
using the holding of elections as a reason not to honour
that request.

Despite all those issues, we are pleased to note
that the resolution recognizes the importance of the
Intervention Brigade and provides for strengthening
its operational effectiveness. For my Government, the
Intervention Brigade, which so far has been the only
offensive force dealing with armed groups, will have to
work closely with the Forces armees de la Republique
democratique du Congo (FARDC). If it is to regain
its former effectiveness, it will have to be adequately
equipped. It will therefore appropriate to authorize, as
part of its arsenal, its use of Tanzanian artillery and
South African aviation, which at one point it had to give
up, leading to its ineffectiveness.

In conclusion, I would be remiss ifI did not convey
the mixed feelings of the Congolese people who, given
the failure of MONUSCO'S efforts to combat the armed
groups, would like to see it finally fulfil its mandated
mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In
that context, as my Vice-Prime Minister said in this
Chamber, we believe that the United Nations will have

succeeded in the Democratic Republic of the Congo penultimate renewal of MONUSCO's mandate. It is
only when the question of the renewal of MONUSCO's
mandate no longer needs to be discussed, because we
will have achieved the goal for which it was deployed in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In that regard,
again as my Vice-Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Regional Integration underscored,
we hope that today's resolution will represent the

therefore important to ensure that it is built up under the
leadership ofthe FARDC so that all the negative forces
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo are finally
neutralized and the peace that the people in the eastern
regions ofmy country dream ofbecomes a reality there.

The meeting rose at 11 a.m.
