Mr. Kubis: Following the certification of the
election results on 19 August, the Government
formation process moved forward with the election of
Mohammad Al-Halbousi as Speaker of the Council of
Representatives, on 15 September, and Barham Salih
as President of Iraq, on 2 October, who then nominated
Mr. Adil Abdul-Mahdi as Prime Minister-designate.

On 24 October, the Iraqi Parliament reviewed the
new governmental programme, endorsed 14 out of
22 Cabinet ministers, and confirmed Mr. Abdul-Mahdi
as Prime Minister. Of the five sovereign ministries,
Finance, Foreign Affairs and Oil were endorsed, but
the ministries of Defence and Interior are yet to be
allocated. No female or minority candidates were
appointed to ministerial positions, but the Prime
Minister intends to consider them for governmental
posts and other key positions in subsequent rounds of
Government formation.

While the Government formation process has not
been without controversies, the political blocs have
demonstrated a willingness to act in support of the
Prime Minister. Competition and differences have
been largely political and not sectarian, and in this way
they represent a break from the past. The guidance of
the supreme Shia religious authority, Grand Ayatollah
Al-Sistani, has significantly influenced the process.
The main negotiations with Prime Minister Abdul-
Mahdi have been led by cleric Muqtada Al-Sadr of the
Sairoun Alliance and Mr. Hadi Al-Ameri of the Fatah
Alliance on behalf of their coalitions - Islah and
Binaa, respectively. All of these primary partners and
political forces now share a responsibility for creating
an enabling environment for the new Prime Minister
and Government to deliver on its programme, and
for its stability. The support of all the political forces
represented in Parliament, including those who will
now be in the opposition for the first time since 2003,
will be essential. Barring this, Iraq's political forces
and leaders will fail their people.

The Government's programme, which includes
advisory inputs from the United Nations, represents
a general outline of a national project to respond to
the needs and demands of the Iraqi people. As stated
in the programme, its focus and pillar should be the
citizen. The programme outlines specific plans for
reforms, investment and the private sector with a view
to transitioning Iraq from a crisis context to sustainable
development; recommends steps to tackle corruption
across all sectors; and sets out a framework to guide
the planning and work of each ministry. In addition
to delivering tangible improvements in the daily lives
of Iraqi citizens, a key focus area of the programme
includes job creation for the unemployed, young people
in particular.

The rehabilitation and reconstruction of liberated
areas and the return of internally displaced persons are
also key priorities. The programme aims at strengthening
security, fighting terrorism and enhancing law and
order and the rule of law, among others, by putting
all arms under the strict control of the State. It also
stresses the prevention of militia formations outside the
framework of the State and the withdrawal of troops
from the cities. The programme confirms that special
attention will be given to resolving pending challenges
with the Kurdistan region, including the issues of
budget allocation and financial resources, oil and
disputed areas.
I commend the exemplary democratic transfer of
power between the outgoing Prime Minister, Haider
A1 Abadi, and incoming Prime Minister Abdul-Mahdi.
At the handover ceremony on 25 October, Mr. Al
Abadi recalled the achievements of his Government
in defeating Da'esh and uniting the country based on
the Constitution, at a time when the economic situation
had deteriorated owing to deep-rooted corruption
and a massive decrease in oil prices. He recalled the
return of millions of displaced families to liberated
areas and the establishment of a national army and
security forces. He also noted improved relations with
all of Iraq's neighbours, including the Arab countries.
Finally, he underlined that political processes in Iraq
have witnessed a gradual departure from sectarian
approaches and rhetoric. For all of this, he and his
Government, the Kurdistan Regional Government,
diverse armed forces and formations, and the people of
Iraq deserve acknowledgment and gratitude.

Iraq must now build on these foundations. The new
Government intends to start immediately, particularly
on the delivery of services and jobs, reforming and
energizing the economy, and fighting corruption and
administrative red tape. In this regard, Iraq will require
and counts on the continued support of the international
community. We must not let the country down.

On 30 October, the results of the Kurdistan region
parliamentary elections, held on 30 September, were
approved. The first session of the new Kurdistan
regional parliament took place on 6 November, but
failed to elect its speaker and the two deputies. The
dominant Kurdistan Democratic Party now intends
to consult with all Kurdistan region political parties,
notably the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan, on the
Government formation.

The new Government of Iraq intends to
introduce robust measures to further improve and
achieve sustainable security throughout the country,
intensifying efforts to uproot Da'esh terrorist cells
to counter this insurgency. Reports of the arrests of
Da'esh terrorists and their leaders or on the elimination
of sleeper cells and hideouts are issued almost daily.

Security measures put in place for the Arba'een
pilgrimage were successful. Among the 15 million
pilgrims, close to 2 million foreign visitors were
recorded to have legally and safely entered Iraq. Efforts
to disturb this massive movement of people failed.

Most of Da'esh's movements in recent months
have reportedly been through the desert joining
central Iraq and its Anbar and Ninawa provinces to the
western border with the Syria. In response, Iraq has
deployed thousands of troops on its border with that
neighbouring country to curb Da'esh, which remains in
control of several areas across the border in the Syrian
Deir ez-Zor province. Also, Da'esh remains active in
some other Iraqi provinces, notably in Kirkuk, Salah
ad-Din and Diyala.

The United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI) continues to advocate justice and
accountability for international crimes. On 6 November,
UNAMI and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights jointly launched a
report entitled Unearthing Atrocities: Mass Graves in
Territory Formerly Controlled by ISIL. At least 202
mass graves have been discovered in Iraq, and they
are believed to contain the remains of many thousands
of victims of atrocities perpetrated by Da'esh. I am
pleased to report that the Special Adviser and Head
of the Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da'esh, Mr. Karim Khan,
arrived in Iraq on 30 October.

In October, UNAMI established a women's
advisory group on reconciliation and politics in Iraq,
which will serve as a political inclusion mechanism
to ensure that the voices, concerns and experiences of
Iraqi women are included in political processes that
shape national reconciliation based on the principles
of peaceful coexistence, respect for diversity and
non-discrimination.

Nearly two years after the defeat of Da'esh by Iraqi
security forces and coalition allies, more than 1.9 million
Iraqis remain displaced, primarily in the north and west
of the country. Although 4 million people have returned
home since the end of the conflict, the rate of return
has decreased significantly. Humanitarian actors and
the UNAMI senior women's protection adviser are also
concentrating on how to best strengthen the centrality of
protection around women and children with perceived
affiliations with extremist groups.

A critical barrier to the return of internally
displaced persons is that the need for residential
buildings to be cleared of mines by mine action actors
remains unmet. The Funding Facility for Stabilization
reached a significant milestone, having now completed
1,517 projects across all nine sectors of work in the
five liberated governorates of the country. There are
245 new projects already tendered, but they will not
be implemented without additional donor support.
We also urge the Government to begin making its
own contributions to donor-funded international
development programmes, including those under
the Facility.

The need for concrete results in public projects
beyond the current focus on liberated areas is perhaps
most evident in the southern city and province ofBasra.
There, a combination of water scarcity and high levels
of contamination in supplies of drinking water led to
more than 100,000 being admitted to hospital with
symptoms of gastroenteritis between mid-August and
mid-October.

On 28 October, the Government of Iraq chaired the
first formal meeting of the Executive Committee on
Recovery, Reconstruction and Development. This high-
level committee is mandated to provide a coordination
platform for strategic guidance on national priorities
to take forward the work set out at the International
Conference for the Reconstruction of Iraq, held in
Kuwait in February. This signals the Government's
determined shift towards development and investment.

I am delighted to report that on 11 and 13 November,
respectively, after over a year of preparations, President
Salih and representatives of the Iraqi Ministry for
Foreign Affairs delivered to the Kuwaiti Ministry for
Foreign Affairs numerous items of property taken
during the invasion of Kuwait, including over 2,300
books, an archive of Kuwaiti television videotapes,
a sword and a valuable painting. I welcome this clear
indication of commitment by the Government of Iraq
to resolving the complex file of outstanding issues
with Kuwait. When I met the new Minister for Foreign
Affairs oflraq, Mr. Mohamed Alhakim, on 5 November,
he assured me that he would give the greatest attention
to and support for efforts on this important file.

In conclusion, as this is my last report to the
Security Council in my current capacity, I would like
to express my gratitude to you, Mr. President, your
predecessors and the members of the Security Council
for the support you have kindly provided to me during
the three years and nine months I have served in my post.
I would also like to express my highest appreciation
to UNAMI and United Nations country team staff for
their dedication, professionalism, proactive efforts
and unwavering commitment to working in support
of UNAMI and United Nations mandates serving
Iraq and its people. I would also like to express my
gratitude to and appreciate for Ms. Alice Walpole, my
Deputy Special Representative for Political Affairs
and Electoral Assistance, and Ms. Marta Ruedas,
my Deputy Special Representative for Humanitarian
Affairs and Development, for their cooperation,
capable leadership and management of United Nations
activities across Iraq.

Finally, I would like to warmly welcome my
successor, Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, and wish
her success in leading the Mission and in helping Iraq
to achieve a durable and sustainable peace, stability and
prosperity for its people. I encourage the authorities and
society of Iraq to offer Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert the same
generous support and cooperation that they have shown
to me during my tenure. I have the honour of serving
the United Nations and Iraq during a particularly
difficult period that has against all odds and scepticism
ended well, with promising future prospects for the
country and its people. Iraq is a success, a positive
story in a region marked by many negative trends and
developments. The United Nations in Iraq has shown
its relevance and will continue to build on the firm
foundations of its partnership with Iraq and its people.

