Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking the Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, Mr. Mark Lowcock, for his ever-
helpful and informative briefing, and by commending
his tireless efforts, as well as those of his team, in
responding to the extreme humanitarian emergency
in Syria.

In the aftermath of the quadripartite summit that
President Erdogan convened in Istanbul on Saturday
with President Macron, President Putin and Chancellor
Merkel, I would like to reiterate that the humanitarian
situation will be lastingly improved only with a long-
term ceasefire and a credible political solution. That
was the challenge at the Istanbul summit, which we
thank the Turkish authorities for convening, and it
marked an important step in that direction. In their
joint statement, the four leaders demanded the full
and lasting implementation of the ceasefire in Idlib,
asked that the constitutional committee meet by the
end of the year and called for free elections to be held
under the supervision of the Untied Nations with the
participation of all Syrians, including members of the
diaspora. It is the implementation of that road map that
will bring peace and stability to Syria and put an end to
the suffering of the Syrian people, which has gone on
for too long.

At the summit, the Presidents of France, Turkey
and Russia and the German Chancellor recalled
the imperative that all humanitarian organizations
have quick, safe and unhindered access to all of the
populations that need assistance in Syria. That is not
the case today, as Mr. Lowcock pointed out, due to
the Syrian regime's determination to manipulate and
politicize humanitarian aid. In concrete terms, in order
to relieve the suffering of Syrians and overcome this
challenge, we must remain mobilized around three
essential and complementary priorities: the protection
of civilians, the guarantee of humanitarian access,
which Ijust mentioned, and a lasting political solution
in Syria.

The first priority is the protection of civilians and
humanitarian and medical personnel. As Mr. Lowcock
pointed out, the Russian-Turkish agreement on Idlib
temporarily averted a bloodbath with an offensive that
would have had disastrous humanitarian, migratory
and security consequences throughout the region.
The quadripartite summit on Saturday reaffirmed the
importance of that ceasefire not being a temporary
freeze in the situation, but rather a long-term solution
that allows us to stabilize the situation in Idlib. In
that context, the protection of civilians must be a top
priority for all stakeholders. All parties must respect
their obligations under international humanitarian law.
We must also do everything to protect humanitarian
and medical facilities and personnel. It must be
hammered home that the attacks on hospitals and health
workers are war crimes and that the perpetrators will be
held accountable.

With regard to refugees, the conditions for
their safe, dignified and voluntary return are not yet
being met. The quadripartite summit identified those
conditions, of which there are three aspects, namely,
the need to be protected from armed conflict, arbitrary
arrests and political persecution, respect for the right
of ownership and access to basic services. We are far
from attaining that, and it is clearly down to the Syrian
regime. Despite announcing the repeal of Law 10, on
forced expropriations, the regime does not seem ready
to abandon its strategy of demographic engineering.
We must continue to strongly oppose that strategy,
which has serious and irreversible consequences and
is one of the main obstacles to the return of refugees
and displaced persons. Let us not be fooled by the
regime's tale; it is not the absence of reconstruction
that is preventing the return of refugees. It is the lack
of credible progress in the political process, which is
an indispensable process in creating the conditions for
their return to be made possible within the framework
guaranteed by international law.

The second priority is the guarantee of safe,
complete and unhindered humanitarian access
throughout Syria. The Syrian regime incessantly
continues its strategy of the political instrumentalization
of humanitarian aid - which constitutes the height of
cynicism - by imposing unacceptable obstacles to
the delivery of aid and disregarding the fundamental
principles of international humanitarian law. Access
to aid is essential for all parties, especially in hard-to-
reach areas. It is unacceptable that the regime has been
blocking inter-agency convoys for over two months
now and is putting in place a punitive strategy by
impeding the delivery of aid to the reconciled areas. In
addition to convoys, humanitarian actors must be able
to access the most vulnerable populations throughout
the territory, based on the needs of those populations
and not the authorizations that are arbitrarily handed
out by the regime.

It is imperative that the entire population in need
benefits from humanitarian aid. We call on actors with
influence over the regime to ensure that all convoys can
travel safely and unhindered throughout the country,
in accordance with the relevant Security Council
resolutions and international humanitarian law. I
wound mention in particular the extremely worrisome
situation in the Rukban camp, where 50,000 people are
living in nightmarish conditions with no humanitarian
convoy having been able to access it since January. I
refer as well to the people displaced from Afrin who
have taken refuge in the Tal Rifaat area, where they
have been living in deplorable conditions for months. I
am recalling these facts at a time when those people are
preparing to face the rigours of a sixth winter of war.

I would also like to recall the indispensable and
irreplaceable nature of cross-border humanitarian aid,
which provides vital support to hundreds of thousands
of people every day. More than 900,000 people were
able to benefit from such help last month. The Council
will soon be looking into the renewal of resolution 2165
(2014), and we call on members to demonstrate unity and
shoulder their responsibility so that that important gain
is preserved. We must be able to access populations in
need by the fastest and most effective means possible. I
emphasize in particular the magnitude and the urgency
of the needs of populations in the north-east who have
been liberated from Da'esh, where the coalition is
working to stabilize the area. The situation calls for the
United Nations to significantly and rapidly step up its
work in that area, including through the cross-border
delivery of aid. I formally call on the Organization to
do just that.

The third priority concerns the launching of a
sustainable political process, which is essential to
eliminating definitively the risk of any new horrific
escalation. As the Istanbul summit underscored,
the ceasefire in Idlib, which has enabled avoiding a
humanitarian disaster, also provides us with a window
of opportunity to launch a credible political process in
line with resolution 2254 (2015), which serves as our
common guiding light more than ever. The goal is to
create the conditions necessary for a virtuous cycle
with the improvement of the humanitarian situation
and the launching of a true political process, both
of which are inextricably linked. In that regard, the
calls of the international community are clear. On
Friday (see S/PV.8383), Council members together
with Mr. De Mistura called for the establishment
of a constitutional committee, for which the United
Nations has a mandate, as soon as possible, and, on
Saturday, the Istanbul summit communique called for
the committee, an initiative of two of its participants,
to be put in place by the end of the year. The formation
of a constitutional committee is a necessary first step
on the path of a credible political process that must
be followed by the holding of free and fair elections
under the supervision of the United Nations, with the
participation of Syrian refugees and displaced persons
in a safe and neutral environment.

Although the stabilization of areas liberated from
Da'esh by the coalition is a priority, help to rebuild Syria
is not on the agenda. There should be no ambiguity
concerning the fact that assistance with reconstruction
will be foreseeable only when an irreversible, credible
and inclusive political transition has begun. To proceed
otherwise would be to reward the intransigence of the
regime and to rebuild on sand.

Rest assured that France will continue to spare no
effort to improve the humanitarian situation in Syria
and open the way to a political solution to the conflict.

