Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I too
thank Ambassador Gary Quinlan for his statement and
for the commitment he has shown with his team as the
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). The Committee's
work is highly important.
Luxembourg expresses its appreciation to the
Panel of Experts established pursuant to resolution
1929 (2010) for the valuable support they provide to
the work of the 1737 Committee. We thank them for
the excellent final report (S/2014/394, annex), which
is well documented and methodologically rigorous
and which it has just submitted to us. The publication
of that document will be of great benefit to Member
States, who will find in it a wealth ofinformation on the
various types of attempts to circumvent the sanctions
regime. Luxembourg supports the recommendations
contained in the final report of the Panel of Experts and
calls for their effective implementation.

With the adoption of the joint action plan on
24 November 2013 in Geneva and the start of its
implementation on 20 January 2014, a dual milestone
was reached. First, the dual approach, which combines
openness to dialogue and restrictive measures,
was shown to bear fruit when applied consistently.
Secondly, the fact that even the most complex cases are
not set in stone forever and that no level of suspicion
is insurmountable for those who agree to negotiate in
good faith was confirmed.

The joint action plan agreed in Geneva, despite its
importance, is only an intermediate step on the path
that must lead to a comprehensive, negotiated and
sustainable solution to the Iranian nuclear dossier. We
wish, in that regard, to acknowledge the efforts of the
E3 +3 countries, led by the High Representative of
the European Union, Catherine Ashton, to negotiate
a comprehensive agreement with Iran that establishes
confidence in the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran's
nuclear programme.

We should recall that the issue here is not to decide
on Iran's right to the civilian use of nuclear energy.
That right is not in question. The issue is to ensure
that the exercise of that right happens transparently, in
close cooperation with the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) and in full respect of all obligations
arising from Iran's international commitments.

Pending a final agreement, as others have pointed
out before me, the sanctions regime established by
the Security Council continues to apply fully.In other
words, Member States must continue to exercise the
same vigilance as before. We are reminded of that by the
Klos C incident, in which a ship intercepted in the Red
Sea in March was found to be carrying a cargo ofloaded
weapons from the Iranian port of Bandar Abbas. That
incident, which the Panel found to be a violation of the
sanctions regime, shows that Iran continues to violate
its international obligations even while it is engaged in
negotiations to restore the international community's
confidence in it. We deplore that new violation of the
sanctions regime, which is not consistent with Iran's
stated intention to reassure its international partners as
to the peaceful nature of its intentions.

However, we are encouraged that the most recent
report of the Director of the International Atomic
Energy Agency, issued on 23 May, confirms that Iran
has begun a substantive dialogue with the Agency
intended to clarify outstanding issues concerning the
possible military dimensions of its nuclear programme.
We are also encouraged by the fact that the IAEA report
confirms that Iran is pursuing the implementation of
agreed measures on its nuclear programme with the E3
+ 3 group within the framework of the joint action plan.

By way of conclusion, let me reiterate Luxembourg's
full support for the diplomatic efforts currently under
way in Vienna. We hope that those negotiations will
lead to the desired result within the time frame set out
by the joint action plan. We also express the hope that
success on the Iran dossier could, in time, positively
influence the evolution of other dossiers related to
issues of non-proliferation.

