Ms. Stiglic (Slovenia): I would like to thank
Nigeria for organizing this meeting and for the
opportunity to present Slovenia's views on this subject,
which is of paramount importance to the United
Nations and its membership. This debate is both timely
and needed. Over the years, security sector reform
(SSR) has become an integral part of the efforts of the
international community to holistically address various
post-conflict situations around the world, especially in
Africa.

I will be short and concise, since previous
speakers have already outlined the main challenges that
SSR faces in the near future. These challenges must be
understood as an opportunity to enhance our common
efforts, not just for a better understanding of the reform
processes but also to agree on a set of tools and
mechanisms that will enable us to deal better with post-
conflict situations.

Security sector reform does not happen in a void.
It always involves other issues, problems and questions
that, more often than not, are linked closely together.
That is my first point. Security sector reform can be
successful only when it is properly integrated into the
environment and linked to all the other efforts already
taking place in the recipient State. In the light of that, I
would like to stress the importance of the link between
SSR and development activities.

The SSR process involves many issues that can
be dealt with efficiently only by development
instruments, including employment for youth and
securing livelihoods for high-risk populations.
Recognition of that link must be properly implemented
by ensuring timely and constructive coordination
between the two activities.

Slovenia understands SSR as a long-term conflict
prevention tool. Successful reform of the security
sector of any country is a prerequisite for irreversible
stability and sustainable development. In that regard,
SSR must not be confined within the specific
timeframe of the conflict aftermath, but must be
carefully place within the entire framework of
peacebuilding and conflict prevention efforts in the
recipient State. SSR can be efficient only when all of
the actors in the process actively, transparently and in a
coordinated manner strive to achieve the same goal.

While international actors have made important
strides in ensuring coordination and transparency
among themselves, there is still room for improvement,
especially on cooperation among State actors and civil
society or non-governmental organizations. Slovenia
has openly advocated the early involvement of the
recipient State in preparations for the SSR process,
since that is the only way to ensure a locally owned,
locally supported and locally tailored process, which is
quintessential to any SSR project. We would also like
to point out that a better level of coordination must be
achieved with respect to local civil society, which has
knowledge and understanding of the local environment
and its needs and issues.

SSR has become an essential part of almost any
peacekeeping operation or crisis management mission
of the United Nations. This means that the missions are
becoming more complex and more demanding. We
should ensure that the training curriculum for staff of
the various missions includes SSR-related subjects. It
is also important to ensure the continuity of the
mission's know-how in the recruitment processes and
institutional memory of peacekeeping operations in the
field.
The promotion of gender perspectives in SSR is
of essential importance to Slovenia. Peacekeeping
operations can also play a positive role in promoting
gender-sensitive SSR and developing security services
that better respond to women's needs, both through
examples of deployed female peacekeepers and police
to encourage more women to serve in the reformed
security sector of the host Government, and through
the provision of gender expertise in support of SSR
processes.

The reintegration of child soldiers into society is
another issue where Slovenia has played an active role
over the years. Disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration and security sector reform offer
complementary approaches that can link the

reintegration of ex-combatants to enhanced community
security. Child-specific reintegration in that regard
must enable a child's access to education, a livelihood,
life skills and a meaningful role in society. Last but not
least, justice should be served in order to remedy past
atrocities. There is no long-lasting peace and reform
without justice.

Finally, let me reiterate once again that Slovenia
will remain fully committed to supporting a profound
dialogue among all stakeholders in developing
effective SSR guidelines.

