Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We thank the Japanese
presidency for having organized this timely and
important high-level meeting on the issue of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, over which we
are pleased to see you presiding, Mr. Minister. Our own
Minister would have been here today had it not been
for the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
Council of Ministers meeting and the high-level
revitalization forum, both due to take place in the
coming days in Addis Ababa.

We thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres for
his briefing on the topic of our discussion today, which,
we understand, was one of the issues raised during his
visit to Tokyo. We share his views, and it is no wonder,
therefore, that in this statement we may have to repeat
what the Secretary-General has stressed.

We can imagine the level of anxiety and deep
concern in Japan concerning the repeated ballistic-
missile tests by the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea. We know that most of those missiles fell
into Japan's exclusive economic zone and that some
of them flew over its territory. It is not difficult to
realize how sensitive this issue is to the people and the
Government of Japan, as the only country to ever suffer
a nuclear attack.

However, the nuclear and ballistic-missile activities
of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea pose a
grave danger not only to Japan and the region of North-
East Asia; as a matter of fact, there is no greater threat
to global peace and security at the moment than the
potential nuclear catastrophe that is hanging over the
Korean peninsula. One does not need to be an expert
in the area to know that no war on the peninsula would
be limited. The possibility that it could spread must not
be discounted. That is why every possible diplomatic
effort must be made to avert this potentially dangerous
situation, which could have devastating consequences
for the region and the world at large.

At this stage, it has become all the more apparent
that there is no option other than a path of peace
and diplomacy to resolving the crisis on the Korean
peninsula. In that regard, priority should be given to
easing the heightened tensions and avoiding the risk of
miscalculations through all available means, including
by reopening communications channels, if none are
open at the moment. We are under no illusions that
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea issue can
be resolved any time soon, but it is absolutely essential
that all sides start taking meaningful steps, however
small, to build the necessary trust and confidence,
which could help pave the way for a resumption of
dialogue and negotiations to find a comprehensive
and lasting solution to the issue of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, as well as to achieve the
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula. Everyone
agrees that this is the key to preserving peace and
security in North-East Asia.

We very much welcomed Under-Secretary-General
Jeffrey Feltman's visit to the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, the first by a senior official of the
United Nations since 2010. It is a small but important
step in the right direction, and we greatly appreciated
the extremely useful briefing that we received on the
range of discussions that he had with North Korean
officials in Pyongyang. What the visit has shown is that
the engagement of the United Nations and, especially, of
the Secretary-General's good offices, could be helpful.
While nothing concrete came out of Mr. Feltman's visit,
we believe that the various discussions he held may
contribute to a better understanding of the thinking in
Pyongyang and to devising a strategy of engagement
to bring the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
back to the negotiating table. In our View, that is
absolutely critical.

In the meantime, the full and effective
implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions by all Member States remains crucial - as
was pointed out by the Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718
(2006) when he reported to the Council (see S/PV.8127)
on the work of the Committee in 2017 - to creating

"conditions conducive to restarting negotiations,
while at the same time hindering the development
of the nuclear and ballistic-missile programmes of
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea".

Regardless of that, I would like to point to the
need to pay attention to the humanitarian situation in
the country. We hope that the recent United Nations
engagement with the Government of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea will contribute to improving
the provision of lifesaving humanitarian assistance to
the population in need. It might also help to raise the
level of mutual trust, which is currently non-existent.
We welcome the presence of the representative of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea at this meeting.

Lastly, it is only through the unity of the Council
that we can avert the dangerous situation on the
Korean peninsula, and at this critical juncture it is only
appropriate to focus on what would help to improve
cooperation among members of Council in ensuring the
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula. We should
not lose hope of the possibility of achieving that goal.

