The President: I thank Ambassador Mahiga for
his excellent briefing.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the
international London conference on Somalia held
on 23 February 2012 and fully supports its
conference communique. The conference
demonstrated the international community's
political will and determination to support the
Somali people as they build peace and stability in
Somalia.

"The Security Council supports the progress
made at the London conference on Somalia,
which affirmed international support, progress on
the political process, security, increasing stability,
economic development and action to address
terrorism, piracy and hostage-taking. The Council
emphasizes the need to build on agreement in
London and continue to pursue a comprehensive
strategy for the establishment of peace and
stability in Somalia through the collaborative
effort of all stakeholders. The Security Council
also welcomes the meeting, which preceded the
London conference, on the ongoing and
protracted humanitarian situation in Somalia.

"The Security Council further welcomes the
consensus in London that the mandate of the
Transitional Federal Institutions will end in
August 2012 and that there will be no further
extension of the transitional period. The Council
welcomes commitments to work for a more
representative Government in Somalia, in line
with the Transitional Federal Charter, the
Djibouti Agreement, the Kampala Accord, the
end-of-transition road map and the Garowe
Principles. The Security Council reaffirms its
respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity,
political independence and unity of Somalia.

"The Security Council reiterates its full
support for the work of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Augustine P. Mahiga,
and the United Nations Political Office for
Somalia (UNPOS) in facilitating progress towards
peace and stability in Somalia, as well as that of
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
and the African Union. The Council welcomes the
relocation of UNPOS to Mogadishu and
encourages the United Nations to achieve a more
permanent, full relocation to Somalia when
security conditions allow.

"The Security Council pays tribute to the
contribution of AMISOM. and the Somali national
security forces to achieving a more peaceful and
stable Somalia, and expresses its appreciation for
the commitment of troops by troop-contributing
countries to AMISOM. and the significant
sacrifices made by both AMISOM. and Somali
forces. In this regard, the Security Council recalls
resolution 2036 (2012) authorizing an expansion
of AMISOM, increasing the scale and scope of
the United Nations logistical support package to
enhance the predictability, sustainability and
flexibility of AMISOM's financing, and imposing
an international ban on Somali charcoal. The
Council welcomes the valuable financial support
provided by the African Union's partners to
AMISOM, including through bilateral support
programmes from the United States of America
and from the African Peace Facility of the
European Union. The Security Council stresses
the need for continued support to AMISOM. and
calls for further support from existing and new

partners to provide equipment, funding for troop
stipends to AMISOM. and uncaveated funding,
including through the United Nations Trust Fund
for AMISOM.

"The Security Council recalls its resolutions
1674 (2006), 1738 (2006) and 1894 (2009) on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict,
welcomes the progress made by AMISOM. in
reducing civilian casualties during its operations
and urges AMISOM. to continue to undertake
enhanced efforts in this regard.

"The Security Council emphasizes the
importance of effective governance in Somalia
and the delivery of basic services to the Somali
people throughout Somalia. The Security Council
underlines the need for further efforts to fight
corruption and promote transparency in Somalia,
and welcomes initiatives to increase transparency
and accountability in the collection and efficient
use of Somali public revenues.

"The Security Council underlines that the
development of the Somali security forces and
institutions is vital to ensure Somalia's long-term
security and stability and calls upon the
international community in coordination with the
United Nations and AMISOM. to provide
increased support to the Somali security and
justice sectors. The Council fully supports the
training of Somalia's security forces through the
bilateral support programmes of Member States
and the European Union training mission for
Somalia.

"The Security Council supports efforts to
expand existing stabilization plans in Somalia to
new sectors, welcomes increased international
support to areas of stability, including through a
new stability fund, and encourages further efforts
to address Somalia's long-term reconstruction
and economic development.

"The Security Council recognizes that while
the famine may have ended in Somalia, there are
significant ongoing humanitarian needs. The
Council underlines the high number of internally
displaced persons in Somalia who urgently need
support, and persons in need of emergency relief.
The Council emphasizes the need for the
international community to provide well
coordinated, timely and sustained humanitarian
assistance to the Somali people, and to help build
their resistance to future shocks, and stresses the
importance of upholding and respecting the
humanitarian principles of humanity, neutrality,
impartiality and independence. The Security
Council demands that all parties ensure full and
unhindered access for the timely delivery of
humanitarian aid to persons in need of assistance
across Somalia, consistent with relevant
humanitarian and human rights law.

"The Security Council welcomes the fact
that effective countermeasures have led to a
substantial reduction in the number of successful
piracy-related attacks, although it notes with
concern the increased incidence of attempted
attacks. The Security Council remains gravely
concerned about the ongoing threat posed by
piracy and armed robbery off the coast of
Somalia, including the issue of hostage-taking
and the increasing use of violence against
hostages, and the extended range of the piracy
threat into the western Indian Ocean and adjacent
sea areas. The Security Council recognizes that
the ongoing instability in Somalia contributes to
the problem of piracy and armed robbery at sea,
and stresses the need for a comprehensive
response to repress piracy and armed robbery at
sea and tackle its underlying causes. The Council
welcomes the commitments made at the London
conference on new efforts to repress piracy,
including efforts by bilateral donors and regional
organizations to strengthen the capacity of
Somalia and relevant States in the region to
prosecute those responsible for acts of piracy and
armed robbery off the coast of Somalia and to
imprison convicted pirates.

"The Security Council remains gravely
concerned about the threat posed to Somalia and
the international community by terrorist attacks
by Somali armed opposition groups, in particular
Al-Shabaab, and welcomes the commitment made
at the London conference for renewed
international action to address this threat, while
ensuring full respect for the rule of law, human
rights and international humanitarian law. The
Council also stresses the importance of
addressing conditions conducive to the spread of
terrorism.
12-25034
"The Security Council welcomes the
intention of the Government of Turkey to hold a
conference on Somalia in Istanbul.

"The members of the Security Council will
keep the situation in Somalia under close review."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2012/4.

I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.

