Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): We voted in favour of
this draft resolution even though we would have
preferred that the Council defer taking a decision on this
matter until we have received the Secretary-General's
report, as requested in resolution 1772 (2007) and once
again in a presidential statement later that same year,
adopted on 19 December 2007. Instead, we have
accepted a compromise through which this Council
commits itself to consider the Secretary-General's report
as soon as it becomes available in early March 2008. It
will be important for the Council to do so, because we
have to demonstrate that the Security Council's mandate
for maintaining international peace and security applies
to Somalia as well.

We expect that the Secretary-General's report in
March will provide us with alternative approaches to
addressing the situation in Somalia, including the best
way to proceed, with the eventual deployment of a
United Nations mission in that country. Meanwhile, we
all know that the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) has been doing a great job in maintaining
peace in Somalia despite its capacity challenges. The
problem for AMISOM. is not just lack of resources, but
also that it was deployed as a stopgap measure until the
United Nations takes over.

The African Union Peace and Security Council, in
its communique of 18 January 2008, has, among other
things, stressed the urgent need for the deployment of a
United Nations peacekeeping operation and reiterated
that the United Nations also must provide support to
AMISOM. That call was endorsed by the African Union
summit, and the Group of African States reiterated the
request in a letter dated 12 February 2008 addressed to
the president of the Security Council.

The same urgency of the situation in Somalia was
also conveyed by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in December 2007, when he appealed
to this Council to assume its responsibility towards
Somalia if the country is not to further deteriorate,
causing it to become an even greater threat to
international peace and security.

Somalia is in need not only of a peacekeeping
presence, but the international community also has an
obligation to support the political process that can bring
about lasting peace to this country. My delegation
remains committed to do whatever we can to make sure
08-24515
that the people of Somalia are not allowed to suffer any
more than they have.

