Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Since I have not personally had the
opportunity to do so yet, I would like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your presidency of the Security
Council and to wish you every success with it. We also
thank Mr. Markram for his briefing.

In view of the fact that an act of provocation
involving the use of a chemical-warfare agent took
place in Khan Shaykhun, Syria, on 4 April 2017, exactly
one year ago, we believe it will be helpful to analyse
the incident and its consequences, including in terms
of global and regional security, from the vantage point
of today. A year has gone by and yet the circumstances
around the chemical incident in Khan Shaykhun remain
essentially obscure. Needless to say, the quote-unquote
work done by the defunct Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM) cannot be taken
seriously by professionals. The competent Russian
authorities have clearly shown that the Mechanism's
conclusions were nothing but an arrangement designed
to fit a pre-programmed result - blaming the Syrian
authorities. The Fact-finding Mission ofthe Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and
the JIM. have demonstrated a rare degree of inertia and
incapacity and have been participants in unscrupulous
acts of fraud. Basically, the JIM's conclusions were
contrary to the laws of physics, the chemistry of toxins,
aviation, ballistics and explosive materials.

During the investigation, the standards of the
Chemical Weapons Convention were completely
ignored. The experts did not visit the place where the
incident occurred or comply with the chain-of-custody
principle for preserving the physical evidence. They
formulated their hypothesis based on information that
militias from armed groups had eagerly palmed off on
them with the help of outside sponsors and dubious
entities linked to terrorists, such as the White Helmets.
As I said, the results of the former JIM's investigation
have nothing in common with a serious scientific and
technical analysis.

Because of this, Russia was unable to support the
extension of the mandate of the unchanged Mechanism,
especially since its unfounded, politicized conclusions
damaged the reputation of a genuine international
investigation. Nonetheless, knowing that armed
groups in the region, including some affiliated with
terrorists, have amassed a considerable toxic-chemical
capacity, not only did we not dispute the importance
of designating an independent investigative body, we
have proposed a specific alternative to the JIM. and
circulated a draft resolution to that effect, currently in
blue, to Security Council members. We have clearly
outlined the main points of our position in the light of
the lamentable experience with the JIM. The Secretary-
General would select a professional and impartial team
for the proposed mechanism on a basis of the broadest
possible geographic representation, with the Security
Council's approval. The basic procedure would involve
visiting the areas where the incidents took place to
take samples and interview witnesses, while strictly
complying with the chain-of-custody principle in
ensuring the preservation of the material evidence.

Based on the critical and objective evidence
collected by such a mechanism, the Security Council
would be able to attribute responsibility for any incident
involving the use of toxic substances. In coordination
with the Committees established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) and to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011)
and 2253 (2015), it would still be important to analyse
any information about chemical production by non-State
actors and their use in practice of toxic substances,
including for purposes of provocation. The authorities
in Damascus have repeatedly reported stagings of
incidents using professional video equipment and
extras provided by the White Helmets. However, that
information has either been deliberately ignored or
considered a low priority.

In order to avoid structural flaws and continued
confrontations regarding the findings of an eventual
investigative body, we suggest that its leadership be
composed of experts representing the five permanent
members of the Security Council, who would make
decisions by consensus. We believe that approach
would offend no one, since it was precisely owing
to disagreements among those countries that the
fundamental problems in assessing the situation
regarding the use of chemical weapons in Syria arose.

Nevertheless, our Western colleagues are insisting
on recreating a mechanism that suits them, with its
inherent defects, and which would rubber-stamp the
decisions they need. At the same time, they are trying
to bring in bodies that in principle have neither the
mandate nor the resources for investigating possible
chemical incidents. Bypassing the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, France and its allies
are forging a narrow group of similarly anti-Damascus-
minded people, simultaneously undermining the
international architecture for the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and the authority and
integrity of the OPCW. All of that is accompanied by
harsh pressure on other States.

We have not forgotten another memorable date.
All things being equal, ideally, it should have been the
day we held today's meeting. On 7 April 2017, three
days after the incident in Khan Shaykhun, before
the investigation had even begun, the United States
carried out an act of military aggression against Syria,
launching missile strikes at the Al-Shayrat airbase. The
delegations that were on the Security Council at the time
must remember how our American colleagues were
expressing their willingness to find mutually acceptable
solutions for the modalities of the investigation while
the missiles were already flying towards Syria, in a
clear demonstration that some capitals have no need
of an international investigation in a situation where
the goal continues to be getting rid of the legitimate
Syrian Government. International law is getting close
to collapse when suspicions rather than confirmed facts
rule the evidence.

Nor do they want any investigations or mechanisms
now, it seems. A number of countries continue to
make confident claims about Damascus's use of
chemical weapons, despite the obvious absurdity of
such statements and the absence of evidence and, most
importantly, any military or political reasons for such
actions by the Syrian authorities. Russia condemns
the use of chemical weapons by anyone and supports
the Secretary-General's calls for unity in countering
this threat - but only the real one, not the imaginary.
While some of them are chasing Damascus's phantom
chemical weapons, the potential danger of chemical
terrorism in the region continues to grow.

Guided by the common principle that the use
of chemical weapons by anyone, anywhere, is
impermissible and should be investigated and punished,
that impunity is unacceptable and that the use of such
weapons constitutes a threat to the non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction, my Government has
instructed me to ask you, Mr. President, to convene
an open meeting of the Security Council tomorrow
afternoon at 3 p.m., concerning the letter (S/2018/218, annex) from Prime Minister Theresa May of the
United Kingdom about the Salisbury incident. The
corresponding letter will be sent to you shortly.

