Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French): I wish
to thank you, Madam President, for this opportunity to
take the floor with the presence in the Chamber of the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Liberia, Sierra Leone
and the Republic of Guinea, as well as Dr. Margaret
Chan and Mr. David Nabarro.

(spoke in English)

On behalf of the Government of Canada and all
Canadians, I wish to begin by extending our profound
condolences to, and solidarity with, the peoples of
Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone, as well as Nigeria
and Senegal, for the extreme challenges confronting
them at the forefront of the struggle against Ebola.

Canada remains deeply concerned by the outbreak
of this virus in West Africa. It risks undermining the
foundations for economic prosperity, security and
social stability that have been painstakingly supported
by the Council and the Peacebuilding Commission in
the region.

(spoke in French)

We recognize that the crisis is occurring in a
context of chronic fragility, in places of great poverty
that are only now beginning to recover from decades of
conflict and civil strife.

The affected Governments, in partnership with the
United Nations system, the International Federation of
Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, Medecins Sans
Frontieres and other actors have made it clear that a
collective response to this evolving crisis is urgently
required if we are to succeed in staving off the worst-
case scenarios.
(spoke in English)

We are looking to the United Nations to present
a coherent approach to enable timely and effective
responses by the global community. In that regard, we
welcome the high-level event scheduled for next week.
As an active and engaged international partner, the
Government ofCanada is fully committed to supporting
the international effort to combat this disease.

(spoke in French)

Canada recognized early the risks that this Ebola
outbreak represented and from the outset has been a
leader in making significant contributions in support
of humanitarian and security interventions to help
contain the spread of Ebola in West Africa. We have
provided expert deployments, vaccines and material,
and financial support. Our contributions to the World
Health Organization (WHO), Medecins Sans Frontieres
and local Red Cross and Red Crescent organizations
have helped establish the base for their respective
response activities.

(spoke in English)

In addition, Canada has deployed a mobile
laboratory to Sierra Leone, with rotating teams of
Canadian laboratory technicians and supplies. This
laboratory has been deployed in Kailahun, one of the
areas of the country most severely affected by the Ebola
virus, and will continue to provide critical diagnostic
services to Sierra Leoneans requiring assistance.

We have also enabled the deployment of additional
Canadian Red Cross delegates to Guinea and Sierra
Leone, as well as experts to Sierra Leone working for
UNICEF, and we have committed over $2.5 million in
personal protective equipment to WHO for distribution.

(spoke in French)

Recognizing the extraordinary circumstances,
and for the benefit of the global community, Canada
donated to WHO 800 to 1,000 doses ofthe experimental
vaccine VSV-EBOV. We have also actively contributed
to WHO'S expert panels on Ebola.

(spoke in English)

Canada is now exploring the United Nations appeal
issued the day before yesterday, on 16 September, and
we will work in a coordinated manner with all partners
to enable an effective global response to bring this
outbreak under control. We shall support these ongoing
efforts and hope thus to put an end to the terrible
suffering and loss of life being caused by the Ebola
virus in West Africa.
