Ms. Loj (Denmark): Let me start by thanking Jan
Pronk for his briefing, which was, as usual, a very
eloquent and thorough update on the situation. The
progress made by all parties in implementing the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA), in particular
in the area of security, is indeed very welcome. In this
regard, I should like to recognize the important role
played by the United Nations Mission in the Sudan
(UNMIS). We have also taken note of the reported
difficulties and selectiveness in implementing the CPA,
and we fully subscribe to the Secretary-General's
statement that none of commitments enshrined in the
CPA are optional. In particular, the lack of adherence to
the CPA in respect of Abyei gives rise to concern. The
expectation of peace dividends has yet to be met. That
could seriously undermine popular support for the
CPA, and it warrants our close attention and support in
the coming months.

Sudan figures high on the agenda in New York
this week. Unfortunately, that is due not to the progress
made in implementing the CPA but, rather, to the
extremely worrying situation in Darfur. This week, the
African Union Peace and Security Council is meeting
to discuss the future of the African Union Mission in

Sudan (AMIS). We very much welcome the active
dialogue that African leaders have pursued with
President Al-Bashir over the past couple of days in
Havana. We hope this week's intensified efforts will
bear fruit and allow for the immediate and full
implementation of resolution 1706 (2006).

Last week, the Council had two open meetings,
where we heard alarming reports of the deteriorating
humanitarian situation in Darfur, of military build-up,
aerial attacks and the high risk of the Darfur Peace
Agreement falling apart. I will not repeat the points I
made during those discussions, but will limit myself to
emphasizing the possible spillover to the south. There
are already warning signs that further deterioration in
Darfur will create difficulties in upholding the CPA and
could potentially destabilize the relations between the
north and the south.

The stakes are high for the government of
Southern Sudan. We welcome President Kiir's recent
statement of support for the deployment of United
Nations troops in Darfur. This is indeed a challenge for
the Government of National Unity to overcome.

This week provides a unique opportunity for the
Government of the Sudan to trim down the public
rhetoric, move forward and take the right decisions that
will serve the interests of all Sudanese people.

The eyes of the world are set on New York in the
coming days. Expectations are high for world leaders
to do their utmost and to bring relief to the people of
Darfur. We too will spare no efforts and, like
Ambassador Bolton, I hope that all those invited to the
meeting on Friday will be able to participate and that,
through that meeting, as well as the other activities that
are taking place in New York this week, we can all
expedite the implementation of resolution 1706 (2006)
and address the humanitarian crisis in Darfur.

In closing, I would like to inform the Council that
Denmark supports the recommendation of the
Secretary-General to extend the mandate of UNMIS for
an additional 12 months. At the same time, we expect
to see an expansion of UNMIS operations to Darfur no
later than 1 January 2007, as has already been decided
by this Council.
