Mr. Wang Xuexian (China) (interpretation from Chinese): The Chinese delegation is very pleased to see
you, Mr. President, participating in and presiding over this
morning's meeting. The recent successful visit to China of
His Excellency the Foreign Minister of your country will
contribute to the development of good-neighbourly and
friendly relations between our two countries.

The fate of refugees should stir our deepest sympathy,
as they belong to the most unfortunate group in society.
The refugee problem plaguing the international community
has defied solution for a long time. In recent years, regional
conflicts, territorial disputes and ethnic and religious
contradictions have further aggravated the outflow of
refugees. This has not only plunged numerous innocent
people into dire situations, with lasting consequences for
the social stability and economic development of the
countries concerned, but also inflicted a heavy burden on
many neighbouring countries.

Though the refugee problem in conflict regions is
attributed to different causes, its solution, and the provision
of humanitarian assistance to refugees, are the joint
responsibility of the international community as a whole.
But I want to emphasize that, as far as the United Nations
is concerned, humanitarian activities should be undertaken
mainly by the relevant departments and agencies, while the
Security Council should involve itself mainly with the
settlement of political and security-related issues. It is
therefore necessary to make a distinction between the two,
both in discussions and in practice.

The protection of refugees and the provision of
humanitarian assistance to refugees in areas of conflict is a
complicated and arduous task. We have noted that the
relevant United Nations humanitarian agencies, especially
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, have made tremendous efforts in this regard, as
has the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC).
We greatly appreciate and will continue to support their
efforts. The staff of these agencies often work under
difficult and perilous conditions. They have toiled and
even given their precious lives for the noble humanitarian
cause. We wish to express our sympathy and pay tribute
to them.

The Security Council shoulders the heavy
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security entrusted to it by the United Nations Charter.
The question of how to promote peaceful settlement of
regional conflicts and the protection of refugees and
humanitarian assistance through peacekeeping operations
merits in-depth study.

In our view, compliance with the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter - particularly
with regard to respect for State sovereignty and for the
views of the States and parties concerned - and strict
neutrality remain important principles for international
humanitarian assistance.

The political will and willingness to cooperate on the
part of the States and parties concerned are the key to the
success of conflict resolution and humanitarian assistance.
Furthermore, judging from many ongoing conflict
situations, it is essential to achieve national reconciliation
and eliminate hostility and hatred. The international
community should make greater efforts to promote peace.
The resolution of conflicts by such peaceful means as
good offices, mediation and negotiation is in itself an
effective way to protect refugees.
In United Nations peacekeeping operations and
humanitarian relief activities, there is a tendency towards
frequently invoking Chapter VII of the Charter, or even
authorizing the use of force. This, rather than being
helpful, will more often than not further complicate
problems. Therefore, we are not in favour of such an
approach. We are of the view that in rare cases, when the
use of force is indeed necessary for the protection of the
delivery of humanitarian relief and the safety and freedom
of movement of United Nations peacekeepers, the
authorization to use force must be strictly confined to
self-defence. It should not be used indiscriminately, still
less for retaliation, or in any way hurt innocent civilians.

As a Chinese saying goes, "prevention is better than
cure". We are of the view that the United Nations should
seek the root causes of regional conflicts and
humanitarian crises so as to suit the remedy to each case
and target solutions to the cause.

 

Issues such as the provision of humanitarian assistance
and the protection, voluntary repatriation and resettlement
of refugees should be integrated in order to work out a
comprehensive solution. The international community
should make great efforts in this regard. The Chinese
delegation believes that while "preventive deployment" is
being much talked about, there is the need to seriously
consider "preventive development", that is, to eradicate the
root causes of the refugee situation by encouraging national
unity, promoting economic development and maintaining
national stability.

