Mr. Wolff (United States of America): Let me
also thank the Secretary-General for his report, as well
as Assistant Secretary-General Fernandez-Taranco for
his briefing. We welcome him to his new position and
congratulate him on his first appearance before the
Council.

The United States is firmly committed to working
towards a comprehensive and lasting peace in the
Middle East, including a two-State solution, with Israel
and Palestine living side by side in peace and security.
President Obama is personally engaged in that effort,
and he will continue to lead it.

In consultation with States in the region and
beyond, the United States is working vigorously to
create the conditions for the prompt resumption and
early conclusion of negotiations to end the Israeli-
Palestinian and Arab-Israeli conflicts. My
Government's Special Envoy, Senator George Mitchell,
is again in the region today, consulting with his
counterparts about the way forward. As Special Envoy
Mitchell emphasized yesterday, comprehensive peace
is the only way to guarantee stability, security and
prosperity for all States in the region. We will need
Arabs and Israelis alike to work with us to succeed.

As we move forward, we should recall that all
parties have responsibilities. With Israel and the
Palestinians, those responsibilities centre on fulfilling
the Road Map commitments. With Israel, our focus is
on settlements, outposts and movement in the West
Bank. With the Palestinians, our focus includes their
commitment to provide effective security in areas
under their control, to continue important security and
other reforms and to end incitement. With the Arab
States, we are seeking increased support for the
Palestinian Authority and forward movement on their
offer to normalize relations with Israel, made in the
2002 Arab Peace Initiative. As a concrete gesture, we
urge the leaders of Arab States to do their part by
taking meaningful steps towards normalization.

We have been working intensively with the Israeli
Government to deal with the issue of settlement
activity. For decades, United States Administrations
have had a consistent position on that subject. While
we recognize that those decisions are difficult, we are
asking Israel to uphold commitments it has made,
including to stop settlements and to dismantle outposts.

At the same time, Israel is taking positive steps to
ease the living conditions of Palestinians and to create
circumstances that can help lead to the establishment
of a viable Palestinian State. Over the past several
months, Israel has removed, or eased conditions at,
several key checkpoints in the West Bank. The Israeli
military has also withdrawn its troops to the outskirts
of four cities. If expanded and sustained, these changes
should have a significant impact on Palestinian
freedom of movement, economic development and
growth and overall quality of life. We expect that this
process will continue.

These positive developments make it all the more
imperative that we work together to support the
Palestinian Authority and its non-partisan, transparent
programmes that aim to improve the lives of ordinary
Palestinians throughout the West Bank and Gaza. The
World Bank and the International Monetary Fund
(IMF) have endorsed the Palestinian Authority's 2009
budget and the accounting controls it has put in place.

But the Palestinian Authority's domestic revenue
is still not enough to cover all its operational expenses
and to continue security and institutional reforms.
According to IMF projections for 2009, the Palestinian
Authority needs $120 million each month in donor
assistance to cover its operational expenses. Yet donor
support has failed to keep up with the Palestinian
Authority's needs, falling almost $50 million short on
an average monthly basis during the first quarter of the
year. Thus, the Palestinian Authority is accumulating
arrears and unsustainable levels of debt to private
banks, threatening its financial stability.

On 24 July, Secretary of State Clinton announced
the transfer of $200 million in direct budget support
from the United States to the Palestinian Authority. We
call on other countries that wish to see a strong, viable
Palestinian State to join us in providing such concrete
support to the Palestinian Authority.

On the security front, the Palestinian Authority is
taking its responsibilities for security sector reform
seriously. To date, 1,998 Palestinian security personnel
have completed training in Jordan and have been
deployed to the West Bank. Another full battalion of
roughly 500 men will begin training in August. These
efforts must continue in conjunction with the
invigorated efforts to promote the rule of law, so that
Palestinians can live in the secure environment they
have long deserved and so that they can demonstrate
that Palestine will be a responsible State in the region.

The unimpeded distribution throughout Gaza of
humanitarian assistance, including food, fuel and
medical treatment, remains a pressing issue. As
Secretary Clinton has said, progress towards the goals
we seek is more likely to grow out of opportunity than
out of futility, out of hope than out of misery. By
ensuring the delivery and distribution of humanitarian
assistance to Gaza, we aim to foster the conditions in
which a Palestinian State can be fully realized: a State
that is a responsible partner, a State at peace with Israel
and with its Arab neighbours, a State accountable to its
people, a State that Palestinians everywhere can be
proud of, a State that is respected around the world.
The United States continues to urge the Government of
Israel to ensure that United Nations and other
humanitarian agencies are able to go about their work.

Moreover, all United Nations Member States,
including those in the region, must work to ensure the
end of illicit smuggling of arms and ammunition into
Gaza, lest Hamas restock its arsenal and spark further
conflict. My Government therefore supports reopening
Gaza's border crossings in a controlled manner, with an
appropriate monitoring regime involving international
and Palestinian Authority participation.

Arab States also have responsibilities, in
particular to support the legitimate Palestinian
Authority and help President Abbas and Prime Minister
Fayyad, thus demonstrating that negotiations, not the
terrorism and violence chosen by Hamas, are the path
to an independent and viable State.

President Obama has also called for Arab States
to take clear and unambiguous steps towards
normalization with Israel in the context of significant
Israeli actions, in order to advance our shared goal of
comprehensive peace in the Middle East and stability
for all the region's people. The Arab Peace Initiative,
supported by the 57 members of the Organization of
the Islamic Conference, was a positive step, but more
is needed. Those who embraced the proposal should
taken meaningful steps now, and that includes
contributing to a more positive international backdrop
to our efforts for peace in international forums,
including here at the United Nations. We will be
looking for early signs of such a change.
The Quartet remains the most effective
instrument for marshalling the international
community's diplomatic efforts in support of Middle
East peace. In Trieste last month, the Quartet
underscored that the only viable solution to the conflict
is one that fulfils the aspirations of both parties for
independent homelands: two States for two peoples
living side by side in peace and security. It also
welcomed Prime Minister Netanyahu's and President
Abbas's commitment to the two-State solution. The
Quartet voiced its support for Palestinian unity in
pursuit of such a solution. It called on all Palestinians to
commit themselves to non-Violence, recognition of Israel
and acceptance of previous agreements, as well as to the
obligation to facilitate the reconstruction of Gaza and the
organization of elections.

I should note here that since the most recent
Security Council consultation on the Middle East we
have marked the third year that Gilad Shalit has been
held in captivity by Hamas, in direct contradiction of
international law. To compound that grave violation,
Hamas has never allowed the International Committee
of the Red Cross access to Corporal Shalit. We
encourage all efforts to secure Gilad Shalit's immediate
release.

Events in Lebanon over the past several weeks
have underscored the importance of full
implementation of Security Council resolutions 1559
(2004) and 1701 (2006). Implementing those
resolutions is the only sure path to protecting
Lebanon's sovereignty, stability and independence. As
the Council heard last week, on 14 July a series of
explosions shook a house in the village of Khirbat
Salim, well south of the Litani river. Initial findings
point to a large quantity of arms and ammunition being
stored there in serious violation of resolution 1701
(2006), with all evidence pointing to Hizbullah. The
Khirbat Salim events clearly demonstrate the urgent
need to bring arms in Lebanon under legitimate control
of the State and the need for the international
community to remain fully committed to supporting the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) in
its mission.

We are deeply concerned about the threat that
such weapons pose to the civilian populations in both
Israel and Lebanon. By Hizbullah's own admission, it
is continuing to rearm. That is a dangerous
development which represents a severe violation of a
core objective of resolution 1701 (2006), since it was
Hizbullah that launched the 2006 war that neither
Israel nor Lebanon sought.

We join the Secretary-General in calling on
Hizbullah to disarm and to transform itself into a solely
political party. We also call for UNIFIL and the
Lebanese Government to act energetically to follow up
on information about Hizbullah's weapons stocks and
call for full and unimpeded investigation into the
explosion of the weapons cache at Khirbat Salim.

Resolving that situation would reassure the
Government of Israel that its northern border and
citizens are secure. Israel has said that, until it has such
assurances, it will persist with its reconnaissance
overflights of Lebanon. While we recognize those
overflights also as violations of the Blue Line, we
understand Israel's justification for them. Simply put,
we have not succeeded in ensuring that Lebanon has
secured its borders in order to prevent the entry of
illegal arms or related materiel. In short, Hizbullah has
intentionally perpetuated the threats that lead to these
Blue Line violations.

The United States remains firmly committed to
supporting UNIFIL and the Lebanese Armed Forces in
their efforts to fully implement the provisions of
resolution 1701 (2006). We stand firmly in support of
Lebanon's State institutions, and that includes
providing the Lebanese Armed Forces with support to
protect Lebanon and its citizens, pursue international
peace and security and implement the resolutions of
the Security Council.

