Mr. Mohamed (Maldives): I wish to thank
Sweden, this month's presidency, for holding this open
debate on children and armed conflict. The Maldives
congratulates the Council on today's adoption of
resolution 2427 (2018), on children in armed conflict,
which the Maldives was pleased to co-sponsor. The
resolution provides a comprehensive framework for
mainstreaming the protection, rights, well-being and
empowerment of children affected by armed conflicts.

Children carrying automatic rifles that are taller
than them, or little girls and boys rescued from the
rubble of buildings shattered by missiles, are images
that have endured with us for so many decades. These
are images that come to mind when we think of children
and armed conflicts. There are tens of thousands of
children who are affected by or who suffer from armed
conflicts - the thousands of children who are killed
or massacred, and those who have to live with scars of
abuse in conflicts for the rest of their lives.

Open debates such as this and resolutions such as the
one that the Council adopted today will be meaningful
only if we, the Member States, are sincere in our efforts
in implementing the resolutions. Members of the
Security Council can start such an effort by reducing
the flow of weapons from their countries to conflict
zones. The Council can also forge a closer link between
the topic of children in armed conflict and other
broader topics on conflict resolution, such as sustaining
peace, or the discussions on the protection of civilians
In almost every instance, it is the supply of weapons,
both legal and illegal, that exacerbates conflicts. At the
same time, the Council has to, as a matter of urgency,
take a more holistic approach to promoting the causes
of peace. Attempts to manage crises or to respond to
developments in conflict hotspots should not define
the Council.

The Council should work with UNICEF and the
United Nations Development Programme to encourage
national Governments to take stronger actions in
promoting the key aspects of the resolution. Real
progress can be made through longer-term development
strategies. The Council must recognize the specific
needs and vulnerabilities of children in situations of
armed conflict.

No child should be trapped in any conflict or war,
for it is our responsibility to ensure their safety. We can
achieve that only if we, the international community,
work together to address the most fundamental root
causes of conflicts. We must devise our strategies to
realize the aspirations of children.

