Mrs. Le Fraper du Hellen (France) (spoke in French): As previous speakers have done, I would like
to warmly thank the British delegation - you yourself,
Mr. President, and your entire team - for a very
effective presidency in August.

I simply wish to touch upon a few topics.

First, on a positive note, I appreciate the unity of
the Council and its productivity on a number of topics
that are important for us, including the renewal of the
mandate for United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL), which is very important in the context of
the regional crisis. We need to limit the repercussions
of that crisis in Lebanon, and we hope that all Member
States will continue to support the role of UNIFIL.

Another example of a unified approach in the fight
against terrorism is that this month the Council finally
took measures against the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL). We welcome the efforts of the British
delegation to achieve the adoption of resolution 2170
(2014), which finally condemns the terrorist acts of
ISIL and in which for the first time the Council also
mentions foreign combatants. That was very important
for us. We hope that the Council summit that is being
prepared by our American partners for the upcoming
ministerial week on the topic of terrorist combatants
will be another opportunity for deepen our action on
this topic at the highest level.

There was further relative unity on Libya, since the
United Nations has a role to play on this issue, and the
Council acted in a very timely way. Just as the issue of
Libya's future was in question, the Council adopted a
resolution (resolution 2174 (2014)) that strengthens the
arms embargo and extends individual sanctions against
those who hinder political transition. The President
of the French Republic has indicated that exceptional
United Nations support for the Libyan authorities
to re-establish the State is necessary. This is a topic
that we will continue to follow closely in the month of
September.

There was also unity in the Council regarding a
number of crises in Africa. In that regard, my delegation
would like to welcome the meeting on 7 August (see S/PV.7237), presided over by the British Minister
for African Affairs, which made it possible to bring
together the key countries of the Great Lakes region
and to recall the major priorities of the Council. Those
priorities were set out in a press statement (SC/11533)
adopted on 26 August, which recalls in particular that
the implementation of resolution 2147 (2014), on the
neutralization of armed groups, notably the Forces
democratiques de liberation du Rwanda, is required.

Also on an optimistic note, we saw the renewal of
the mandate of African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur, the accent in that resolution 2173
(2014) being on the strategic review of the force and on
the importance of stronger public reporting on human
rights.

On the other hand, and our second point - and the
Secretary- General mentionedthis during thepublic debate
that you organized, Mr. President (see S/PV.7247) - in
the Council there are serious divisions that undermine
the Organization's capability to act. We continue to
regret that, in the context of Syria, the tireless support
of certain delegations for a repressive regime did not
enable coordinated action by the Council, thereby
clearing the way for extremists and terrorists. France
will continue to take action against the abusive use of
the veto by delegations, which was evident in the case
of Syria. Of course, there are divisions on the issue
of Ukraine that were just revealed in the Council (see S/PV.7253). It is clear that Russia's persistent attitude is
to simply destabilize the country.

The third point I would like to make is on another
topic. The Council may now have an opportunity to
play a role that it has not played to date. I am thinking
of Gaza. An unlimited ceasefire has been announced
by the Egyptian authorities. We encourage the parties
to comply with the ceasefire and to participate in
the discussions organized under Egyptian auspices.
However, in coordination with our partners from the
European Union and from the Security Council, we
would like to make further progress by contributing to
a solution based on such an agreement. We believe, as
do others, that the Security Council has a role to play
in that matter.

Finally, I would like to conclude with the focus on
conflict prevention that was put forth by the British
presidency, particularly from the early warning
perspective. I would also mention the visit to Europe
that recalled, through history, the importance of
preventing crises. We consider that very important.

The adoption of resolution 2171 (2014) was also a
welcome event.
The debate on conflict prevention (see S/PV.7247)
allowed the Council to listen for the last time to
Ms. Pillay, United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, as she will be completing her term.
Under her mandate, the interaction between the
Security Council and the High Commissioner grew
ever closer, which nevertheless poses a heavy burden
on our work - ifI may say so. We have noted that
among her final recommendations she suggested a
monthly briefing to the Council by her successor to the
post of High Commissioner of Human Rights.

We believe that requires careful consideration, as it
would provide opportunities for the High Commissioner
to play the role of providing early warning, rather than
coming to brief the Council, at our request, when a
crisis is already under way. During the debate convened
by the presidency, the Council also had a chance to

reinforce the expanded role of the Secretary-General in
early warning efforts, which was important.

In conclusion, I would also like to thank you,
Mr. President, for your efforts to address working
methods and to limit our speaking time. We also share
the presidency's concern to have public discussions
in the Chamber, for reasons of transparency, but also
greater use of interactive consultations to accelerate
decision-making, as decisions signal the Council's
unity, as I had mentioned earlier.

I would like to express to the United States our
every wish for success in the month of September.

