Mr. Vieira (Brazil): I thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing today's open debate. I would like to extend
my gratitude to the Chef de Cabinet of the Secretary-
General, Ms. Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, and to all
other briefers.
Brazil is aware that no country is immune
to terrorism and has been attentive to prevention
domestically and at the regional and subregional levels.
We recently updated our legislation to include the crimes
of preparatory acts of terrorism and of recruitment
of foreign terrorist combatants. We also simplified
the procedures for freezing the assets of terrorists so
listed by the Council. We were successful during the
2014 World Cup and in the last year's Olympic Games,
when we consolidated inter-agency cooperation, at both
national and international levels, to specifically prevent
acts of terrorism or the entry of suspected terrorists to
critical places like airports.

Critical infrastructure is indeed a preferred target of
terrorist organizations. The disruption of the provision
of basic services can, after all, have a destabilizing
effect in our societies. As highlighted in the concept
note (S/2017/104, annex) prepared for this debate, one
of the side effects of the advances in information and
communication technologies (ICTs) is the increased
vulnerability of critical infrastructure. Establishing
norms that identify and proscribe the misuse of ICTs
and a framework to enhance cooperation among States
in countering it would contribute to better addressing
this challenge.

The United Nations Group of Governmental
Experts on Developments in the Field of Information
and Telecommunications in the Context of International
Security had called on the international community
to assist in improving the security of critical ICT
infrastructure, developing technical skills and advising
on appropriate legislation, strategies and regulation
in that area. The need to support capacity-building
in less developed countries is integral to any strategy
to combat the malicious use of ICTs, and will require
greater and sustainable investment in infrastructure
and services, capacity-building, the promotion of
joint research and the development and transfer of
technology. Differences in the ability to use and develop
ICTs represents a knowledge divide that perpetuates
inequalities, such as between developed and developing
countries, and that may increase vulnerabilities in an
interconnected world.

The use of the Internet and social media by terrorist
groups illustrates the evolving nature of the challenge
that we are facing. Those platforms are also being used
for inciting hatred, for recruitment and for unleashing
attacks on critical infrastructure. As we seek to
counter those trends, we must safeguard the freedom
of expression and the right to privacy. In that context,
we highlight the joint initiative by Brazil and Germany
that led to the General Assembly and Human Rights
Council resolutions on that issue (resolution 68/167 and resolution 28/16, respectively).

Repressive measures are necessary but not
sufficient to eliminating terrorism. Border control,
air and maritime security and law enforcement must
be coupled with efforts to address structural factors
conducive to terrorism - in particular those associated
with protracted social, political, economic and
cultural exclusion.

We must take action against measures that do not
respect diversity and ignore our common humanity,
such as those that associate terrorism with specific
cultures, religions or ethnic groups. We must be wary
of rhetoric that fuels xenophobia and prejudice. Certain
responses to the refugee crisis and to recent migration
movements are also of concern, as they might increase
rather than decrease the risks associated with violent
extremism conducive to terrorism.

Let us also not lose sight of the protracted conflicts
that may directly or indirectly fuel terrorist agendas.
The failure to deal with ongoing crises in the Middle
East, including the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, is a case
in point.

Terrorist groups seek to provoke Governments into
overreacting, so as to exploit their narratives of abuse
and oppression. Counterterrorism will be effective only
to the extent that it is consistent with the Charter of
the United Nations and other norms of international
law, including human rights law and humanitarian and
refugee law.

We have noted an increase in the number of letters
submitted to the Security Council under Article 51 of
the Charter, seeking to justify resorting to military
action in the context of counter-terrorism, usually ex
post facto. At the most recent open debate on working
methods (see S/PV.7740), Brazil stressed the need
for follow-up to such communications and for an
assessment as to whether the obligations laid out in the
Charter were being fulfilled.

There can be no justification for terrorism. Brazil
reiterates its commitment to a multidimensional
response to that threat and remains convinced that
cooperation and dialogue within the United Nations
will enhance our capacity to achieve the needed results.

