Ms. Mogherini (spoke in French): It is an honour
for me to speak before the Security Council for the third
time. Allow me to underscore that I am proud to do
so at a time when five European Union member States
are sitting around the table and when cooperation and
coordination among the European Union member States
in the Security Council has increased enormously. The
decision to strengthen that coordination came directly
from member States for reasons of principle, but above
all because we are aware that we are stronger and more
effective together; we are aware of our responsibility;
and we can and want to put that strength at the service
of the United Nations, multilateralism and a cooperative
approach to international relations.

We share the same values and interests, starting
with the defence of multilateralism and the United
Nations system. The European Union and the United
Nations were born from the same founding idea,
after the two world wars: the idea that, in order to
avoid another disaster, a multilateral mechanism was
needed - a mechanism to work towards building
win-win solutions as the only alternative to a new
continental and world war.

For us that idea is still valid, but over the decades
our elective affinity has grown even stronger. There is a
European path to peace and security, which is identical
to the United Nations path to peace and security.
It is a path built on mediation and peacekeeping
operations, on sustainable development and the
protection of human rights, on humanitarian assistance
and on the development of, and respect for, shared rules.
Our support for the United Nations and multilateralism
is a choice based on our values and, at the same time, it
is a pragmatic choice. A decision taken in a multilateral
context is by definition more democratic and inclusive,
but also more solid and sustainable over time.

(Spoke in English)

The European Union will therefore never be
heard questioning whether the United Nations serves
its interests and values, because we in Europe know
that the Organization serves universal interests and
values. And we know that precondition to be essential
for building sustainable peace and security, which is
always in our own ultimate interests. The question we
always ask as Europeans, rather, is "What can we do
to support the United Nations?". For working with the
United Nations is the best way to serve our collective
interests - the interests of peace, security and global
progress. That is why the European Union has increased
its cooperation with the United Nations across all fields
of action. Allow me to update the Council on some of
our main fields of cooperation with the United Nations,
starting with conflict resolution.

Conflicts in our times are more complex than
ever. They always have local, regional and global
dimensions, and solutions can be built only when
those three dimensions align. That is possible only in
a multilateral framework. That is clearly true for Syria.
Since the beginning of the war, we have said that the
only sustainable solution can come from the United
Nations-led process and from the implementation of
resolution 2254 (2015). A negotiated political transition
towards a democratic, inclusive, reconciled and united
Syria - that is the only realistic path out ofthe conflict.
Anything else would not lead to a stable, sustainable,
secure, inclusive or prosperous Syria. That is why we
fully support Special Envoy Pedersen in his difficult
but essential work.

Precisely to support the United Nations-led
process, tomorrow the European Union will co-chair
with the United Nations the third Brussels Conference
on Supporting the Future of Syria and the Region. Its
aim will be to mobilize international support to the
United Nations-led political process, gather pledges to
guarantee humanitarian aid for Syrians, both inside and
outside of their country, and support the countries of the
region, starting with Jordan, Lebanon and Turkey. After
eight years of war, while war continues, the people of
Syria are still hoping and preparing for peace, and there
are some little signs of hope coming from the region.

The Stockholm Agreement on Yemen tells us that
steps towards peace can always be possible, even after
immense suffering. We are fully and actively supporting
Special Envoy Martin Griffiths. The Security Council's
continuous engagement will be crucial to his success
and to the implementation of the Stockholm Agreement.
The possibility of peace will not turn into reality if we
do not invest all our energy in it.

That is also true for Libya, where we are working as
the European Union in the closest possible cooperation
with Special Representative Ghassan Salame, and
we are enforcing resolution 2420 (2018), on the arms
embargo. We are coordinating our action directly
between the European Union and the United Nations,
but also through the quartet that brings together the
United Nations, the European Union, the League of
Arab States and the African Union, in coordination
that, to me, is essential. Together we can help Libyan
players to truly move towards reconciliation, through
a national conference to be held in Libya and elections
with the right conditions in place. The European Union
is and will continue to support that process with all
its means.

Another country that is clearly at a crossroads
this week, and where European Union-United Nations
cooperation is key, is Afghanistan. Last year was the
deadliest ever for civilians since the start of the war
in 2001, and yet 2019 could be the year of peace. We
are following very closely the contacts between the
representatives of the Taliban and the United States
Government. We believe the Taliban need to engage
in intra-Afghan talks with the Government in Kabul,
together with other parts of the Afghan political
spectrum. Those talks should be accompanied by
confidence-building measures and a lasting ceasefire.

The European Union has offered to support peace
in Afghanistan with five practical contributions, which
I presented in Geneva a few months ago. First, we can
serve as a guarantor of the peace process; secondly, we
can help make the process more inclusive, involving in
particular women, minorities and all sectors of civil
society; thirdly, we can help with reforms; fourthly, we
can support the reintegration of former fighters; and
last but not least, we can promote regional trade and
infrastructure with all of Afghanistan's neighbours. We
are now following this up with our partners, first of
all within Afghanistan, but obviously also in the region
and in the international community, starting with our
friends in the United States.

I have talked about four conflicts in our greater
region, but allow me to also look to this side of
the Atlantic. The situation in Venezuela has been
deteriorating dramatically. The crisis affecting
the country has political and institutional causes;
it is not a natural disaster. Its solution needs to be
peaceful, political and democratic. We believe that no
military development, from inside or outside of the
country, would be acceptable and a solution cannot
be and should never be imposed from the outside. We
believe that an international initiative can help build
a peaceful and democratic way out of the crisis. For
that reason, we have set up an international contact
group with European and Latin American countries
to help create the conditions for a political process
that would lead to free and fair presidential elections,
in accordance with the Venezuelan Constitution and
international standards.

Even when there is no multilateral framework, the
European Union tries to work to build or rebuild one. In
the meantime, we are working on Venezuela, together
with the relevant United Nations agencies, to ensure
that humanitarian aid reaches those in need inside and
outside the country, following the key principles of
humanitarian law and avoiding any politicization of the
aid delivery. In all these cases, our strongest interest is
to restore peace and security, and that is possible only
in a multilateral framework. We always work in support
of the United Nations and for peace.

The United Nations is the key partner for us on
conflict resolution in Africa. From the Central African
Republic to the Sudan, from the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to Guinea-Bissau - wherever there is
a peace process and a United Nations peacekeeping
mission, the European Union is there to support
politically, financially and with our own missions
on the ground. New threats to peace and security in
Africa have an impact on the stability of both our two
continents - ours is the closest to Africa - and I would
mention in particular the growing terrorism threats and
transboundary criminal activities that are challenging
our security on both sides of the Mediterranean Sea.

The role of United Nations peacekeepers has
sometimes been questioned. We in the European Union
believe that it is an essential tool towards sustainable
peace and security. The European Union Member
States, taken together, contribute one-third of the
United Nations peacekeeping budget. That is more
than any other global Power, and we are proud of
that. We also believe in African solutions to African
challenges. African Union peace support operations
are a vital instrument for the promotion of international
environment of peace and security on the African
continent and globally. The African Union is pursuing
major financial and institutional reforms in order to
become a major player for regional security. I was
honoured to be present at the latest African Union
Summit, held in Addis Ababa just a few weeks ago.
This is a process we fully support, and we should do
so, including through the possibility of utilizing United
Nations contributions for African Union peace support
operations authorized by the Security Council, and in
compliance with international humanitarian, human
rights and refugee law.

I would like to mention two cases I particularly care
about 4 which does not mean that I do not care about
the others, but these two examples are particularly
appropriate in these times.

The first is Mali. I believe that a sort ofrenaissance
of Mali is possible, and I believe that a solution to the
problems that Mali is facing can come only from the
people of Mali themselves. Just a few days ago, I met
with the representatives of the movements that signed
the 2015 Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in
Mali. This was my second meeting with them to discuss
some key political and institutional reforms, including
security sector reform. The European Union is the first
supporter of the Joint Force created by the Group of
Five for the Sahel - a regional solution to regional
challenges. As these processes take place, a United
Nations presence must be guaranteed. We will continue
to support the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali with our two
European training and capacity-building missions on
the ground.

Something similar can be said for Somalia. The
Federal Government of Somalia is working to take
greater responsibility for the security of the country.
While Somali forces have to step up and take full
responsibility for security in their own country, which
is the only way make security in Somalia sustainable,
they still rely on the support of their international
partners - first and foremost the European
Union - starting with the African Union Mission
in Somalia, which the European Union continues to
support and finance. We know that the transition of
responsibilities can only happen gradually, but it has
to happen, in connection with the path of reforms.
The United Nations and the its Assistance Mission in
Somalia have a special role to play in coordinating the
international community's work in the country, and for
that reason we look forward to the appointment of a
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General.

Clearly, our cooperation with the United Nations
and Africa goes well beyond peacekeeping, but in
all sectors our approach is the same. Africa wants
and needs to take responsibility for its own security,
its own economy, its own present and its own future,
and as Europeans we want to accompany our brothers
and sisters on this path. We have moved from the 01d
donor-recipient relationship to a partnership of equals
in particular during the Abidjan Summit a year and a
half ago. We set our common priorities together and
we try to understand how everyone can contribute to
achieving them by each playing its own role.

This new approach is also changing the way we work
together in the United Nations context. For over a year
now, we have been working in a trilateral format with
the African Union and the United Nations. Our common
work began on a common challenge - the dramatic
situation of African migrants in Libya's detention
centres. We realized together that we could empty those
centres and save lives only by working together, and
thanks to our cooperation in one year we have helped
over 30,000 people to return voluntarily to their homes
or find international protection whenever needed. This
is probably our most innovative contribution to a more
effective multilateralism - regional organizations
joining forces on the ground and in triangulation with
the United Nations agencies.

I would like now to mention two more contributions
of the European Union to the multilateral system,
starting with reconciliation in a region closer to the
European Union reconciliation - the Balkans.

Let me thank every member of the Security Council
for their constructive approach to the dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina. For a full-fledged resumption
of the talks, the tariffs that have been imposed by
the Government of Kosovo must be revoked. The
day the tariffs are suspended, I will immediately call
for a new meeting of the dialogue to reach a legally
binding agreement that should address all outstanding
issues and fully normalize relations between Pristina
and Belgrade.

As Council members know, I personally facilitate
the dialogue, but the dialogue does not belong to me,
the European Union or any of us around this table. The
Dialogue belongs to the parties. It is up to them to find
an agreement that would be acceptable, convenient and
sustainable to both. At the same time, a final agreement
will need to be in line with international law and
supported by the Security Council. The Council's role
is and will be key, and we are ready - I am personally
ready - to intensify our exchanges with all members
of the Security Council on this.

Staying in the Balkans, let me say that this year we
have already seen something historical in that region.
The Prespa agreement is another positive example of
European Union-United Nations cooperation and a
remarkable example of political leadership by the two
countries, North Macedonia and Greece. A positive
conclusion to the dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina would give even more hope to the whole region
and would serve as a model and inspiration to Europe
and the world.

I have mentioned a number of geographic priorities,
but we all know that most of the challenges we face have
a global dimension. So let me conclude by referring
to the European Union's support for global solutions
to global challenges. From the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change to the Sustainable Development
Goals, progress on these agreements would have been
impossible without the strong commitment of the
European Union and, most importantly, we continue to
work and the Security Council can continue to count on
us for their full implementation.

This is a moment in human history when cooperation
among nations and respect for the rules that govern
our international systems are more needed than ever.
The concept of global governance risks being replaced
by the 01d law that "might makes right". We need to
avoid our system of rules from being disrupted and our
multilateral system from being called into question.

A clear violation of the fundamental principles of
our international system came with Russia's illegal
annexation of the Crimean peninsula and its behaviour
in eastern Ukraine. And the situation in Crimea also
led to the militarization ofthe Sea of Azov. That is what
happens when international law is violated - tensions
rise, conflicts proliferate and we all lose.

Russia is an important interlocutor for the European
Union. We work well together on several files, from
Iran to the Arctic. Yet it is no mystery that we are
deeply worried about certain behaviours, not only in
Ukraine but also in Salisbury, as well as about the use of
espionage against the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons. We have also expressed
serious concerns about Russia's compliance with the
Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty. We need to
work to preserve the Treaty and for Russia to return to
full compliance. Europe is not party to the Treaty, but is
clearly extremely interested in its existence.

The global architecture for disarmament and
non-proliferation is being questioned like never before.
To us that is one of the greatest paradoxes of our times,
because deterrence is clearly no longer enough for
preventing a war, given the fragmentation of centres
of power in today's world. A new arms race - and a
nuclear arms race in particular - can only make the
world less secure. Our collective security requires a
solid multilateral architecture for non-proliferation
and disarmament.

That is why the European Union will continue
to work to preserve the nuclear deal with Iran. Iran's
implementation of its nuclear-related commitments
has been confirmed in 14 consecutive reports of the
International Atomic Energy Agency, the latest just a
couple of weeks ago. Alongside Iran's implementation,
the lifting of nuclear-related sanctions is an essential
part of the deal. We will therefore continue to work
to preserve the economic dividends of sanctions-
lifting. This is a contribution to our collective security
on the part of the European Union and its member
States, and I would like to thank in particular France,
Germany and the United Kingdom. It is also a way to
prevent nuclear proliferation, especially relevant in an
extremely tense region. Finally, it is also a contribution
to preserving the credibility of the Security Council,
which endorsed the Iran deal through resolution 2231
(2015), adopted unanimously. We have serious issues
with Iran's behaviour on other matters, starting with
ballistic missiles, human rights and regional dynamics.
But without a nuclear deal, discussion with Iran would
be much more difficult, not easier. Dismantling a deal
that works and delivers will never be a good starting
point to advance our collective security interests.

The European Union will continue to support
all efforts to strengthen and expand the global
non-proliferation regime. The Council can count on our
contribution towards the full, verifiable and irreversible
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula. We have
imposed the toughest sanctions on North Korea and, at
the same time, have kept channels open to encourage
dialogue at all levels. We are ready to support the
difficult process under the way with our expertise and
our political support.

Our approach is always to build and never to
dismantle. We do not believe that the current multilateral
system is perfect. Nothing is perfect. That is why we
fully support the reform agenda of Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres and are contributing in practice to a
more effective multilateral system. We need to expand
and improve the system for global governance, not
weaken or demolish it.

When the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)
faced a serious funding crisis, the European Union and
its member States stepped in to fill the gap and prevent
a sudden cessation of the Agency's work. We want
UNRWA to continue its vital reforms, but we cannot
afford the collapse of the Agency and the ensuing chaos.
The Agency's work is essential, first and foremost to
the lives of millions of people, but also to preserve the
viability of a two-State solution between Israel and
Palestine. We believe that the only alternative to the
two-State solution is turmoil and violence in the holy
places. That is why the European Union and its member
States will continue to work together with international
partners to preserve the viability of a two-State solution
in the holy places.

Protecting and reforming the United Nations is
our collective responsibility. As Europeans we feel
that responsibility because we see the United Nations
as our common home. It is the centre of gravity of
the international system, the tool we have to build a
more peaceful and cooperative global order. The
United Nations is not only a covenant of States, it also
represents hope for millions of human beings who still
suffer from the same human rights violations that the
world collectively decided to ban after the misery of the
Second World War.

The European Union is contributing to a stronger
and more effective multilateral system. We are
investing in our cooperation with the United Nations
system as never before because we want to assume our
responsibility for our common home. I believe that we
must all renew our commitment to support the United
Nations - politically, financially and diplomatically,
here in New York as well as on the ground, in all the
peace process that need a multilateral framework to
succeed. For us Europeans this is the best investment
we could make. We will continue to support the
United Nations and its work by collaborating as much
as possible with our partners and friends worldwide
that believe in a cooperative multilateral international
order, as we do.

