Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
The Mexican presidency yesterday expressed its
deepest concern over the serious deterioration of the
situation in the Middle East and at the continuing lack
of implementation of Security Council resolutions.
Mexico reiterates its position today that a just and
lasting solution to the conflict should be found, based
on the implementation of resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973), 1397 (2002) and 1402 (2002) and strongly
supports the concept of a region in which Israel and
Palestine coexist side by side within secure and
mutually respected borders.

Mexico also endorses the statement made
yesterday by the Rio Group that, in keeping with
resolution 1402 (2002), both parties proceed
immediately with the implementation of a genuine
ceasefire and with the withdrawal of Israeli troops from
Palestinian cities, including Ramallah. It supports the
demand contained in resolution 1397 (2002) for an
immediate end to all acts of terrorism, provocation,
incitement and destruction.

All Security Council resolutions are mandatory
for all those involved and in all circumstances, as set
out in Article 25 of the Charter. This is not subject to
discussion. Nonetheless, despite this obligation, Israel
considers that military incursions into Palestinian cities
and its virtual siege and kidnapping of the President of
the Palestinian National Authority fall within Israel's
right to legitimate self-defence.

Mexico believes that, on the contrary, Israel is not
acting in accordance with the principles of legitimate
self-defence recognized by Article 51 of the Charter of
the United Nations. The military actions that Israel is
carrying out in the Palestinian territories will not
succeed in preventing terrorism. On the contrary,
regardless of their military or strategic objectives, the
effects and practical consequences of those actions will
lead to acts of reprisal and to new extremist actions on
the part of the Palestinians.

Israel's military actions in Palestinian territory
have involved several acts of aggression against the
civilian population, which runs totally counter to
international humanitarian law. My delegation
therefore can find no legal, moral or political
justification for the actions undertaken by Israel in the
Palestinian territories.

Mexico - firmly convinced of Israel's right to
security and repudiating as abominable acts the suicide
bombings of the Palestinians against the Israeli
population - calls on Israel to respect international
law; immediately to withdraw its troops from
Palestinian cities; and to give the President of the
Palestinian National Authority, Yasser Arafat, freedom
of movement and respect his integrity.

Mexico also calls on the Israeli authorities to
cease their military actions against the civilian
population. The people of Mexico are friends of the
people of Israel, and, on the basis of this friendship,
Mexico calls on Israel to place its trust in the United
Nations and to have recourse to the Council, seeking
here solutions that will lead to a just peace and to the
full achievement of its legitimate aspirations to live in
an international environment of security and safety.

The Palestinian Authority and its representatives
have indicated their willingness to act within the
framework of international law, deeming it the only
way to find a just solution to the conflict.

Nonetheless, the suicide bombings that are taking
place in Israel are in totally contravention of
international law. For that reason, the Palestinian
National Authority should therefore demand that these
terrorist actions cease, in accordance with the
unambiguous provisions of Security Council
resolutions 1397 (2002) and 1402 (2002).

The Palestinian National Authority cannot be
ambiguous or ambivalent in the face of a flagrant
violation of international law. Mexico believes that
President Yasser Arafat should demand the cessation of
all of these acts of terrorist Violence, as they are
contrary to the cause defended by the Palestinian
Authority and to the demands that it is making for all
parties to respect international law. That message
should be transmitted without any ambiguity or
ambivalence to the people of Palestine and to all
Palestinian organizations. Mexico considers that the
Palestinian Authority is also compelled to respect the
provisions of international humanitarian law.

The last two resolutions adopted by the Security
Council on the situation in the Middle East, including
the issue of Palestine, have been ignored. This
undermines the credibility of the Council and of the
United Nations.

Mexico believes that the Security Council must
adopt concrete, specific and effective measures in order
for its authority and resolutions to prevail. This
meeting of the Security Council is being held in
response to the request made by the international
community, which is awaiting resolute and effective
action by the United Nations to put an end to the
escalating Violence and terrorism in the Middle East,
which is threatening international security.

The Security Council remains actively seized of
the issue. Our immediate objective is to ensure,
through all of the diplomatic means at our disposal,
that the parties involved both implement resolutions
1397 (2002) and 1402 (2002).

The Security Council is endeavouring to

contribute to seeing that the mediating activities of the
"quartet" bear fruit very shortly. The declarations made
by our President, his meeting with the representatives
of Palestine and Israel, and the separate dialogue of the
15 members of the Council yesterday with the
Ambassador of Israel and the Ambassador of Palestine
have made it very clear to the Government of Israel
and of the Palestinian National Authority that the
Council is expecting both parties fully to respect and
implement the resolutions. This public debate has
contributed additional elements to the Council and will
help guide its actions.

In these circumstances, Mexico believes that the
Council must support the work of the special envoys,
particularly of General Zinni; the actions being
currently undertaken by representatives of the
European Union; and those of the Secretary-General of
the United Nations to reach agreement on a ceasefire as
soon as possible, as well as to take the political steps
necessary to allow for an urgent return to the
negotiating table.

Mexico considers that the clearer and better
defined the positions of the countries promoting these
measures, the more effective their efforts will be.
Mexico also considers that the Security Council should
now start exploring the role that it will have to play
when - as we hope - the ceasefire becomes a reality
and the political dialogue is resumed. Among these
actions, Mexico proposes that the Security Council
explore activities appropriate to the authority conferred
upon it by the Charter of the United Nations and which
are part of its past experience, such as the observation
and monitoring of ceasefires, the establishment of
zones of peace, the implementation of disarmament
programmes and the collection arms obtained by illicit
groups, the verification of security arrangements, the
adoption of confidence-building measures, the
establishment and protection of violence-free zones
and on-the-spot verification of the implementation of
agreements and of provisions of international
humanitarian law.

Finally, Mexico considers that the Security
Council has made very significant progress in its action
in the Middle East thanks to the consensus reached
among its members. We therefore feel that any future
Council action to encourage compliance with its
resolutions should be done while maintaining a
position of consensus and its unity of action.

