Mr. Burian (Slovakia): First of all, I would like
to thank Foreign Minister Karel de Gucht for his
insightful and informative statement. On behalf of my
delegation, I would like to wish Belgium a very
successful term as Chairman-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE).

We welcome the priorities of the Belgian OSCE
programme, as defined by the Chairman-in-Office, and
its focus on rebalancing the OSCE's three dimensions
by strengthening the economic dimension without
weakening the human and politico-military
dimensions. That approach fully conforms with the
conclusions of the world summit about the mutually
reinforcing and interlinked pillars of the United
Nations system and foundations for collective security.

In reaction to Foreign Minister De Gucht's
statement, I would like to stress three points.

First, the OSCE has played an important role in
turning Europe into an area of peace and stability, and
we believe that it is still needed in order to consolidate
the achievements of the 30 years since the Helsinki
Final Act was adopted. We agree that there is a need
for the institutional reform of the OSCE in order to
strengthen its capability to face new challenges and
threats to security.

There is a certain similarity between the United
Nations and OSCE, and not only in that area.

The priorities of the Belgian OSCE programme -
such as the advancement of the rule of law, the fight
against terrorism, defining a global and coherent
approach to combating organized crime, new ways to
strengthen mechanisms of non-proliferation and
disarmament, and so on - coincide with the priorities
of the United Nations and its Security Council for
building a more stable and secure world.

The commonality of goals and challenges makes
cooperation between those two organizations even
more relevant and urgent. In that connection, it is
important to note that the world summit has given new
backing to efforts to strengthen cooperation and
interaction between the United Nations and regional
organizations. So as not to waste scarce resources, that
cooperation should be based on the principles of
complementarity of action, the pooling of resources
and the proper division of labour.

We think that it is important for both
organizations to strengthen their dialogue and
interaction. Better communication should be achieved
through liaison officers and regular consultations on
matters of common interest at all appropriate levels,
including that of the Chairman-in-Office.

Secondly, throughout the years of its existence,
the OSCE has accumulated enormous potential and
expertise in the area of institution-building,
confidence-building, election monitoring, and the
protection of human and minority rights. We believe
that its valuable post-conflict and transformation
know-how may be truly inspiring for other regional
organizations. In our opinion, it could also be better
utilized and reflected in the work of United Nations
agencies and institutions, including the future work of
the newly established Peacebuilding Commission.

Last but not least, we particularly appreciate the
special attention paid by the Chairman-in-Office to the
issue of so-called frozen conflicts in Moldova,
Nagorny Karabakh and Georgia, as well as to
developments in Central Asia and to post-conflict
stabilization in the western Balkans, including the issue
of the future status of Kosovo. That is another
important area for cooperation and interaction between
the United Nations and the OSCE.

We share the appreciation expressed for the work
that the OSCE has done and is still doing in Kosovo.
We expect the OSCE Mission in Kosovo, which is a
component of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo, will remain
focused on the issues of democratization, respect for
human and minority rights, freedom of the media,
elections, the training of law enforcement authorities
and the functioning of democratic institutions, to which
Mr. De Gucht referred in his statement.

The OSCE should continue to play its important
role in the area of implementing standards for a
democratic and tolerant society in Kosovo. In our
opinion, that will be a major factor influencing the
whole process of defining the future status of Kosovo.
In this connection, I would like to ask Mr. De Gucht to
elaborate a little further on the objectives of the
Belgian chairmanship regarding the OSCE's activities
aimed at making progress in the settlement of frozen
conflicts and on the future of the OSCE mission in
Kosovo in the context of the ongoing future status
talks.
