Mr. Brammertz: Thank you, Mr. President,
for this opportunity to address the Council on our
progress towards the completion of our mandate. In
the reporting period, as we marked 20 years since the
creation of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), we witnessed significant critique
of the Tribunal's work. Never before has so much been
said and written about our cases, our legacy and our
contribution to reconciliation in the region.

Certainly for the Office of the Prosecutor, it has
been a difficult and challenging period. As a party to
the proceedings, we must accept the judgements issued.
However, we are using and will continue to use all
remaining legal mechanisms to press for the outcomes
that we think are just and which properly reflect the
culpability of the accused persons brought before the
Tribunal.

But, despite the rising crescendo of debate about
the Tribunal, we will remain focused on successfully
completing our last cases. The Karadeic' trial is now
well into the defence evidence presentation phase of
the case. If the current swift pace continues, it will
be completed before the end of this year. To promote
efficiency, the Karadeic' prosecution team has devised
cross-examinations that minimize court time While
ensuring that the evidence is properly tested.

In both the Mladic' andHadeie cases, the Prosecution
is continuing with its presentation of evidence. In
those cases too, efficiency techniques developed over
previous years are minimizing the amount of court time
used. At the same time, the Prosecution is constantly
reassessing its strategy to further expedite the process.
For example, in Mladic', the Prosecution has reduced
the number of witnesses planned from 200 to 170, after
verifying that it would not have a negative impact on
the outcome of the case. If the current pace continues,
the Prosecution will complete its cases in both Mladie
and Hadeie well before the end of this year.

The Prosecution's work on the last trials and
appeals has been helped by good cooperation from
Croatia, Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina. Each
of those countries has responded appropriately to our
requests for assistance concerning documents and
access to witnesses. We will continue to require their
prompt and effective responses to our requests in the
next reporting period.

In my recent reports and briefings to the Security
Council, problems relating to national war crimes
strategies in the former Yugoslavia - in particular, in
Bosnia and Herzegovina - have become an increasingly
disturbing refrain. Those problems remain, and urgent
action is needed on many fronts if the situation is to
be corrected. In that regard, I will travel to Sarajevo at
the end of June for in-depth discussions on the status
of the nine pending Category II cases transferred from
my Office to Bosnia and Herzegovina some years ago.
At the same time, we will hold a practical information
session in Sarajevo for entity-level prosecutors about
accessing materials from our databases. We want a
greater commitment to using the resources available in
our databases in The Hague.

We have a number of other ongoing initiatives
to build capacity, including a detailed proposal for a
coordinated and comprehensive training programme;
the development of resources to transfer expertise
from the ICTY for the purposes of sexual Violence
prosecutions, which still represents a very important
challenge for our colleagues in the region; and the joint
ICTY/European Union Liaison Prosecutor and Young
Professionals Programme, which is now in its fourth
year.

It is clear that the international community is playing
a very important role in terms of capacity-building in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We are particularly grateful to
partners such as the European Union, UN-Women, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and the United Nations Development Programme,
which are working with us on many of the initiatives
I have mentioned today. But it is also clear that our
efforts will bear little fruit until political leaders on all
sides genuinely commit to making national war crimes
strategies successful, and more needs to be done.

In the reporting period, we saw signs of progress
with the conclusion of two regional cooperation
protocols for war-crimes prosecutions: one between
Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina, and the other
between Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina. That
is a step in the right direction, but the States involved
must now turn their words into concrete actions. More
generally, we strongly encourage the responsible
authorities to make adequate resources available in
order for them to successfully implement their national
war crimes strategies. We also ask the States Members
of the United Nations to remain committed to ensuring
positive results.

I would like to highlight two other issues concerning
regional commitment to the rule of law. The first is
Serbia's work on fugitive networks. Serbia's efforts to
establish accountability for those who have assisted
ICTY fugitives to evade justice is a work in progress,
and we ask that it be finalized promptly and effectively.
The second issue is the lack of progress in locating
missing persons, including through exhuming mass
graves. During my recent visits, survivor communities
expressed significant frustration in that regard, and
authorities in the region must urgently refocus on
locating missing persons, regardless of their ethnicity.

As we enter the ICTY's twenty-first year of
operations, the thousands who survived crimes
committed during the conflicts in the former Yugoslavia
should be foremost in our minds. For them, the passage
of 20 years has little meaning. The crimes that they
lived through and the crimes that took away their loved
ones are ever-present, and we must redouble our efforts
to facilitate redress for them.

We are now just a few short weeks from the start
date of The Hague branch of the Residual Mechanism.
The parallel establishment of the Mechanism while the
ICTY's work continues has resulted in a more complex
operational framework. Nevertheless, our core concern
is to ensure an effective transition and the best possible
outcome in each one of our cases, regardless of whether
it will be ultimately completed by the ICTY or the
Mechanism.

Safeguarding the quality of our work also requires
attention to the issue of staff retention, as was mentioned
by the two Presidents. The loss of key staff members
of the Tribunal at critical junctures in our work poses
a significant challenge. In our Office, we are seeking
creative ways of encouraging our staff members to
stay at the ICTY. We want our personnel to see their
work through. At the same time, we want to help them
make a successful transition to the next step in their
careers. Retention incentives are the key to meeting
that objective. We also hope that the international
community will see that ICTY staff members are a
tremendous resource for future international justice
initiatives and a highly transferable asset for the United
Nations system more generally.

