Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Iwould like to thank Mr. Jan Kubis, Mr. Vladimir
Voronkov and Ms. Michele Coninsx for their briefings. I
commend the efforts of the United Nations in providing
advice and assisting the people and the Government
of Iraq, in accordance with resolution 2367 (2017),
through the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI). We renew our support to Mr. Kubis and we
commend his efforts at the helm of UNAMI. We also
renew our support to the efforts of his Deputy Special
Representative for Political Affairs, Ms. Alice Walpole,
especially when it comes to determining the fate of
Kuwaiti and third-party nationals who went missing,
including as well the missing Kuwaiti national archives,
which are part of Kuwait's important heritage, pursuant
to Council resolution 2107 (2013).

We congratulate Iraq on the successful holding of
parliamentary elections in mid-May, which took place
in a democratic and transparent environment across
the country, thereby reflecting the high national spirit
in Iraq, in line with the Constitution and international
democratic standards. We hope that those positive
signs Will be put to use in order to form the new Iraqi
Government. We also hope that Iraq will be able to
create a national consensus Government that can meet
the aspirations of its people and establish security,
growth and prosperity for this brotherly country.

At the same time, we recognize that this year is
crucial for Iraq, especially with regard to restoring
security and stability and moving forward with
reconstruction. We congratulate the Government and
the people of Iraq for fully liberating their land from
the control of Da'esh terrorists. Iraq is starting a new
phase that requires continued international support
and solidarity if it is to confront security, political,
humanitarian and economic challenges. We have sought
to alleviate those drastic conditions given the suffering
of the Iraqi people. Consequently, in mid-February, we
organized the Kuwait International Conference for the
Reconstruction of Iraq. It was a successful conference
with broad international participation to allow for the
start of the reconstruction phase and the return of
internally displaced persons. We have great hope for
the future, security and stability of Iraq, which in turn
are an integral part of the security and stability of the
region as a whole.

Regarding the international commitments and
the remaining humanitarian issues related to missing
Kuwaitis and third-party nationals and Kuwait's
national archives, we continue to follow the matter
closely through the Secretary-General's reports and
the briefings of the Special Representative, pursuant
to paragraph 4 of resolution 2107 (2013). We are
disappointed at the lack ofprogress on that front despite
efforts made in exploration and excavation, as well as
getting further information on possible burial sites.

We share the Secretary-General's disappointment
that there is no information or evidence so far about the
national Kuwaiti archives. These are highly sensitive
issues that are related to building confidence between
Kuwait and Iraq. We look forward to adopting a new
approach in order to settle these matters and achieve
the required outcome, including through the Technical
Sub-committee ofthe Tripartite Commission, headed by
the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC).
We welcome the steps taken by the ICRC to achieve
further progress. However, those ongoing efforts are not
sufficient to make significant progress on the ground in
order to end the suffering of the families of the missing
people, which has been going for more than 27 years.
That requires further commitment and determination.

In conclusion, the State of Kuwait looks forward
to continuing its cooperation with the Republic of
Iraq, as our two countries seek to settle problems
and build relationships based on the fundamentals
of good neighbourly relations and non-interference
in the internal affairs of other States, pursuant to the
Charter of the United Nations. The State of Kuwait will
spare no effort to assist Iraq in all areas in order for
the country to overcome all its challenges. We hope
that all commitments will be fulfilled according to the
relevant Security Council resolutions, for we believe in
the need to support the Iraqi people to achieve security,
stability and peace so as to help Iraq regain its status
and position regionally and internationally.

We commend UNAMI's efforts and endeavours in
that regard. We will continue our full cooperation with
UNAMI in order to execute its mandate to the fullest.

