Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I am delighted to see High
Representative Mogherini in the Security Council
this morning. Her briefing was truly inspirational.
Her points about the win-win nature of a cooperation
approach, of a rules-based international order and of
strong multilateralism with the United Nations at its
centre is an important message.

It is particularly fitting that she is in the Council
today on Europe Day, 9 May. As she said, today we
mark 60 years since the Treaty establishing the
European Community and 67 years since the Schuman
Declaration, which set the European continent on an
unprecedented j ourney from the ashes of war and division
towards recovery, reconciliation and, ultimately, to the
European Union (EU) we know today. The European
project has been the single most important institutional
source of peace and stability in Europe since the end of
the Second World War. With a vision of Europe whole
and free, based on democratic values, a rules-based
security order and shared economic prosperity, it has
been the ultimate conflict-prevention mechanism.

Today should also be seen as a celebration of the
power of multilateral cooperation to deliver peace and
development. That belief was at the heart of Europe's
founding fathers, who, in the words of the former Italian
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs, Alcide
De Gasperi, believed that the future would

"not be built through force, nor the desire to conquer,
but by the patient application of the democratic
method, the constructive spirit of agreement, and
by respect for freedom".

Because of the foundations upon which it is built,
the European Union is a natural partner and ally to the
United Nations for the maintenance of international
peace and security. We are also joined in our common
commitment to deliver a more peaceful, equitable and
sustainable world, as envisioned in the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change.

We share a commitment to a world based on the
core principles of democracy, the rule of law, and the
universality and indivisibility of human rights. That
commitment to the United Nations is clearly stated in
the Treaty on European Union, which enshrines the
core principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
Effective multinationalism is at the heart of how
the European Union engages with the wider world.
Therefore, it is clear that a strong United Nations is a
cornerstone of the EU's common foreign and security
policy, and that a strong EU can significantly contribute
to a strong United Nations.

The opening line ofthe Schuman Declaration called
for creative efforts proportionate to the dangers which
threaten world peace. This call to adapt in response
to a changing world is as relevant today as it was in
1950. The Secretary-General is seeking to respond to
that imperative through his renewed focus on conflict
prevention and sustaining peace and through his efforts
to reform how the United Nations works to make it
more effective in dealing with the challenges of today
and tomorrow. We fully support his efforts.

The United Nations reviews on peace and security
emphasize the need for strengthened partnerships
between the United Nations and regional organizations.
In that context, the strategic partnership between the
EU and the United Nations in the fields ofpeacekeeping
and crisis management is important. I would like to
thank the European External Action Service and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations for their
efforts in implementing that partnership.

The European Union seeks to actively contribute
to peace and security in Europe and beyond. It does
that as a committed partner of the United Nations, in
many ways. Let me highlight just a few. First of all,
the European Union is an advocate for international
law and for a rules-based international order with a
strong United Nations at its heart. That is why the EU
has reiterated its unwavering support for Ukraine's
sovereignty and territorial integrity.

Secondly, through its enlargement and
neighbourhood policies, the EU helps strengthen
democracy and human rights among its eastern and
southern neighbours. In the western Balkans, the
Security Council has handed over primary responsibility
for security and stability to the EU in countries that
were once subject to large United Nations operations
and that, in many cases today, are turning into security
providers in their own right.

Thirdly, the European Union has actively
contributed to peace and security beyond the region of
Europe and across all continents. It has done so, for
example, from its contribution in Colombia, to the
Aceh Monitoring Mission in Indonesia, to stabilization
in Iraq and Afghanistan, to its maritime operations off
the coast off Somalia and Libya, to its comprehensive
policy in cooperation with countries and regional actors
for security, peace and development in the Sahel, to its
support for African Union peace operations - not least
the African Union Mission in Somalia - through the
African Peace Facility.

Finally, as the world's largest humanitarian donor,
the EU provides needs-based humanitarian aid, in line
with humanitarian principles of humanity, neutrality,
impartiality and independence. Cooperation between
the EU and the United Nations is strong, as was
evidenced by the process leading to the agreement
on the ambitious Grand Bargain. A fast and efficient
humanitarian response that reaches those who are
most vulnerable is contingent on continuing, and
deepened, coordination and cooperation between our
two organizations.

In conclusion, the European Union's Global
Strategy for Foreign and Security Policy gives it a
renewed framework for global action in support of
peace and development, as we just heard. We hope it
can contribute to strengthening the partnership between
our organizations even further. The European Union is
a champion of multilateralism and a shining example of
what multilateralism can achieve. While the challenges
that Europe and the international community face today
could not have been imagined by the EU's founders, the
principles on which they built it remain relevant as we
seek to build a better future for all.

