Mr. Jenie (Indonesia): The delegation of
Indonesia would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his report. We note the work of, and the information
provided by, United Nations country-level monitoring
and reporting task force teams. Such mechanisms,
using all available resources, will enable us to arrive at
an accurate and balanced picture of what is happening
on the ground.

Indonesia is fully committed to facilitating the
implementation of the various Security Council
resolutions aimed at ending the recruitment and use of
children in armed conflict situations. We firmly believe
that children should be arming themselves with
education and the necessary social skills so that they
can become productive members of stable, peaceful,
well-governed developing societies.

While it is true that the Secretary-General's
report inspires some sense of hope for betterment in the
future, there are current matters that demand immediate
attention. One such matter is the continued availability
of small arms and light weapons, which enables the
recruitment of child soldiers. Access to such arms
should be severely curtailed.

Another issue of concern is the plight of children
caught up in conflict situations in the Middle East -
as exemplified by what recently occurred in Lebanon,
where a greater number of children were killed than
combatants. We believe that the Security Council
should react in an urgent manner to prevent the loss of
life of children in that region. In particular, action is
necessary to protect the lives of children who are
victims of the unresolved Palestinian problem, which is
at the heart of the ongoing Middle East crisis.

Apart from those known challenges, the
Secretary-General's report also draws our attention to
emerging situations that are giving cause for great
concern. We are now faced with the painful reality of
combatants crossing borders to recruit and use children
in armed conflicts. We are also hearing of new centres
of recruitment by illegal armed groups, in several
regions. More detailed information should be
forthcoming about those situations so that appropriate
action can be taken early to deal with them.

Because of the many dimensions of the challenge
created by children's involvement in armed conflict,
initiatives must be taken simultaneously on several
fronts to ensure that consistent progress is made in
solving the problem. In addition to involving the
Peacebuilding Commission in the process of
preventing the recruitment of child soldiers, it is also
essential to encourage State adherence to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child as a means of
eliminating that practice. It would be equally helpful
for appropriate national legislation to be enacted
prohibiting recruitment, thereby shielding children at
risk.

Indonesia is pleased that the United Nations has
developed and is implementing a comprehensive
strategy to build strong discipline among all categories
of its peacekeeping personnel, and that troop-
contributing countries are also being mobilized to help
deal with the problem of child sexual exploitation and
abuse. That will serve to curb the occurrence of that
hideous practice. It is imperative that peacekeepers
uphold the trust that local populations and the
international community have placed in them.

My delegation notes with concern the
recommendation that the Security Council should
consider expanding its focus to include all categories
of grave violations against children in armed conflict.
It is our strong belief that such consideration should
involve the wider participation of Member States. That
would increase sensitivity to the issue and strengthen
commitment in that regard.

The continued protection of vulnerable children
will require adequate, sustained and reliable funding.
Without funding, the long-term sustainability and
success of current initiatives are put at grave risk. For
the sake of the children whose lives are being disrupted
by unscrupulous individuals, it is vital that adequate
resources and funding be available to all stakeholders
involved in combating that practice.

