Mr. De Rivero (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): The
Government of Peru once again calls on the
Government of Iraq for full compliance with all its
obligations with regard to disarmament, including the
complete elimination of its weapons of mass
destruction, in accordance with the provisions of
resolution 1441 (2002) and other Security Council
resolutions.

Iraq has the obligation to cooperate with the
United Nations inspectors immediately, actively and
unconditionally. Regrettably, we are still witnessing a
clear lack of cooperation on the part of Iraq. The
Government of Iraq must understand, once and for all,
that the only possibility for normalizing its relations
with the international community is its immediate
disarmament and its unconditional, active and complete
compliance with Security Council resolutions. Only
those actions can be considered by the international
community as verifiable guarantees that Iraq does not
possess programmes or weapons of mass destruction.
And only in this way will it be possible to prevent the
Council's authority and legitimacy from being
undermined.

The Government of Peru is convinced that
conflicts and threats to international peace and
security- as Secretary-General Kofi Annan recently
stated - should be resolved in conformity with the
principles and mechanisms established in the Charter
of the United Nations. What does that mean? It means
that the use of force - as the Secretary-General has
also asserted - should be considered as a last resort.
But it should be recalled that, in conformity with the
Charter, the use of force is also a legitimate recourse of
the Security Council in order to ensure international
peace and security.

As I pointed out on 18 February, current events,
which are testing the United Nations security system,
grew out of the Government of Iraq's violation of key
Charter principles by attacking and invading Kuwait
and, more recently, out of its systematic unwillingness
to implement measures established by the Security
Council for its total disarmament of weapons of mass
destruction. More than a decade has passed, and the
problem persists, jeopardizing the effectiveness of the
United Nations collective security system.

At this juncture, the United Nations and the
international security system find themselves in an
extreme situation. Peru believes that the crisis must be
resolved - I repeat, must be resolved - within the
normative framework of the United Nations,
particularly in the context of the decisions adopted by
the Security Council. We believe it is of the highest
priority to exhaust the possibilities of a peaceful
solution, which undoubtedly depends on immediate,
unconditional and complete disarmament by Iraq, in
accordance with the provisions and terms established
by resolution 1441 (2002).

The Government of Peru is aware of the
complexity of the inspectors' verification task and of
the difficulties involved in determining the unequivocal
results of their activities. But, at the same time, it can
be concluded from their reports that the mandate
established by the Council for complete and total
disarmament of weapons of mass destruction has not
been fulfilled.

In that context, full implementation of resolution
1441 (2002), as Peru stated on 18 February, should
have a decisive deadline - a fixed and final deadline.
That is a requirement that the Government of Peru
supports for the sake of peace and the authority of the
Security Council. Time cannot and should not be used
to render the resolutions of the Council without content
or useful effect.

