The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and of Rwanda, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ileka
(Democratic Republic of the Congo) and
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda) took seats at the Council
table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council expresses its
appreciation to the Foreign Ministers of South
Africa and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and to the Special Envoy of the President
of Rwanda, who participated in its meeting on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo on 8 August
2002.

"The Security Council welcomes the Peace
Agreement of 30 July 2002 between the
Governments of the Republic of Rwanda and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Programme of Implementation for the withdrawal
of Rwandan troops from the territory of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
dismantling of the ex-FAR and Interahamwe
forces in the Democratic Republic of the Congo

(S/2002/9l4). The Council commends the
Governments of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Rwanda for engaging in direct
dialogue on their mutual security concerns and
urges them to continue this dialogue.

"The Security Council expresses its full
support for the implementation of the Peace
Agreement. In this regard, the Security Council
looks forward to considering as soon as possible
the recommendations of the Secretary-General on
how MONUC and, through MONUC's
coordination, all relevant United Nations
agencies, can assist the parties in their
responsibilities to implement the Peace
Agreement.

"The Security Council commends the
Government of the Republic of South Africa for
its facilitation of the Peace Agreement and for its
further role, together with the Secretary-General
of the United Nations, regarding the Peace
Agreement.

"The Security Council stresses in particular
the responsibilities of the two parties set out in
the Peace Agreement and implementation plan
and calls upon the international community to
assist and expedite the carrying out of these
responsibilities.

"The Security Council reiterates its support
for the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (MONUC), as established by its
resolution 1417 (2002) of 14 June 2002, in
particular in the area of voluntary disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation, resettlement and
reintegration (DDRRR).

"The Security Council expresses the
importance of close consultations and cooperation
between the Governments of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and the Republic
of South Africa, as well as MONUC and, through
MONUC's coordination, all relevant United
Nations agencies on measures that can help
implement this Agreement and facilitate
voluntary DDRRR.

"The Security Council welcomes the
commitments of both the Governments of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda

under the Peace Agreement to cooperate in the
identification, disarmament and repatriation of
ex-FAR and Interahamwe. The Council urges the
parties to the Peace Agreement to make every
effort to fully comply with all their obligations in
conformity with Security Council resolution 1341
(2001) of 22 February 2001 and the Programme
of Implementation of the Peace Agreement. The
Security Council also welcomes the commitment
of the Government of Rwanda, under the Peace
Agreement, regarding the withdrawal of its troops
from the territory of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and, in this regard, notes Rwanda's
submission of its initial troop withdrawal plan to
the 'third party'.

"The Security Council will remain seized of
these matters."

This statement will be issued as a document
the Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2002/24.


The President: The Security Council has thus

concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

