Mr. Koishybayev (Kazakhstan): We thank the
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Mr. Mladenov, for his detailed and objective update on
the situation in the Middle East. We are closely following
his efforts and negotiations held with the key countries
on this issue. We appreciate the positive outcome of

his meeting in Moscow with the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Russian Federation, Mr. Sergey Lavrov.

We echo the warnings of the United Nations that
there is a cycle of conflagration of conflicts currently
in the Middle East. There are rising tensions at all
levels and in various contexts, including the situations
in Syria and in Yemen, and the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict. We are particularly concerned about the move
of the United States Embassy to Jerusalem on 14 May,
and the clashes in Gaza, which resulted in casualties
among Palestinians.

Kazakhstan's position on the Middle East peace
process is clear and remains unchanged. We support
the two-State solution and call for the early resumption
of negotiations, especially in the bilateral format
and without preconditions. That should be done in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
the relevant Security Council resolutions, and other
mechanisms and initiatives, such as the Quartet road
map, the Arab Peace Initiative, the Madrid principles
and the land-in-exchange-for-peace formula.

We support the rights of the Palestinian people to
self-determination and the creation of a free, sovereign
and independent State within the international borders
of 1967 with East Jerusalem as its capital. Jerusalem
is the common homeland of different ethnicities and
religions. Palestine and Israel must respect each other's
right to existence and avoid taking actions that might
further escalate the situation. We look forward to
implementation of the provisions of resolution 2334
(2016), and we would like to stress that the construction
of new Israeli settlements is causing hardships for the
Palestinians, who are incurring huge economic losses.

Turning to Gaza, we are alarmed by the situation
there. We support the Egyptian and the international
efforts to ease the situation in that sector. With regard
to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East, Kazakhstan
reiterates the need to support this important mechanism.
We will therefore make another voluntary financial
contribution to the organization this year.

Mycountryunderscorestheimportanceofachieving
intra-Palestinian unity. Investments in building strong
Palestinian institutions and promoting reforms in the
security sector - the military, law enforcement and
judicial and correctional systems - will, together
with new legislation, ensure the rule of law and good
governance. Our colleagues from United Nations
humanitarian agencies informed us that the Central
Emergency Response Fund had recently allocated
$1.26 million for Gaza. Those funds are meant to
strengthen and reinforce the rapid procurement of
essential medical supplies and their distribution to
critical hospitals providing trauma care - all of which
is critical to relieving the suffering of the population.

The immediate start of direct negotiations and, as a
result, the speedy implementation of agreements, in the
first place, will allow us to solve the confidence-deficit
problem and enable us to move to a more open dialogue
between the two sides. It is necessary to identify
mutually acceptable principles for the advancement of
the Palestinian-Israeli peace process.

Lastly, we once again reiterate our call to ensure
Israel's right to security as well as Palestine's right
to statehood, using appropriate instruments of
preventive diplomacy, including political, economic
and environmental confidence-building measures, as
well as addressing new challenges and threats. We are
ready to work towards finding common ground and
look forward to effectively cooperating with a View
to bringing peace and security both to Palestinians
and Israelis.

