Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): Let me first of all, to
extend our sincere thanks to Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert,
for her very comprehensive briefing. In response
to the briefing, Indonesia would like to underscore
three points.

First, with efforts owned and led by the
Government and the people of Iraq, supported by the
regional and international communities, Iraq is on
the right track towards a democratic and prosperous
future. The Security Council's first-ever visit to Iraq,
in June, demonstrated the international community's
support for the country's post-conflict recovery and
reconciliation efforts. Indonesia also commends
Iraq's active endeavours to strengthen relations with
neighbouring countries. That indicates Iraq's good
intentions to build a principle of good-neighbourliness.
Regional cooperation indeed plays a crucial role in
economic development and national stability.

Brick by brick, ranging from the formation
of its Cabinet to combating corruption and from
strengthening the environment for investment, the rule
of law to security sector reform, we believe that the
Iraqi Government will be able to respond to the needs
and the demands of its people. Those efforts should
continue, and the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq (UNAMI) plays a crucial role in supporting
them. We would like to voice our continuous support for
UNAMI and the Special Representative. We hope that
the appointment of Cabinet ministers will be completed
soon, with the inclusion of appointments of women in
senior decision-making positions.
Secondly, we recognize the complex challenges
facing stabilization and rehabilitation in Iraq. The
security situation remains fragile, as the remnants of
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) continue
to attack the Iraqi people and security forces. In that
connection, we support the Iraqi security forces
anti-terrorism campaign, supported by international
efforts, to combat ISIL. We also support the work of
the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote
Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/
ISIL in close collaboration with the Iraqi Government.
We stress once again the importance of international
cooperation in combating terrorism and its cells.

We also support the Government's efforts as part of
its security sector reform to issue an executive order to
bring the popular mobilization forces exclusively under
State control. If implemented, the Government will
have the ability to manage and control weaponry and
the circulation of arms, which would hopefully improve
the security situation.

We also recognize the challenge faced by the
Iraqi Government in managing the approximately
1.7 million internally displaced persons in the country.
In that connection, it is important that the humanitarian
assistance programme remain funded and the issue
remain on the international community's radar.

Thirdly, on the issue of the repatriation and return
of all Kuwaiti and third-country nationals or their
remains, we are happy to note that Iraqi authorities
handed over the remains of Kuwaiti citizens from
Samawah on 8 August. We hope that contributes to the
healing process ofthe families ofthose missing persons.
With developments in technology and the persistent
efforts of the Tripartite Mechanism, couple with the
good intentions of both Governments to continue their
cooperation, we are finally witnessing an important
breakthrough in advancing this important file. We also
applaud UNAMI's continuous efforts in that regard.
We encourage the Iraqi Government to continue its
constructive engagement with the relevant parties to
resolve the remaining issues.

