Mr. Kanu (Sierra Leone): I thank the United
Kingdom, President of the Security Council, for
organizing this timely meeting. The Sierra Leone
delegation also thanks the Secretary-General and the
Office of Legal Affairs for their contributions to the
promotion of the rule of law in international relations.

The Security Council is the principal organ for
the maintenance of international peace and security and
this role is intrinsically linked to the promotion of
justice and the rule of law. This delegation also
believes that justice and the rule of law are essential
elements for building peace and democracy. In this
effort, the United Nations, and, in particular the
Security Council, must be consistent and firm in its
application of international instruments relating to the
observance, promotion and protection of human rights
and international humanitarian law.

Our continent of Africa, in particular our
subregion of West Africa, has suffered unimaginable
wrongs, not only in terms of the loss of human life but
also in the erosion of the rule of law. My delegation
believes that the absence of the rule of law creates an
atmosphere in which gross violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law are often accepted
and encouraged with impunity.

We in developing countries need the rule of law
in order to live in a peaceful and just society. But
durable and sustainable peace is something we cannot
achieve without the help and assistance of developed
countries, which need to show more leadership in the
respect of the rule of law, both nationally and
internationally. An effective rule of law is the sine qua
non for justice and therefore, for accountability.
However, establishing and promoting justice and the
rule of law require resources, for justice and the rule of
law are not cheap. They are expensive to attain.

In this regard, let me digress and make a plea for
the Special Court for Sierra Leone. The Court needs
resources and we call on all States to contribute to the
Special Court for Sierra Leone. The Court is an
important mechanism for the restoration of peace and
the rule of law in Sierra Leone.

For decades, the international community has
been trying to set up a court that will bring justice to
victims of heinous crimes and bring an end to the
culture of impunity. The international community now
has an International Criminal Court that is fully
operational. There are now over ninety States that are
parties to the Court's Statute. Sadly, despite this
expression of determination by the international
community to establish a just legal order, the Statute of
the International Criminal Court (ICC) has not enjoyed
full universality. This delegation calls on all States, and
these include our dear friends, members of the Security
Council, who are not parties to the Statute to sign and
ratify the Statute as a matter of urgency. This will
demonstrate their commitment to the promotion of
justice and the rule of law in international relations.

The Judges, the Prosecutor, his deputy and the
Registrar of the Court have all been elected. Those
eminent persons represent the collective wish of
mankind to end impunity and foster the rule of law in
international relations. This delegation does not believe
that those individuals will engage in frivolous and
vexatious prosecutions and thus betray the collective
confidence entrusted to them by humankind. The
International Criminal Court is the tool that can be
instrumental not only in bringing to justice war
criminals but also in disseminating the notion of
individual criminal justice for egregious crimes.

The Court furthers the Security Council's goal of
maintaining international peace and security. It is not a
threat to the sovereignty of States. In this delegation's
View, the principle of complementarity ensures the
sanctity of the sovereignty of States. It is only when
States are unwilling or unable to investigate and
prosecute that the ICC will intervene.

Sierra Leone believes that accountability,
reconciliation and reintegration can be achieved
through the rule of law. The rule of law is the only way
to move forward and rebuild a thriving and peaceful
democratic society. Accounting for our past and
attributing individual criminal liability to those most
responsible for violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law are sure ways for the
United Nations to foster justice and the rule of law, as
the United Nations is an instrument of justice and the
rule of law.

In conclusion, let me remind this body of what
the Secretary-General of the United Nations, His
Excellency Mr. Kofi Annan said in September last year
before the first session of the Assembly of States
Parties to the International Criminal Court. He said
inter alia that the International Criminal Court "must
serve as a bastion against tyranny and lawlessness, and
as a building block in the global architecture of
collective security." The Sierra Leone delegation
subscribes to that view.

