Mr. Al-Maawda (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Madam President, for
convening today's meeting to address the challenges
facing the Middle East region and the means to
ensure its stability for the sake of international peace
and security.

Today's meeting sheds light on the mounting
challenges in the Middle East, as well as on the vital
importance of achieving stability in that critical part
of the world. That requires the convergence of efforts
to allow for cooperation, wisdom and the language of
dialogue to prevail so as to prevent more deterioration,
which could jeopardize international peace and security.

A just and comprehensive settlement to the
Palestinian question is of critical importance to
achieving peace in the Middle East. All parties must
therefore respect their obligations under resolutions of
the international legitimacy and the benchmarks set out
by the international community, including acceptance
of the two-State solution and acknowledging the rights
of Palestine as an independent State within the 1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, based on
the relevant Security Council resolutions and the Arab
Peace Initiative.

Furthermore, Israel must cease its occupation of
all occupied Arab territories and end all settlement
activities immediately. International protection must
also be provided to the Palestinian people, refugees
must be able to return to their homes and Palestinians
must enjoy their inalienable rights.

The link between the conflicts and crises plaguing
the Middle East and their direct implications on
stability in the region require urgent action and
effective initiatives in order to achieve peace in
Syria, Libya and Yemen. Despite the considerable
resources of the Middle East region and the need to
invest them in achieving development and prosperity
for all its peoples, in addition to cooperating to settle
current crises and conflicts and root out terrorism and
extremism, other very serious challenges exist that lead
to instability in the regional security system that is the
Gulf Cooperation Council, which has positively and
effectively contributed to the maintenance of regional
and international peace and security.

Achieving lasting peace in the Middle East calls for
abandoning threats and violations of State sovereignty
and the stoking of artificial crises to achieve illegitimate
objectives. At a time when our region is experiencing
tensions that constitute a threat to international peace
and security, the imposition of an unjust embargo on
the State of Qatar, now in its third year, contributes
to regional instability and undermines the efforts
undertaken by the Security Council to establish
international security.

That illegal embargo causes damages that are
not limited to the State of Qatar and other States in
the region. It sets a serious precedent in international
relations and constitutes a grave breach of international
law and the principle of friendly relations among States.
It is also a breach of the Charter of the United Nations,
which compels States to refrain from escalating
conflicts and requires them to settle disputes through
dialogue and peaceful means.

We welcome this opportunity to reaffirm the
position of the State of Qatar. We support dialogue to
resolve disputes and conflicts, and reiterate our support
and gratitude for the sincere efforts that have been
undertaken by His Highness Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad
Al-Jaber A1-Sabah, Amir of the sisterly State of Kuwait.

Cybersecurity is a tremendous challenge. When
it is used with ill will, it destabilizes international
relations and security. The world has already borne
witness to serious cyberattacks, and the State of Qatar
has been among the victims thereof. The absence of
international institutions and legislation for governing
this extremely serious and vital realm requires strict
measures against the perpetrators as well as those who
commit cybercrimes and piracy, including subjecting
them to accountability and sanctions in addition to
making them fully responsible legally for such crimes.
The State of Qatar has closely followed recent
developments in the Strait of Hormuz, particularly
with regard to regional and international navigation.
Incidents ofthis type need to be addressed expeditiously.
We call upon all parties to exercise restraint. We call for
efforts to be undertaken to achieve a peaceful solution
for such incidents.

The State of Qatar has undertaken numerous
initiatives that reflect our commitment shared with the
international community to strengthen understanding
and dialogue so as to advance the premises oftolerance,
cooperation and the fight against extremism and
terrorism. The State of Qatar is one of the largest donors
to the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism.
Furthermore, our institutions have supported efforts to
provide education for 10 million children in more than
50 States. Many of those children are in areas plagued
by armed conflict and dire poverty, as well as by natural
disasters. Those efforts have been undertaken through
Qatari educational institutions and in cooperation with
UNICEF and other United Nations agencies.

In conclusion, The State of Qatar reaffirms
our commitment to working hand in hand with our
partners through the international system in order to
tackle shared challenges and to support the Security
Council mandate in maintaining international peace
and security.

