Mr. Jomaa (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): It is my
great honour and privilege to address the Security
Council on behalf of the Arab Group on the situation in
the Middle East, including the Palestinian question. I
would like to begin by congratulating the delegation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina on its assumption of the
Council presidency this month and to wish it every
possible success. My gratitude goes also to Mr. B. Lynn
Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
for his briefing to the Council.

The situation in the Middle East is entering a new
and decisive phase that requires that each of us take a
firm position. A prompt and serious international
commitment is necessary to end Israel's occupation
policies, which continue to exacerbate the suffering of
the Palestinian people and cause escalating tensions
and provocations. That, unfortunately, impedes the
resumption of the peace process. This is a very serious
phase, which the international community must address
with a great deal of responsibility and caution in order
to avoid any exacerbation of tension in the situation
and prevent any risk of explosion.

The situation on the ground is extremely
alarming. The Arab Group would like to reaffirm very
clearly that Israel's obstinacy in implementing its
settlement policies and practices in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem,
constitute ongoing violations of international law and
relevant resolutions of international legitimacy. These
practices undermine the possibility of achieving peace
and the creation of a sovereign Palestinian State with
East Jerusalem as its capital.

The Arab Group also reaffirms Israel's sole and
full responsibility for the failure of the negotiation
process launched in Washington, DC, in September as
a result of its preference for colonial settlement
activities over peace. Israel's behaviour is a brazen
challenge to international unanimity in asserting the
illegality of the settlements and the very serious impact
of the pursuit of these activities on the possibility of
reaching peace and a two-State solution. Everyone here
will remember that the Arab States have addressed the
peace process in a very positive and responsible way.
They afforded international efforts undertaken by many
parties every possible chance to ensure that this
process would advance in the hope of achieving a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace that would guarantee
a two-State solution within pre-1967 borders.

The Arab Peace Initiative commission has met
several times over the past few months and adopted
many decisions to stay the Initiative's course while
absolutely rejecting Israel's continued colonial
settlement activities and arbitrary practices. Israel's
pursuit of its policy of provocation, its settlement
activity and practices, and collective punishment aimed
at the Palestinian people, as well as the inhumane
blockade imposed on nearly 1.5 million Palestinians in
Gaza, have led to an impasse and undermined all
prospects for the peace process. In the meantime,
unfortunately, these practices proliferate and get worse.

All of that is alarming, and leads us to ask
ourselves whether Israel, the occupying Power, is truly
serious about achieving peace in the region. It is very
important that we remind all the members of the
Council and all States Members of the United Nations
of the reality of some of these serious practices, which
must stop immediately if we want to see the peace
process relaunched and stability reign in the region.
Let us recall that these policies include the continued
practice of violence and terror against Palestinian
civilians by Israeli settlers seeking to annex more
Palestinian land and maintain the status quo; the
ongoing assassinations of Palestinian civilians by the
Israeli occupation forces in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem; the continuing
illegal inhuman blockade of the Gaza Strip; the
increase in military actions against civilians in the
Gaza Strip, which have claimed the lives of many
individuals; increased expulsions; the destruction of
homes; and the withdrawal of Palestinians' rights of
residency. These actions are in flagrant violation of
international law, including the Fourth Geneva
Convention and relevant Security Council resolutions.

Additional illegal practices include changing the
demographic composition and legal status of Jerusalem
by expelling Palestinian inhabitants; the destruction of
the historic Shepherd Hotel in East Jerusalem under a
plan to construct a new settlement of 20 housing units,
which threatens the geographic contiguity of the
Palestinian territories and the Viability of any future
Palestinian State; the recent adoption by the municipal
Government of Jerusalem of a plan to build 124 new
housing units around East Jerusalem; and the recent
announcement by the Jerusalem planning commission
of a new plan providing for the construction of a
further 1,400 housing units for Jewish settlers in
annexed land in the occupied West Bank.

The Arab Group, while welcoming the rejection
of such practices by the international community, calls
for the implementation of real measures on the ground
and calls on Israel, the occupying Power, to put an
immediate end to these practices and to fulfil its
commitments within the framework of international
law, international humanitarian law and its
commitments to the Road Map and the various
benchmarks of the peace process.

Unfortunately, the repeated calls of the Secretary-
General and his condemnation of the continued
occupation, as well as the appeals of the Quartet, the
international community and the European Union, have
not been met with any response from the Israeli
occupying forces, which have continued their
repressive practices in flagrant violation of the desire of
the international community to help the Palestinian
people, which has struggled under colonialist
occupation for decades, to enjoy its right to freedom
and independence. Accordingly, the Arab Group
condemns these practices and calls on all influential
parties, including the Quartet, to assume their
responsibilities, address these issues, face down Israel's
obstinate refusal to accept international legitimacy, and
force it to accept efforts to build ajust peace.

We also call on the Quartet to go beyond the mere
adoption of statements and reiteration of positions.
What is important now is to ensure that these positions
are implemented on the ground by exerting the
necessary pressure on the occupying forces. We cherish
the hope that this will indeed take place following the
Quartet meeting to be held in Munich on 5 February.

We also condemn the ongoing inhumane
blockade imposed on Gaza and ask the international
community to take every possible step to put an
immediate end to this unjust blockade, lift all
restrictions to freedom of movement, enable access of
humanitarian assistance, and cooperate in a more
serious and effective way with the efforts of the United
Nations agencies to rebuild the Gaza Strip and enable
its inhabitants to enjoy their basic rights to life,
housing, education and health.

The Arab Group reaffirms its absolute rejection
of any activity aimed at changing the demographic,
religious and social composition of the holy city of
Jerusalem, of any attack on holy sites, and of any
attempt at arbitrary destruction of homes or expulsion
of people. We condemn these continued practices and
ask the international community to take a firm position
to ensure that an end is put to them and prevent the
maintenance of the status quo.
Regarding the situation in the Middle East with
specific reference to the Lebanese and Syrian tracks,
the Arab Group affirms the Arab position that a just
and lasting peace with Israel can be achieved only
through Israel's full withdrawal from occupied Arab
territories to the lines of 4 June 1967, including East
Jerusalem, the occupied Syrian Golan and the
territories that are still occupied in the south of
Lebanon. It is necessary that an independent
Palestinian State be established, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, pursuant to the Arab Peace Initiative; to
ensure a just return of the Palestinian refugees; and to
implement all relevant United Nations resolutions.

Allow me to remind the Council that the ongoing
violations of Lebanese airspace by Israel's forces and
the violations of its commitments under resolution
1701 (2006) are all fraught with the threat of the return
of tension to the region and the undermining of efforts
to maintain stability.

The Arab Group calls for an end to these
violations and to settlement in the occupied Syrian
Arab Golan and reaffirms that all activities undertaken
by Israel in the Golan aimed at changing its
demographic and legal status, as well as Israeli
measures aimed at exerting administrative authority
there, are null and void and have no legal basis. The
Arab Group calls for immediate withdrawal by Israel
from the Syrian Golan to the borders of 4 June 1967, as
well as for the implementation of resolutions 242
(1967), 338 (1973) and 497 (1981).

The international community cannot stand by
passively in the face of the occupying Power's
continued violations of every one of its commitments
under international law, instruments and agreements.
The enormous suffering of the peoples of the region
has lasted far too long. There is no alternative to
ending the occupation of Arab territories in order to
ensure security and stability in a region to which, as
everyone knows, the security and stability of the entire
world are related.

The international community cannot permit any
increase in tensions and frustration or the resumption
of aggression against the lives of civilians. This is an
immediate danger, and urgent and firm measures must
be taken to address the underlying causes of the
tension. The Secretary-General has reaffirmed in his
recent statements and briefings on the Middle East that
the need is urgent and that the strategy for addressing
this situation must be changed. We must therefore
overcome the shortcomings and answer the repeated
calls on the international community to preserve the
rights of Palestinian civilians and protect them from
such oppressive practices so as to ensure that the peace
process has the chance to resume.

The Arab Group supports the resumption of the
peace process, but its position is clear. Relaunching
Israeli-Palestinian negotiations requires an immediate
halt to all settlement activities in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem. The
established benchmarks of the peace process must be
honoured. An end to settlement activity is not the only
condition required for the peace process to resume.
International and humanitarian law must also be
implemented. Continued settlement activities
undermine the very nature of negotiations. Historic
Palestinian territories are, unfortunately, are shrinking
and being drained of their life.

In this context, a draft resolution on the occupied
Palestinian territories and East Jerusalem has been
introduced, calling for an immediate end to settlement
activity, which would enable resumed negotiations to
achieve a just and lasting peace in the region. The draft
resolution enjoys the support of the Arab ministerial
meeting in Sharm el-Sheikh and of the majority of
States Members of our Organization. It is sponsored by
more than 120 States, which shows clearly that the
international community is unanimous in confronting
the imminent threat presented by these ongoing
practices, which are condemned by all under
international law, instruments and agreements.

The draft resolution contains consensus wording
and is based on previous Security Council resolutions,
as well as on a number of resolutions and statements
made by relevant actors and parties. It recalls the basic
positions regarding settlement activity and articulates a
position aimed at preserving the peace process's
chances of success and at fulfilling the aspirations of
the peoples of the region, and of the international will
as a whole, with respect to the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people to freedom and dignity and to build
an independent State on its territory.

The members of the Arab Group support the draft
resolution in a demonstration of their commitment to
international legitimacy and their desire to abide by
their obligations as members of the international
community responsible for the maintenance of
international peace and security. The draft resolution is
an opportunity to breathe new life into the peace
negotiations and, indeed, to save them in order to
ensure peace. All those who cherish peace are called on
to support the draft resolution and to ensure the
implementation of justice and righteousness throughout
the world.

