Mr. Sucharipa (Austria): It is a special pleasure for
me today to address the high representatives of this Council
under your most able leadership, Mr. President, which we
are confident will ensure a successful conclusion of the
deliberations of the Council this month.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union. In addition, the Central and Eastern European
countries associated with the European Union - Bulgaria,
the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania,
Poland, Romania, Slovakia - and the associated country
Cyprus, as well as the European Free Trade Association
countries members of the European Economic Area, Iceland
and Liechtenstein, align themselves with this statement.

In the past few years, peacekeeping operations have
become increasingly multidimensional. United Nations
peacekeeping today encompasses not only demanding
military tasks, but also a variety of other functions which
expand into the area of peace-building, such as civilian
police activities, humanitarian assistance, demining,
practical disarmament measures, demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants, enhancing and
monitoring respect for human rights, support for democratic
development, including election monitoring, and last but not
least, public information. The European Union considers
this a positive development which also proves the United
Nations potential to meet new demands.

The multidimensional quality of today's peacekeeping
operations poses new challenges to the United Nations, both
at headquarters and in the field. Military and civilian
personnel have to be specially trained, prepared and
equipped for their ever more complex missions. Their tasks
have to be coordinated with the respective activities of
United Nations bodies and programmes.

At headquarters, this requires an integrated,
coordinated approach with regard to actions which most
often address combinations of political, legal, institutional,
military, humanitarian, human rights-related, environmental,
economic, social, cultural, and demographic factors of
conflicts. In the field, this is greatly facilitated by special
representatives and United Nations coordinators, who are
given overall responsibility and authority with regard to the
coordination of United Nations efforts and cooperation with
national and international partners, as well as non-
governmental organizations.

The European Union expresses its appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his valuable efforts in this respect,
and in particular for the relevant proposals made and
measures implemented in the context of United Nations
reform. They have significantly enhanced the ability of
the United Nations to respond to the complexities of post-
cold-war conflict situations. With respect to peace-
building in particular, we commend the Administrative
Committee on Coordination for developing the new
strategic framework concept, which provides a basis for
more coherent strategies to link all aspects of external
support for countries afflicted by conflict.

Furthermore, we would like to sincerely commend
the Secretary-General for his valuable analysis pertaining
to related matters, as contained in his landmark report,
"The causes of conflict and the promotion of durable
peace and sustainable development in Africa"
(S/1998/318).

The European Union welcomes the Security
Council's continued efforts in responding to the challenges
of combining peacekeeping and peace-building, in
particular with regard to the new peacekeeping operations
established this year in Africa, in the Central African
Republic and in Sierra Leone.

In this connection, we would also like to welcome
the Council's resolutions and presidential statements
issued since the ministerial meeting in September 1997 on
the situation in Africa, and in particular those documents
which were adopted upon consideration of the
assessments made by the Secretary-General in his report.

With regard to the recent General Assembly
resolutions, let me recall the initiative "Consolidation of
peace through practical disarmament measures" by one of
the European Union's Member States, which was co-
sponsored by all 15 European Union countries. Integrating
a wide variety of aspects from disarmament to
peacekeeping matters, it is aimed at helping affected
countries and regions that need assistance with regard to
conflict resolution and post-conflict rehabilitation.

International peace and security today must,
obviously, signify much more than the absence of war
between States. Peace, security, sustainable development,
human rights and good governance are interdependent.
Modern day crises are, more often than not, intra-State
rather than international conflicts, triggered by a range of
factors, including social, ethnic or religious strife, the
violation of human rights, poverty, inequitable distribution

 

of resources, environmental degradation, large-scale
migration, organized crime and terrorism.

To address and prevent violent conflicts caused by
such crises, the United Nations has developed a
comprehensive set of policy measures aimed at conflict
prevention, management and resolution, including through
peacekeeping and peace-building. With regard to the latter,
the European Union recognizes that peace-building
measures could apply in all phases of conflict and peace.
However, as peace-building activities will generally
embrace projects and programmes with the longer aim of
the stabilization of societies, their impact will be greatest in
non-violent situations, including post-conflict situations.

Since 1995, the European Union has adopted a number
of important documents concerning peace-building, conflict
prevention and resolution. Key amongst these are the June
1997 Common Position and Council conclusions on conflict
prevention and resolution in Africa.

On 30 November this year, the Council of the
European Union adopted conclusions, restating, inter alia,
that the approach to peace-building, conflict prevention and
resolution that has been developed within the Union, mainly
in view of the African continent, should be extended to all
developing regions. The Council of the European Union
emphasized that full use should be made of the potential of
development cooperation to contribute to peace, democracy
and stability. It further welcomed, in particular, the
respective assessments given by the United Nations
Secretary-General in his report on Africa.

All this reflects the European Union's commitment to
a proactive policy on conflict prevention and resolution,
focusing on preventing the outbreak of violence at an early
stage, as well as on peace-building, while using the full
range of policy instruments available, including
development assistance.

The Union underlines that the peoples concerned must
take a lead role in peace-building, conflict prevention and
resolution. We also stress that viable solutions can be
achieved only through enhanced local ownership. Activities
must, to the largest extent possible, build on local capacities
and institutions.

Post-conflict reconstruction and peace-building aimed
at the prevention of future conflicts are much more than
repairing physical infrastructure. To address the root causes
of violent conflicts in a targeted manner, it is imperative to
consider the socio-political impact of assistance
programmes and measures. For the European Union,
support for democratization, the strengthening of
legitimacy and of the effectiveness of government, respect
for human rights, the rule of law and good governance
play crucial roles in this regard.

We also strongly underline that external assistance,
including peace-building measures, to societies in crisis or
conflict should aim at promoting a fair balance of
political, social, economic and cultural opportunity among
different groups and at strengthening mechanisms for
peaceful conciliation and the bridging of dividing lines.
Furthermore, we should like to stress the importance, in
this connection, of a vibrant civil society.

The Union fully shares the View of the
Secretary-General, expressed in his report on Africa, that
protecting human rights, and in particular political rights
and economic freedoms; promoting transparency and
accountability in public administration; and fighting
corruption are not merely crucial, but prerequisites for
building peace and promoting development.

Guided by the principles which I have just
mentioned, the European Union has made considerable
and continuous contributions to peace-building efforts
through various programmes in our own continent, in
particular with respect to the conflict in the former
Yugoslavia, in the Middle East, in Africa, in Latin
America and elsewhere. For its effectiveness, action by
the Union also relies on active cooperation with the
United Nations; other international organizations; regional
organizations, such as the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE); and subregional
organizations. In this connection, we would also like to
draw the Council's attention to the concept of mutually
reinforcing institutions, contained in a document recently
adopted by the Council of the European Union, which
emphasizes the necessity of ensuring that the involvement
of more than one organization and its member States
results in complementary and mutually supportive
contributions.

Let me conclude with a few practical thoughts on
peacekeeping and peace-building and their possible
interdependence. Many of today's peacekeeping
operations provide an indispensable basis for wider
peace-building efforts. Their presence is in fact a
precondition for the successful start or continuation of
peace-building programmes, which usually makes it
logical and necessary to integrate strong peace-building
elements into peacekeeping operations. On the other hand,

 

effective peace-building efforts can provide the conditions
for peacekeeping missions to wind down or be completed
once peace has become sustainable. Ideally, they would
help to limit the duration and size of peacekeeping
operations and other external interventions. For all these
reasons, the European Union strongly supports United
Nations endeavours to combine peacekeeping and peace-
building measures in a balanced and complementary
manner.

We would like to stress in this regard that there is no
comprehensive peace-building design and that it might not
even be useful trying to define it. Peace-building measures
have to be chosen and tailored according to the specific
situations and different causes of conflict. This holds
particularly true when they are part of or interlinked with
peacekeeping operations. Identifying them will best be done
in the peace accords between the parties to conflicts.

We fully subscribe to the Secretary-General's View,
again expressed in his report on Africa, that peace-building
does not replace ongoing humanitarian and development
activities in countries emerging from crisis, but rather aims
at building on, adding to or reorienting such activities in
ways designed to reduce the risk of a resumption of conflict
and contribute to creating conditions conducive to
reconciliation, reconstruction and recovery.

Peace-building measures have to be designed and
implemented accordingly. They will also require long-term
commitments, pragmatism, flexibility, creativity and the
will to provide all necessary resources. But the efforts to
make and the price to pay for peace will always seem small
when compared to the human, social and economic losses
incurred in protracted or resumed violent conflicts.

