The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra,
Angola, Armenia, Austria, Bangladesh, Belgium,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cameroon, Canada, Colombia, the Congo, Cote
d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti,
the Dominican Republic, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Estonia, Finland, Gabon, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guinea, Guyana, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lebanon,
Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, the Marshall Islands, Mauritius, the
Federated States of Micronesia, Monaco, Montenegro,
Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, the Niger, Norway, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, the Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San Marino,
Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles,
Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, The
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda,
Ukraine, the United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Vanuatu, Viet Nam, Yemen and Zambia to participate
in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate inthis meeting: Dr. DavidNabarro,
Senior United Nations System Senior Coordinator for
Ebola; Dr. Margaret Chan, Director-General of the
World Health Organization; and Mr. Jackson Niamah,
from Medecins Sans Frontieres (MSF).

It is so decided.

On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. Niamah,
who is joining us today via video-teleconference from
Monrovia. Let me note that Mr. Niamah will be with us
through part of this meeting only, so that he can return
to his lifesaving work in MSF's Ebola treatment centre
in Monrovia.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.

It is so decided.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Tete Antonio, Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations, to participate in this
meeting.

It is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and I now give him
the floor.

