Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): Allow
me at the outset to thank you, Mr. Minister, for having
graciously agreed to preside over the work of the
Council this week. We are indeed privileged to have
you here, and this demonstrates the importance that
Norway attaches to its presidency of the Security
Council for the month of March.

I should like also to thank the Secretary-General
for his extremely important statement and also to thank
the High Representative, Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch, as
well as the Special Representative, Mr. Jacques Paul
Klein, for their comprehensive briefings on the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Bulgaria fully endorses the analysis and the
conclusions offered by the High Representative for
Foreign Policy and Common Security of the European
Union, Mr. Javier Solana. I shall therefore confine
myself to some brief national comments.

My country commends the work done by
Mr. Petritsch as the High Representative for the
Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina and agrees with the views set out and
recommendations made in his report of 22 February of
this year. In addition to warmly thanking Ambassador
Petritsch for his outstanding work, my delegation also
wishes to express its satisfaction at the decision taken
by the Peace Implementation Council on 28 February
to appoint Paddy Ashdown High Representative, as Mr.
Petritsch's successor. My country is convinced that
Lord Ashdown, who is known as a friend of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, has all the credentials required actively to
work with the international community as well as the
local authorities.

Bulgaria has been supporting the Dayton/Paris
Accord and the actions taken by the international
community under that Accord, which is a decisive
factor for bringing about peace in the former
Yugoslavia and for bringing about a united, multi-
ethnic and democratic Bosnia and Herzegovina.

My country agrees with the ideas and conclusions
contained in the report on the need to pursue the efforts
of the international community in Bosnia and
Herzegovina in order to ensure the full implementation
of the Dayton/Paris Accord.

At the same time, it is our View that this
involvement should gradually decline, with local
authorities progressively taking over all these
responsibilities. That would enable Bosnia and
Herzegovina to become a completely autonomous State
that can take its proper place within the structures of
international integration. Here, we hail the members of
the Election Commission for their work to prepare for
the general elections scheduled for 5 October, which
will be first organized by the domestic authorities. It is
important that the Bosnian authorities be fully involved
in the lead-up to the elections, which will be a sign of
the ability of Bosnia and Herzegovina further to align
itself with the structures of European integration.

We appeal to the authorities to implement the
four decisions handed down in 2000 by the
Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
especially that relating to the electorate, which will
make possible equitable representation of the entire
constituency in the establishment of the State and will
facilitate integration into European bodies.
Implementation of that decision will enable the general
elections to go forward properly and will signal the
ability of Bosnia and Herzegovina to become an active
member of the Council of Europe. I recall that Bulgaria
fully supports such membership.

My country supports the international community
in its strategy of gradually transferring United Nations
responsibilities to the European Union. We welcome
the decision of the European Union to name the next
High Representative as a special representative of the
European Union. Here, Bulgaria endorses the European
Union strategy for a seamless transition from the
International Police Task Force to a European Union
police mission. My country believes that the Bosnia
and Herzegovina peace process has reached the point
where its European dimension should be emphasized,
because of the fact that Bosnia and Herzegovina
naturally belongs to Europe and because of Bosnia's
European inclination.

At the same time, we believe that the issue of the
possible participation of countries not members of the
European Union in the follow-on police mission to
replace the International Police Task Force should be
decided in the future, taking account of the
contribution that such participants had already made,
along with their interest and their capacity to continue
their participation.

The High Representative's plan for reorganizing
the United Nations international presence, which
envisions the rationalization and improved
coordination of the work of international civilian
organizations in Bosnia and Herzegovina, deserves the
Security Council's support. The functions, structures,
composition and financing of that presence should
accord with the political situation on the ground.

Bulgaria welcomes the commitment of the
Bosnian authorities to the fight against terrorism,
including through their participation in the recently
established coordination team. The measures taken by
the competent authorities of the Federation with
respect to persons suspected of terrorist activities are
one example of that commitment.

We welcome the increased number of refugees
who returned in 2001; this issue is directly linked to
revitalizing the country's economy. Among the positive
trends of recent months, we should also mention
progress towards normalizing relations between Bosnia
and Herzegovina and its neighbours the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and Croatia.

At the same time, Bulgaria is convinced of the
need for more active and more dynamic cooperation on
the part of the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities with
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia. The appearance of Mr. Karadzic and
Mr. Mladic before the Tribunal could only improve the
overall climate in the country.

Bulgaria praises the High Representative for his
efforts to promote dialogue among the three main
religious groups, which have included the rebuilding of
religious monuments that had been destroyed. We call
on the parties in Bosnia to make greater efforts to that
end. Demining must be speeded up; there is an obvious
need for a comprehensive demining strategy, to be
implemented under the control of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina authorities.

In conclusion, I hail the activities of non-
governmental organizations operating in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, especially those working in the field of
human rights.

