Mr. Hoang Chi Trung (Viet Nam): At the outset,
I would like to thank Special Envoy Eliasson and
Under-Secretary-General Guehenno for their
informative briefings to the Council. Our thanks go
also to Mrs. Ratsifandrihamanana for her presence and
for her briefing to the Council this morning. I am sure
that those briefings have been of much help to the
Council in considering this very important matter in
today's debate.

Against the backdrop of the recent disturbing
violence that has taken place in various parts of the
subregion, the Vietnamese delegation welcomes the
recent positive developments with regard to Darfur and
the Sudan. We commend the active and good-faith
efforts made by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and
President Al-Bashir of the Sudan on the sidelines of the
African Union Summit in Addis Ababa on 31 January
2008 to facilitate the deployment of the African Union-
United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID).

In that connection, Viet Nam also welcomes the
agreement reached between the Government of the
Sudan and the United Nations on the initial draft of the
status-of-forces agreement and the announcement of
the Sudanese Government regarding its readiness to
sign that agreement as soon as tomorrow. My country
believes that the agreement will expedite the full
deployment of UNAMID. That fruitful outcome of the
talks has once again underlined the importance of
dialogue, consultations and cooperation between the
United Nations, the African Union and the Government
of the Sudan.

At the same time, we cannot afford to ignore the
fact that, given the current lack of troops and support
equipment, UNAMID can hardly ensure the effective
discharge of its mandate. We therefore call on the
international community and all countries in a position
to do so to make substantial contributions to UNAMID,
as requested by the United Nations and the African
Union and as proposed by the Sudanese Government.

We hope that all the parties concerned will
cooperate and work together to resolve the outstanding
technical bottlenecks in the way of UNAMID's full
deployment. In particular, we urge the rebel
movements in Darfur to renounce violence, join the
peace and political process and cooperate with the
United Nations and the African Union in facilitating
the deployment of UNAMID.
We wish to stress here that the parties concerned
must build on the momentum created by the August
2007 Arusha peace talks under the auspices of the
United Nations and the African Union as well as the
Sirte process launched by Libya in October last year,
and actively respond to the good offices efforts by the

United Nations and the African Union that are under
way.

My delegation would like to reiterate Viet Nam's
strong support for the full and rapid deployment of
UNAMID in conformity with the mandate set forth in
resolution 1769 (2007). It is our conviction that a full
and effective deployment of UNAMID in Darfur will
help to restore peace and stability not only in Darfur
and the Sudan but also in other countries in this
subregion, namely, Chad and the Central African
Republic.

In parallel with the peacekeeping track and
UNAMID deployment, the international community
and regional countries must devote equal attention and
contributions to pushing forward the political process
in Darfur and the Sudan with a View to finding a just
and lasting solution to the Darfur conflict.

We would also like to emphasize that the peace
and political process in Darfur cannot be divorced from
the North-South peace and political process in the
Sudan, especially the implementation of the 2005
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA). Peace,
stability and prosperity will be achieved in Darfur and
the Sudan only if all parties concerned jointly address
the root causes of the conflict by taking a
comprehensive approach to security and political and
socio-economic development so as not to give biased
priority to one issue at the expense of the others.

The Vietnamese delegation fully shares the
observation made by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
on 5 February of this year that "the deployment of
UNAMID will only be as effective as the political
process it is mandated to support". With this idea in
mind, we feel encouraged by such positive
developments as the return of the Sudan People's
Liberation Movement (SPLM) to the Government of
National Unity last December, the signing by President
Bashir of the national strategic plan for disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and the return of over
2 million refugees and internally displaced persons to
south Sudan since the conclusion of the 2005 CPA.
Once fully realized, these efforts will make a huge
contribution to the overall peace and political process
in Darfur and in the Sudan at large.

My delegation also hails the ongoing efforts
made by the Secretary-General's Special Envoy,
Mr. Jan Eliasson, as well as the African Union Special
Envoy for Darfur, Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim, especially
during their visit to the Sudan last January to help
organize the talks between the Sudanese Government
and the rebel movements. We fully agree that their
efforts should enjoy strong support from the Security
Council and the United Nations.

Furthermore, I would like to join all of my
colleagues in extending our best wishes to the
Permanent Representative of Croatia as she takes on
her future responsibilities.

Finally, I would like to conclude by reaffirming
the Vietnamese Government's unwavering support for
the efforts made by the United Nations and African
countries for the full and effective deployment of
UNAMID in particular and in bringing about peaceful
resolutions to conflicts in Africa in general.

