The President: I believe that Mr. Oshima's
remarks have summed up the very extensive discussion
which we have had this morning and this afternoon
with regard to the humanitarian response of the system
to the humanitarian situation in Iraq.

I think that all of us would agree that this has
been a very informative debate and that it has enhanced
our understanding of the situation. I am sure that
Council members have been reassured by the fact that
the key humanitarian needs, such as food, electricity,
water, sanitation and medical supplies and facilities,
are all being addressed and receiving the attention of
all concerned.

It is also heartening that the United Nations
family seems to be working well together, as was
confirmed just now by Mr. Oshima, and that it is
working together with local Iraqi authorities, as well as
with the coalition partners, now called the Authority
under resolution 1483 (2003).

Thirdly, it would appear so far that the resources
to undertake the humanitarian activities are available,
including through the oil for food programme. Perhaps,
with the changes that will be made under resolution
1483 (2003), there may be a need somewhere down the
line to make a projection of needs and of the resources
required to meet them. While we have discussed the
humanitarian situation, the role of the United Nations
has this morning been broadened considerably by the
adoption of resolution 1483 (2003). These are aspects
of the work of our Organization which we shall need to
review and return to at some future point.

I would like to thank all the personalities who
participated in this debate: the Deputy Secretary-
General, the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme, the Executive Director of
the World Food Programme, the Executive Director of
Sustainable Development and Healthy Environments of
the World Health Organization, the Director of the
Emergency Programmes of the United Nations
Children's Fund, the President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross and, last but not least, Mr.
Kenzo Oshima, the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator.

Following informal consultations with Council
members and with their concurrence, I now call on the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to make a
statement regarding the Council's proceedings this
morning.

