Mr. Wolfe (Jamaica): The Jamaican delegation
welcomes the opportunity to participate in this open
debate on an agenda item that is of critical importance
to the international community. We view this debate as
a chance for the international community to renew its
focus and commitment with regard to ending the
catastrophic consequences caused by small arms and to
garnering the political will necessary to create and
implement the appropriate measures to curb the illicit
trafficking of these weapons. In that connection, my
delegation welcomes the report of the Secretary-
General to this body contained in document
5/2008/258, dated 17 April 2008.

Jamaica reaffirms its commitment to the United
Nations Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects and continues to work
towards effectively implementing its provisions
through our domestic legislation. To further
consolidate that position, we have ratified related
international conventions, including the United Nations
Firearms Protocol.

At the same time, however, Jamaica continues to
be concerned at the lack of progress towards curbing
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons.
Indeed, while we acknowledge that a few steps have
been taken in the right direction with regard to specific
areas of the Programme of Action, my delegation
remains strongly of the view that, if we are to achieve
meaningful and sustainable outcomes to the
Programme of Action, great emphasis must also be
placed on the area of ammunition.

In taking stock of the implementation of the
Programme of Action, we are also of the conviction
that the global effort should also focus on the need to
examine how implementation can be made more
relevant, given that the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons is still prevalent seven years after the
Programme of Action was adopted. That will, of
course, necessitate consideration of an approach that
would encompass the wider work and activities of the
United Nations. In that regard, we look forward to the
upcoming third Biennial Meeting of States to Consider
the Implementation of the Programme of Action.

As noted in the Secretary-General's report, the
illicit proliferation of small arms facilitates a wide
array of human rights violations, relating to murder;
rape and other forms of sexual violence; kidnapping;
torture; and the trafficking of persons, including
children. We fully agree that, where armed violence
becomes the established means for resolving
grievances and conflicts, legal and peaceful dispute
resolution mechanisms could in fact be eroded,
consequently posing severe difficulties for upholding
the rule of law and ensuring the dispensation ofjustice.
In such scenarios, the devastating effects of illicit small
arms and light weapons are usually felt most by the
vulnerable in our societies, including women and
children, and ultimately challenge the development
priorities of States by causing the diversion of efforts
aimed at attaining the Millennium Development Goals.

It is indeed not surprising that the Small Arms
Survey informs us that much more is known about the
number of nuclear warheads, stocks of chemical
weapons and transfers of major conventional weapons
than about small arms. The international community
has failed to respond to this alarming threat, especially
where it affects developing countries and where the
real impact of these weapons, in terms of criminal,
gang-related and narco-trafficking activities, is felt
daily at an astounding level. If we are to reverse that
trend, it is important that all Member States cooperate
and engage in meaningful action, including the
exchange of information among law enforcement
authorities, and implement such measures as will lead
to a reduction in the illegal trade of the approximately
875 million small arms and light weapons reported to
be currently in circulation globally.

Since 2001, our efforts in Jamaica, with the
assistance of our partners, to reduce the volume of
illegal guns and ammunition on our streets, have met
with some success. My delegation would like to take
this opportunity to express our appreciation for the
assistance provided to Jamaica at the bilateral and
regional levels, which has allowed for the
implementation of the Programme of Action in areas
such as the provision of training for legal officers,
policy-makers and law enforcement and customs
officials. We also express our gratitude to the United
Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and
Development in Latin America and the Caribbean for
its assistance in training programmes for law
enforcement officials. We certainly look forward to
continued cooperation and support in other areas as we
seek to comprehensively implement the Programme of
Action.

Jamaica hereby reiterates its call for the
international community to work resolutely and
steadfastly towards the adoption of a legally binding
instrument to enable States to identify and trace illicit
small arms and light weapons. At the same time, with
the constant changes in global patterns of the supply of
small arms and light weapons, there is an equal need
for the international community to examine and come
to terms with the problem of illicit brokering - a
situation that presents the greatest risk of the diversion
of these weapons to the underground market and
consequently into illegal hands. As stated by the
Secretary-General in paragraph 14 of his report, "it is
of the highest significance that countries enact
effective laws and regulations to govern this wide
spectrum of present-day arms brokering". My
delegation welcomes that very important and timely
injunction by the Secretary-General, which emphasizes
the need for the international community to proceed to
take urgent action in this critical area.

The nexus between small arms and light weapons
and ammunition is indissoluble. Accordingly, while
paying due attention to illicit small arms, we must also
be resolute in our commitment to regulate the illicit
proliferation of ammunition. This is of prime concern
to Jamaica. A gun without ammunition is merely a
mechanical contraption, a device that is practically
useless. So all efforts to curb, regulate or stem the flow
of illegal small arms and light weapons must be
accompanied by similar, multiple efforts to effectively
regulate the illegal flow of ammunition.

As a member of the Peacebuilding Commission,
Jamaica is fully aware of the arduous task faced by the
Commission in restoring and maintaining stability in
post-conflict situations. The issue of small arms and
light weapons is relevant to the work of the
Commission, as the levels of illegal weapons
circulating in the countries concerned are usually
higher at the end of a conflict. In that regard, we
support the view that the strategic frameworks
developed by the Commission could benefit from
coordination with existing instruments such as the
Programme of Action and the United Nations Register
of Conventional Arms, and also with the work done in

other forums to curb the proliferation of illicit arms.
The Jamaican delegation certainly looks forward to
supporting efforts to that end as the Commission
continues to develop the tools necessary to assist in
facilitating total recovery from conflict and in
achieving sustainable development in all countries
faced with such situations, in particular those countries
currently on its agenda.

Finally, Jamaica is currently reviewing the
recommendations offered by the Secretary-General in
his report on small arms and will express its views in
the upcoming Biennial Meeting and in other pertinent
forums.

Before concluding, I think it is incumbent on
Jamaica to express its appreciation and commendation
to you, Sir, for your able stewardship of the Council
during this month. We wish you all the best in the last
few hours of your presidency.

