Mr. Cunningham (United States): Let me begin
by saying that I agree with many of my colleagues
around the table that this has been a year of
considerable success. We have not reached all the goals
we set for ourselves, but we have accomplished quite a
bit. It has also been a year of considerable
improvement in the working methods of the Security
Council, demonstrating flexibility and creativity and
adapting ourselves to new challenges and
circumstances.

We welcome this year's report to the General
Assembly on the work of the Council. As others have
noted, it is streamlined and has a much better format,
and we commend Ambassador Mahbubani and his
colleagues for pressing forward and accomplishing this
outcome, which we supported.

The report reflects the continuing progress
achieved in balancing transparency with the efficient
workings of the Council. This has been achieved in
different degrees in at least three separate areas:
procedures; new mechanisms for work on Africa and
for incorporating the work of troop-contributing
countries; and the groundbreaking work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee and Ambassador
Valdivieso's committee.

During our presidency we worked closely with
the Singapore delegation to draw up a comprehensive
index of all the procedural notes that have been issued
on the workings of the Council. This annotated list
provides a clear guide to all Member States on a wide
range of procedural clarifications. We also appreciate
the efforts of Norway, as Chair of the Security Council
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations, to
establish a new mechanism for enhancing the dialogue
between the Council and troop contributors. We have
made some progress in addressing areas that were of
concern, but we believe that there is room for further
improvement. We welcome the views of troop-
contributing countries in our deliberations as a
contribution to better Council decision-making.

I would note that the traditional complaints about
the Council's lack of transparency are quickly being
overtaken by events. On the threat of global terrorism,
we saw the construction of a transparent body - the
Counter-Terrorism Committee - which has erased in
many respects the old lines and divisions between the
Council and the United Nations membership at large.
In resolution 1373 (2001), the Council took a radical
approach in reaction to 11 September; it was a
sweeping resolution imposing a series of legislative
and other obligations on all States. Those ambitious
goals can be achieved only with transparent
information sharing by Member States and in ongoing
dialogue between Member States and the Security
Council. The Counter-Terrorism Committee is a good
example of a practical, comprehensive and operational
method for incorporating all Member States into a
process of decision-making and implementation
stemming from a Security Council resolution. It is also,
I think, a prime example of the Council's flexibility,
and creativity and ability to adapt to new
circumstances.

That said, we are less interested in reviewing
where we have been than in planning for where we are
going. We will fully support efforts to improve
transparency in the future, while maintaining and
improving the Council's effectiveness. We have urgent,
important and pressing issues before us: peacekeeping,
conflict prevention, fighting terrorism and the unique
challenge posed by Iraq.

Our responsibilities as a Council and as members
ofthe Council compel us to continue efforts to be frank
and effective. For example, there should be no mincing
of words with regard to the threat to peace posed by
self-proclaimed terrorists, such as the Palestinian
Islamic Jihad, Hamas and the Al-Aqsa Martyrs
Brigade. In the coming days, the Council will be called
on to meet the purpose for which it was created, when

it addresses the defiance of Iraq and the threat it poses
to international peace and security.

