Mr. IliicheV (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the Force Commanders, Lieutenant
General Dos Santos Cruz, Major General Ngondi and
Major General Iqbal Asi, for their briefings on current
issues of concern to peacekeeping operations in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Liberia and Cote
d'Ivoire and United Nations peacekeeping overall.

Regarding cooperation between peacekeeping
operations, it is our View that missions and the
Secretariat must be fully prepared for any negative
scenarios that may develop in the field, in particular
with respect to the exchange of information between
missions in the same region, the coordination of their
activities and the movement of troops and equipment
in case of emergency resource shortage. In this regard,
we would like to express our appreciation to the troop-
contributing countries, which flexibly and promptly
agree to such movements.

However, although such interaction between
peacekeeping operations in West Africa as a temporary
mechanism for dealing with emergency problems
has shown itself effective in a number of emergency
situations, for example maintaining security during
elections in Liberia and Cote d'Ivoire, it is vital to
ensure that all United Nations peacekeeping operations
have the necessary resources to discharge their
mandates. From a political and operational standpoint,
it is important to take into consideration all possible
scenarios in countries where cooperating are missions
deployed. Each peacekeeping operation should at any
time be prepared to fulfil its mandate fully. There must
be minimum threats to the security ofthe Blue Helmets.
In the majority of cases, peacekeepers and equipment
are being sent into the most tense and dangerous
circumstances.

We need to approach the idea of standardizing
cooperation between peacekeeping operations very
carefully, especially in moving troops and equipment,
bearing in mind the range of political, legal and
financial considerations. Such questions must include
the agreement of the country concerned to the change,
even if it involves temporary configurations of the
international presence, the peacekeepers being prepared
to be moved, and United Nations administrative and
budget procedures. Of major significance is Security
Council agreement to the movement of personnel and
resources.

Separately, we would like to talk about the
challenges for the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO). These are laid out in resolution
2098 (2013), which calls for the implementation of
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region
with a view to a political path towards a long-term
settlement of the conflict and the establishment of
peace and stability in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the region overall. We look forward to the
full implementation of the provisions of that resolution,
including that establishing the intervention brigade
with the Mission.

In this context, we would like to inquire how the

process for the deployment of the Brigade is going.

How is it perceived as an instrument for achieving a

qualitative turnaround in combating anti-Government
units? An important United Nations peacekeeping

innovation, which has been noted in MONUSCO, is the

use of unmanned aerial vehicles. It is still our view that
this experimental process will require a careful analysis
of all aspects ofthe implementation ofnew technologies
and is not a carte blanche for similar steps in other
missions. In this regard, we would like to know at what
stage the deployment of the drones within MONUSCO
is, and when the United Nations anticipates achieving
their operational use. What is the perception of this
question on the ground? Is there a risk that the drones
could become an irritant, hindering the establishment
of an atmosphere of trust among neighbours and even
the very process of Congolese peacebuilding?

