Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this important debate on
the promotion and strengthening of the rule of law in
the maintenance of international peace and security. I
also wish to thank the Deputy Secretary-General,
Ms. Asha-Rose Migiro, and the Under-Secretary-
General, Ms. Patricia O'Brien, for their statements.

The Preamble to the Charter of the United
Nations expresses the determination of the peoples of
the United Nations to establish conditions under which
justice and respect for obligations arising from treaties
and other sources of international law can be
maintained. It envisages an international community
grounded in law. Justice and law are therefore
fundamental conditions for international peace and
security. The international community must rekindle its
commitment to fundamental human rights and to the
dignity and worth of the human person.

It is often said that there can be no peace without
justice. Justice and peace are complementary variables,
neither of which can last or even exist without the
other. Durable peace must be built on social, economic
and political foundations that serve the needs of the
people. We therefore welcome the continuing efforts of
the Security Council to address the critical issue of
early consideration of peacebuilding activities, right
from the peacemaking and peacekeeping stages. In that
regard, support for building the capacity of institutions
for justice and the rule of law is critical if justice is to
be meaningfully delivered at national levels.

Promotion of justice and the rule of law is
critical, especially in fragile post-conflict situations in
order to avoid impunity and the danger of relapse into
further conflict. It is essential to insure national
ownership and support of the people for programmes
for justice and the rule of law.

In intractable conflict situations it would be
unrealistic to expect effective delivery of justice and
the rule of law where there is no functioning police,
judicial institutions or custodial facilities. Therefore a
holistic approach is needed to situations leading to or
arising from conflict. The international community
should contribute to comprehensive and holistic
solutions, rather than to half measures that ultimately
would not lead to the results envisaged.

Uganda supports mechanisms for dispute
prevention and settlement, which include international
as well as regional courts and tribunals. We are
convinced that such mechanisms offer States the
options for settling disputes peacefully.

The promotion of the rule of law is crucial in the
maintenance of international peace and security. As a
State party to the Rome Statute, Uganda is committed
to the role of the International Criminal Court (ICC) in
ending impunity for the perpetrators of the most
heinous crimes of concern to the international
community. Our commitment is further evidenced in
our hosting in Kampala of the recently concluded
Review Conference of the Rome Statue, which resulted
in historic adoption of a resolution (resolution RC/Res.6) on the crime of aggression as a crime
punishable by the International Criminal Court.
Uganda has institutionalized the rule of law by
promulgating the necessary legislation domesticating
the Rome Statue and establishing equally appropriate
institutions to dispense justice. The War Crimes
Division of the High Court of Uganda is thus
complementary to the ICC in the pursuit of justice for
the most serious crimes of concern to the international
community.

My delegation is not oblivious to the Challenges
arising from situations of armed conflict and the fight
against terrorism. Nevertheless, it is important to
ensure that human rights law and international
humanitarian law are observed. All parties to armed
conflict must respect international law applicable to the
rights and protection of women and children and other
vulnerable persons.

Finally, we thank the Mexican delegation for the
draft presidential statement, which Uganda supports.

