Mr. Linkevicius (Lithuania): Allow me to begin by
commending Poland, as the President of the Security
Council for the month of May, for convening this
exceptionally important open debate. I would also
like to thank our briefers for their contributions to
our discussion.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union.

Lithuania is celebrating the centennial anniversary
of the restoration of its independence this year. One
of the factors that enabled us to begin developing our
State was the League of Nations and a system based on
international rules. We joined the League of Nations
and co-founded the Permanent Court of International
Justice, the predecessors of today's United Nations and
International Court of Justice. Unfortunately, Lithuania
was occupied by the Soviet Union by the time the
League of Nations had ceased its activities. Following
its return to the international family, Lithuania accepted
the compulsory jurisdiction of the International Court
of Justice. Like others, we are happy to note recent
declarations recognizing the jurisdiction of the Court.

When rules are not observed, we are confronted
by a clear threat to international peace and security.
Today ongoing conflicts are destroying many parts of
the globe, while Governments take steps to turn their
contested claims into faits accomplis. In Syria, Yemen
and the Central African Republic, among others, gross
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights law continue on a daily basis. Barbaric crimes are
being committed on a massive scale. A total collapse of
law and order has also led to unspeakable atrocities.

After listening to the remarks by the Russian
representative, who lectured us on international
law, I would like to recall that non-compliance with
international law in Europe has led to clear violations
of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States
in several cases. The protracted conflict in Moldova
has continued for almost 20 years. The violation of
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Georgia is
entering its tenth year. Moreover, we recently witnessed
the occupation and annexation of Crimea by the Russian
Federation and military actions in eastern Ukraine,
including the downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-
l7. Those do not appear to be isolated events.

Such blatant breaches of the Charter of the United
Nations constitute a threat to international peace,
security and stability and should not be permitted in
the twenty-first century. The United Nations and the
entire international community have to be able to react
effectively to such constantly repeated violations.

During its non-permanent membership on the
Security Council, Lithuania consistently raised the
issue of the violation of international law in Ukraine.
Unfortunately, the Security Council was not able to
take any concrete action. We especially regret that the
Council was not able to ensure that an independent
and impartial international court or tribunal would
investigate the downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight
MH-17. That undermines the credibility of the whole
United Nations.

There are many ways to achieve long-lasting peace
and stability. The Secretary-General's efforts to put
emphasis on conflict resolution, preventive diplomacy,
peacebuilding and sustaining peace are therefore of
the utmost importance. The advancement of preventive
diplomacy, early action and mediation remain vital to
preventing conflicts and mass atrocities. Early action
matters. Greater commitment and engagement must
also be devoted to supporting political processes.

A crucial element of conflict prevention consists
of putting an end to impunity and ensuring justice for
all. The Council's strong voice and action in support
of international law, accountability and justice matter a
great deal. Accountability for crimes against humanity,
genocide and war crimes is key to progress on the path
of reconciliation and peace. My Government therefore
commends the work done by the International, Impartial
and Independent Mechanism and the Commission of
Inquiry in laying the foundation for the accountability
process in Syria. Moreover, a new French initiative
launched this year on the International Partnership
against Impunity for the Use of Chemical Weapons is
very timely.

It is the primary responsibility of national justice
systems to investigate and prosecute the most serious
crimes of international concern. However, where
national judicial systems fail to tackle impunity, the
Security Council should be ready to use the full range
of tools at its disposal, including targeted sanctions
and referrals to the International Criminal Court. A
relevant and strong United Nations requires an efficient,
transparent and inclusive Security Council to meet
today's challenges to international peace and security
and improve global governance. Among other things,
restraint in the use of the veto would make the Council's
responses to ongoing crises more effective and reduce
veto-induced paralysis. Lithuania therefore strongly
supports the French-Mexican initiative on limiting its
use in cases of mass atrocities, genocide, war crimes
and crimes against humanity. Lithuania also actively
endorses the relevant initiatives of Liechtenstein and
the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group.

