The Secretary-General: Thank you, Mr. President
for inviting me to brief the Council today. I thank the
Security Council for its attention to the mounting crisis
in South Sudan. I visited the country last week to sound
the alarm about the violence and the risk of catastrophic
famine and to press the leaders to step back from their
destructive path.

I had a long and productive meeting with President
Salva Kiir last Tuesday in Juba, and spoke by telephone
to former Vice-President Mr. Riek Machar. My message
to both was clear: they must work together to heal the
wounds they have opened.

I am pleased that they responded positively to my
appeal to reopen dialogue. I welcome the ceasefire
agreement signed in Addis Ababa on Friday and I
commend the mediation role of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) under the
chairmanship of Prime Minister Dessalegn of Ethiopia.
I call on the international community to continue to
support IGAD's efforts.

Since the crisis began five months ago, many
thousands ofSouth Sudanese have been killed, atrocities
have been committed by both sides, more than 1 million
people have been displaced and nearly 5 million more
need humanitarian assistance. If the conflict continues,
half of South Sudan's 12 million people will either
become internally displaced, refugees abroad, starving
or dead by the year's end.

In Juba, I visited the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) Tomping protection-of-
civilians site, which hosts some 20,000 people. I was
appalled by the conditions they must endure, which are
worse than in any of the many refugee camps I have
visited around the world, including the refugee camps
for Syrians. But let me emphasize: our peacekeeping
bases are not designed to accommodate such an influx,
nor should they be. UNMISS and the various United
Nations agencies are now working to provide safer,
more hygienic accommodations for the more than
80,000 people we are sheltering around the country.

The United Nations policy of opening our gates as
an emergency option to protect innocent civilians is
correct, unprecedented and not without considerable
risk to United Nations staff, to our relations with
communities and to those we are trying to shelter. It
is not a routine decision, nor one taken lightly, but one
that we were morally compelled to take.

I am proud of the actions of our United Nations
peacekeepers and civilian staff. Their quick response
and courage has saved tens of thousands of lives. But
that is not a long-term solution. This is an entirely man-
made calamity and it needs the engagement of all actors
to change course. I see five priorities.

First, the fighting must end immediately. People
need to be able to go back to their land to plant and
tend their crops in peace. Hunger and malnutrition are
already widespread. If the planting window is missed,
there will be a real risk of famine. That is why we are
calling for 30 days of tranquility, backed by both sides.
I am troubled by accusations already from both sides of
breaches of the ceasefire and I urge maximum restraint
by all parties.

Secondly, both sides must fulfil their commitment
to allowing humanitarian access by air, road and, in
particular, by barge along the Nile River. Peacekeepers
and aid workers are operating under increasingly
difficult circumstances. Attacks on the United Nations
and the humanitarian community are unacceptable.
They must cease immediately, and all parties should
respect international human rights and humanitarian
law.

Thirdly, the international community must support
humanitarian action. The United Nations is launching
a massive operation to help 3.2 million people, but
we need resources. The humanitarian community is
$781 million short of the $1.27 billion that we estimate
is needed by the middle of the year. I urge all countries
to support the forthcoming 20 May donor conference
on South Sudan to be hosted by Norway and the United
Nations.

Fourthly, there must be justice and accountability.
The human rights report issued by UNMISS last
Thursday underscores the level of atrocities committed
by all sides. There are reasonable grounds to believe
that crimes against humanity have been committed.
A special or hybrid tribunal with international
involvement should be considered.

Fifthly, the two leaders must recommit to inclusive
nation-building that involves all political leaders and
civil society. That means addressing the root causes of
the conflict. They must cease a senseless power struggle
and restore the sense of national unity that prevailed at
the time of independence.

I commend the leadership ofPrime Minister Dessalegn
of Ethiopia as Chairman of IGAD and the efforts of
United States Secretary of State John Kerry. Political
dialogue is the only answer. Now the onus is on both
South Sudanese leaders to accelerate the momentum
for peace.

