Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I would like to add my
voice to those who have thanked Ms. Zerrougui and
Ambassador Alotaibi for their work. I would like to
underline Ms. Zerrougui's personal engagement on
the issue. We really appreciate it. I thank both of them
very much for their briefings and for the written report
(S/2019/575). I subscribe to what was said by those
who spoke earlier, in particular the representatives of
France, Belgium, Poland. I can therefore be brief.

I share Ms. Zerrougui's positive take on President
Tshisekedi. She quoted his vision of establishing a
haven for peace and development in the region. I note
that some members, including my French colleague,
talked about the climate of optimism and the opening
up of the political space. That is certainly the case, but
we are not yet in heaven. Many challenges that have
already been mentioned remain, such as the formation
of the Government. I can understand that the former
President, Mr. Kabila, clings to power but he has to let
go. He has to understand that. People must tell him that
so that the Government can finally be formed.

As was said earlier, the justice system has to be
established in order to effectively fight impunity. The
increased violence in the east is a concern. There are
too many spoilers, in addition to displacement and the
continuation of sexual violence against children and
women, who are most affected by the conflict. The
attack on humanitarian workers, in particular during
an Ebola outbreak, is unacceptable. Ms. Zerrougui said
that it has health and political dimensions. Therefore, it
would be really good if we could have a special Council
meeting to address the Ebola crisis.

With regard to the response, I can only subscribe to
what Ms. Zerrougui said about the One United Nations
approach, at both the national and the regional levels.
Neighbouring countries also need to play on the same
team, as was also implied in Mr. Alotaibi's briefing,
with regard to the need for regional players to play ball
and be involved.

Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration is
also important and some success has been had in that
area, but more is needed. Efforts must also include the
cooperation of civil society. Young people must also be
involved. It is unfortunate that for health reasons we do
not have a civil society briefer with us today.

The United Nations Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
remains key. We appreciate its redirection through
the One United Nations method and strategy. We
look forward to the independent review team's
recommendations with regard to how best to address
the challenges and how MONUSCO can have a real
impact. We look forward to receiving that report.

