Mr. Satoh (Japan): I would like to begin by
extending my sincere congratulations to you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for

 

the month of September. May I also express my
Government's appreciation of your leadership during the
past two weeks in guiding the work of the Council on the
difficult question of East Timor.

I would like also to thank the members of the Security
Council mission, led by Ambassador Andjaba of Namibia,
for providing the international community with their
valuable findings and assessments. Their presence in
Indonesia during the past week was undoubtedly critical as
the Government of Indonesia came to its important decision
on 12 September.

My sincere appreciation goes also to the members of
the United Nations Mission in East Timor (UNAMET),
who in the face of difficult circumstances ensured that the
popular consultation was carried out successfully. I wish to
pay special tribute to the small number of staff members
who are at this very moment striving under very severe
conditions to maintain a United Nations presence in East
Timor.

Japan strongly deplores the deterioration of the
security situation and the grave humanitarian crisis that
have occurred in East Timor since the result of the popular
consultation was announced. Having received reports of
unspeakable violence and destruction and of the forced
displacement of large numbers of people over the course of
many days, the international community welcomed the
encouraging news from Jakarta over this past weekend. I
would like to join the members of the Security Council and
many other Member States in welcoming the courageous
and very difficult decision of President Habibie to accept an
international peacekeeping force. I also commend the
efforts of the Foreign Minister, Mr. Alatas, who has come
to New York to discuss arrangements for the early
deployment of the international force.

My delegation welcomes the decision taken by the
Council today in authorizing the establishment of a
multinational force to restore peace and security in East
Timor. It is clear that this resolution is but the first step in
the difficult and complex process of restoring peace and
order in East Timor and of implementing the result of the
popular consultation of 30 August. The international
community must cooperate in organizing and deploying the
necessary forces as quickly as possible. Japan pays high
tribute to those Member States, particularly Australia,
which have offered to organize, lead and contribute to the
multinational force in East Timor. The task confronting that
force will by no means be easy, and it is absolutely
essential that the Indonesian authorities extend it their full
cooperation.

In the View of my delegation, the immediate task in
East Timor is threefold. First, law and order in East
Timor must be quickly restored. All acts of violence must
end immediately. The forced displacement of people to
West Timor must cease immediately. The Indonesian
Government, particularly the military authorities, have a
grave responsibility for the security of East Timor. Japan
calls upon the Indonesian authorities concerned to
cooperate fully with the multinational force to facilitate
the process of its deployment and the implementation of
its mandate.

Another task is to ensure an appropriate environment
in which the UNAMET staff can return to East Timor and
in which the Mission can resume its operations in
accordance with the 5 May tripartite Agreement. Japan is
particularly concerned for the safety of UNAMET
personnel remaining in Dili and the conditions
surrounding them.

Finally, an environment in which humanitarian
activities can be safely carried out must be established
immediately so that assistance can be extended to those
who have been the victims of violence and whose homes
and property have been destroyed. We welcome the
Indonesian Govemment's intention to accept international
humanitarian assistance. But here again, it is imperative
that an environment be established in which humanitarian
organizations can function safely and effectively, and that
the Indonesian Government fully cooperate with the
multinational force in facilitating humanitarian assistance
operations.

Japan, as a long-standing and very close friend, has
conveyed to the Government of Indonesia its views as
well as those of the international community on the
importance of accepting international assistance to restore
security in East Timor. Now that the Security Council
resolution has been accepted, Japan will continue to
provide support and assistance to the political and
humanitarian process of restoring peace in East Timor and
to the implementation of the result of the ballot of 30
August. As Prime Minister Keizo Obuchi announced on
13 September in Auckland, Japan is committed to making
the utmost efforts to ensure the stability of East Timor.
My Government will, through the United Nations, make
financial contributions to the multinational force and will
also provide emergency humanitarian assistance. We are
also determined to provide assistance for the rehabilitation

 

and development of East Timor. My Government will
announce the details of Japan's contribution in the very
near future.

In pursuing the goals stipulated in the Security Council
resolution adopted today, it must also be borne in mind that
Indonesia itself is at a precarious stage in its
democratization process, which the Government and the
people of Indonesia are pursuing in the face of tremendous
economic difficulties. The commitment to democracy, the
rule of law, economic reform and human rights reiterated
by President Habibie on 12 September clearly demonstrates
that Indonesia is a country which shares the cherished
values of the international community, and we must
welcome his commitment. It is important for the
international community to keep this broader picture in
mind as it continues to address this difficult issue.

