Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I know that it is late,
but my statement will not take long. Today, the Russian
delegation once again resorted to a flat lie, this time
stating that the Council did not receive any request from
Ukraine on the deployment ofa peacekeeping operation.

Just for the record, Ukraine officially approached
the Council at the highest level, as well as the Secretary-
General, with such a request on at least two occasions.
Relevant appeals on the part of Ukraine, the President
and the National Security and Defence Council, as well
as the Parliament, were accompanied by letters from the
Ukrainian Minister for Foreign Affairs and officially
transmitted to the United Nations by our Mission in
February and March last year.

Let me recall a quote from an address by the
President of Ukraine to the Security Council and
the Secretary-General, adopted by the Ukrainian
parliament on 17 March 2015.

"On behalf of Ukraine I address the Secretary-
General and the Security Council of the United
Nations to initiate appropriate procedures for
the deployment of a United Nations international
peacekeeping operation in the territory of
Ukraine, with the exact modalities to be defined
in consultations with the Ukrainian side, in
accordance with established practice. In particular,
I request that a preliminary assessment mission be
dispatched to Ukraine in order to assess the situation
and put forward recommendations for consideration
by the Security Council." (S/2015/225, p. 4.)

One can ask oneself: if that is not a request
addressed to the Council, then what is it? Yet the
Russian delegation may try to deny even that. If so,
let me recall that the aforementioned address by the
President, adopted by the Parliament of Ukraine and
addressed to the Council, was distributed as an official
United Nations document on 2 April 2015 under the
symbol S/2015/225.

It is highly unusual for a Council member to deny
the existence of a document that can be found in the
online United Nations document system. I would
therefore like to ask the Secretariat to distribute hard
copies of the Ukrainian request. For ease of use and
reference, we will also upload that official Security
Council document to our Mission's web page.

Moving on now to the substance of today's debate,
I wish to inform the Council that, as the Permanent
Council of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in Vienna was informed
yesterday, Russian-backed separatist forces continue to
use advanced weapons and equipment to put civilians
at risk in eastern Ukraine. According to monitors of
the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine,
residents of Donetsk said that separatist fighters
position themselves on the roofs of their homes, launch
mortar attacks and then flee, leaving civilians to face
defensive return fire from Ukrainian soldiers.
Recently, Russian-backed separatists attacked
Ukrainian positions from a water-treatment plant,
using chlorine canisters stored there as a deterrent to
Ukrainian return fire, as the rupture of the canisters
would cause a local environmental disaster. There is
no justification for such acts, which intentionally place
civilians and critical civilian infrastructure at risk.

The meeting rose at 6.55 pm.
