Mr. Puente (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I wish
to express appreciation for the valuable information
provided by Ambassador Ahmedou Ould Abdallah,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Somalia, and to acknowledge his commitment and
efforts and those of his team in seeking solutions to the
problems faced by Somalia. We also welcome the
presence of Ambassador Elmi Ahmed Duale,
Permanent Representative of Somalia.

We believe that the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2009/590) is very clear on a number of
points. One of them is that the phenomenon of piracy
and armed robbery off the coast of Somalia is a
challenge requiring fully coordinated urgent action by
the Transitional Federal Government, the countries of
the region and the international community. One year
ago, the Security Council acted decisively against that
threat by adopting resolutions 1846 (2008) and 1851
(2008). The cooperation, commitment and
commendable work of many countries has produced a
common front against such acts.

Nevertheless, the number of attacks and
hijackings off the coast of Somalia, in the Gulf of Aden
and in the western Indian Ocean in 2009 is higher than
that recorded in 2008. We are also concerned at the fact
that, in addition to the increase in the number of acts of
piracy and armed robbery committed in recent days,
smaller vessels, such as fishing boats and pleasure
craft, are being attacked.

We acknowledge the efforts being made by the
Transitional Federal Government of Somalia, in
particular to promote greater coordination with the
Puntland and Somaliland regions in seeking to
prosecute suspected pirates. We commend the
coordination and cooperation efforts between
Operation Atalanta, NATO, Combined Task Force 151
and Member States and naval forces in the region to
carry out monitoring and escorts. In particular, we pay
tribute to Operation Atalanta for its efforts to escort
and protect vessels related to the World Food
Programme and the African Union Mission in Somalia.

With regard to the Contact Group on Piracy Off
the Coast of Somalia, we recognize as an important
step forward the establishment of the international trust
fund to support the prosecution of suspected pirates
and other initiatives of the Group, as well as the efforts
being made in its working groups to promote greater
coordination and capacity-building, to disseminate best
practices and to strengthen counter-piracy legal
mechanisms. Regarding the latter point, we reaffirm
that those responsible for acts of piracy must be
brought to justice in accordance with the applicable
legal regime, including standards in the area of human
rights and fundamental freedoms.

Moreover, we also highlight the work done by the
International Maritime Organization in setting out
guidelines and specific actions to be taken by States, as
well as the joint efforts with the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime to correct the deficiencies of
national legislative systems. In that connection, the
widespread implementation of the Djibouti Code of
Conduct is essential. That would enable States in the
region to take part in actions carried out by
international forces, through the strengthening of their
legal and judicial capacities.

As we have stated on previous occasions, my
delegation believes that piracy off the coast of Somalia
is not a phenomenon isolated from the situation on the
ground and that the solution to both problems requires
a comprehensive approach. This must include, among
other elements, developing the rule of law and security
institutions as a complement to the peace process,
strengthening the Transitional Federal Institutions,
building the capacity of judicial institutions and
prosecuting criminal suspects in order to combat
impunity.

Finally, my delegation has emphasized both in the
Security Council and in the Contact Group on Piracy

the negative impact of this phenomenon on the
sanctions regime with regard to Somalia. Such acts, in
addition to being apparent violations of the arms
embargo, undermine the stability and security of the
country and directly affect access of humanitarian aid.
Mexico, in its capacity as Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 751
(1992) concerning Somalia, reaffirms that it is essential
that the States and multinational maritime coalitions
deploying forces to combat piracy cooperate with the
Monitoring Group on Somalia by providing
information in a systematic and timely manner on
actions that violate the sanctions regime and which
have a particularly negative impact on efforts to
promote economic and social development in Somalia
and on the consolidation of the Government and the
institutions of Somalia.

