Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting at
a crucial point in the Ebola epidemic. I thank the
briefers, Mr. David Nabarro, Mr. Anthony Banbury
and Mr. Thomas Mauget, as well as the Ambassadors
of Guinea, Liberia, Mali and Sierra Leone. Through
them, France wishes to pay tribute to the victims and to
the local and international personnel who are working
closely with the sick to provide them with assistance.

Progress in the struggle has been noted and we
welcome it, but it remains insufficient and too many
locations are affected. Moreover, the cases in Mali are
an additional source of concern. We thank Mr. Nabarro,
Mr. Banbury and all United Nations personnel involved
for their actions, both at the strategic and operational
levels. We also encourage the continued efforts of
the United Nations to deploy personnel as near as
possible to those affected on the ground. We deplore
the sudden death of Mr. Marcel Rudasingwa, who led
the United Nations mission in Guinea, and we offer
our condolences to his family, to his loved ones and to
Rwanda.

The struggle against the Ebola epidemic has
mobilized France at the highest level. Last week,
our Secretary of State, Ms. Annick Girardin, visited
Guinea, together with the European Union Coordinator,
Mr. Christos Stylianides, on the occasion ofthe opening
of the treatment centre in Macenta, in the Guinea Forest
Region, the heart of the worst hit zone. The centre
is operational and has an initial capacity of 50 beds,
which could be significantly increased if necessary.
Ms. Girardin also travelled to Mali to express France's
solidarity with that country and to immediately
strengthen our assistance to prevent the spread of the
disease. President Francois Hollande will travel to
Guinea next week to underscore France's support for
that affected country.

In this race against time with the Ebola virus, as
has been eloquently recalled by others, we would like to
commend the commitment, the courage, the devotion of
the non-governmental organizations, such as Medecins
Sans Frontieres and the International Committee of the
Red Cross, that are on the front lines in the struggle,
as Mr. Mauget's riveting briefing reminded us. Their
interest in receiving on-site treatment or medical
evacuation in the event of an infection is fullyjustified.
That is why France is setting up a treatment centre for
all staff - national and international - involved in
the Ebola response, without distinction of nationality.
The centre is being built in Conakry and should be
operational by the end of December.

Moreover, France has ensured the establishment of a
European mechanism for the treatment of international
staff, including their medical evacuation to Europe. As
part of that mechanism, which is already operational,

France places its own evacuation capabilities at the
disposal of international personnel. Our efforts to
provide relief for the population, training and advice fit
into the United Nations strategy to establish mid-size
treatment centres in the middle of the epidemic hotspots.

We have intensified our response, in particular in
Guinea. Eighty French civil security agents are working
hard to set up two new treatment centres that will open
in Beyla and Ke'rouane' in mid-December. They are also
participating in strengthening the centre in Forecariah.
French civil security will also renovate the Mane'ah
school in Conakry that will host the training centre for
Guinean staff, both medical and non-medical, involved
in the fight against Ebola, in addition to the training
provided in France. The Pasteur Institute is stepping
up its activities, which will be in Guinea over the long
term, with the creation of a Pasteur Centre of Expertise
in Conakry.

Finally, in response to the request from the United
Nations and with the consent of the Guinean President,
Professor Alpha Conde', we are strengthening the
coordination of international assistance with the United
Nations system and in support of the Guinean national
coordination against Ebola. In total, more than 100
French health workers are thus engaged on the ground.
We are also working in Mali, where we have sent
several French medical experts to assist the national
Malian coordinator in facilitating health checks at
Bamako airport and assess the capacities of Malian
health structures to treat the ill.

All of those measures should help us defeat the
epidemic by isolating the virus and not the countries
concerned. Isolation is counterproductive in the short
term and harmful to their economic development
in the long term. Beyond the urgent response to the
epidemic, we cannot underestimate the magnitude of
the economic and social consequences of the crisis.
Long-term reconstruction and recovery will require
coordinated efforts and assistance from the countries
of the subregion in preparing their health-care systems
to combat the virus. The United Nations will have to
adopt an integrated, tailored and differentiated strategy
to bolster resilience to such health-care shocks. That
is the very thrust of the commitment of France, which
will continue to work side by side with the countries of
the region.

