Mr. Cevik (Turkey): I thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this debate.

The Middle East is today more unstable and
unpredictable than at any time in recent history.
However, the proliferation of crises in the wider region
must not distract us from the urgent need to resolve
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, which remains a core
challenge.

The continuing Israeli occupation and its practices
in contravention of international law, such as the
recent decision on land appropriation in the West
Bank, hamper efforts to establish a permanent peace.
The expansion of illegal settlements, the denial of the
Palestinians' rights to use natural resources, arbitrary
arrests, the suppression of freedom of association and
assembly, the excessive use of force, as well as efforts
aimed at undermining the status and Islamic sanctity of
Al-Haram Al-Sharif, must immediately stop.

The situation in Gaza also remains worrisome.
The international community cannot afford to stand
by idly in the face of the tragedy of 1.8 million people
suffering under an inhumane blockade for nine years.
Israel should respond to the continuous calls and lift the
siege on the Gaza Strip in order to allow the Gazans to
build their livelihoods.

The historical injustice against the Palestinian
people, reinforced by the illegal practices of Israel
on the ground, is fuelling hatred, alienation and
radicalism in the region and beyond. To the extent that
the Palestinian people lack hope, their reaction grows.
The only way out of this impasse is to convince the
Palestinians that their future will be better than today
and that they will be sitting at the negotiation table as
the State of Palestine in equal standing with Israel.

We all agree that the status quo is unacceptable
and unsustainable. The international trend towards the
recognition ofthe State ofPalestine is a reflection ofthat
frustration. The recent decision by the European Union
with regard to labelling products from the settlements
and the raising of the Palestinian flag at United Nations
Headquarters are steps in the right direction. Needless
to say, the root cause of the problem is the illegal
occupation of East Jerusalem and other Palestinian
territories by Israel. In that regard, the establishment of
an independent and sovereign Palestinian State within
the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
is the only viable solution. The Security Council
should also assume its primary responsibility vis-a-vis
international peace and security.

The situation in Syria today is the greatest disaster
we have encountered since the Second World War. As
a neighbouring country, Turkey is extremely concerned
by the humanitarian and security impacts of the crisis,
which constitute a major national security threat. In
that regard, we maintain our resolute stance in the
fight against terrorism, without making a distinction
between the terrorist organizations.

We are at a critical time in Syria. The crisis can
be overcome only by a political solution. The work
of the International Syria Support Group (ISSG) and
the subsequent adoption of resolution 2254 (2015)
accelerated the efforts to revitalize the political
process. The political process should lead to a transition
period with concrete timelines, a new constitution and
elections. In the meantime, the Council should assume
the implementation of all the measures, including those
related to a nationwide ceasefire and to humanitarian
access, and outlined in its very own resolution 2254
(2015).

The Syrian people can regain their faith in the
international community only if they see an improvement
of humanitarian conditions on the ground. The tragic
stories of starvation and death in the besieged town
of Madaya are just the latest examples of violations of
the most fundamental principles of international law.
The regime's brutal policies and indiscriminate attacks
against its own population, as well as the recent air
strikes by its allies targeting civilians and moderate
opposition under the pretext of fighting Daesh, must
stop. Such attacks not only undermine the prospects for
a political solution, but also contribute to the worsening
of the scourge of terrorism.

The moderate opposition cannot be expected to
negotiate under fire. In addition, it should be entitled
to designate its own representatives. Non-intervention
by third parties in the composition of the opposition
negotiation team is a must for the credibility and
sustainability of the process. Attempts to dilute and
weaken the opposition would only harm the process
before it even starts.
The current tragedy will not end unless the people
of Syria have a legitimate Government that truly
represents their will and enjoys their full consent. On
that score, the Syrian people have already spoken.
Now it is time for us - the members of the ISSG - to
prepare the ground for a real process that will lead to
genuine political change.

Syria's security is also linked to the international
community's efforts to counter Daesh in Iraq, as a
lasting victory against Daesh can be achieved only if
coupled with an inclusive strategy. We welcome the
recent progress by the Iraqi army and the liberation of
Ramadi. However, it is important to consolidate those
gains and increase the capability of Iraqi forces. In that
regard, we would like to reiterate our commitment to
supporting Iraq in its efforts to fight Daesh.

Some recent developments have served to
demonstrate once again the merits of diplomacy. In
that regard, we welcome the announcement on the
achievement of the implementation date of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action regarding the Iranian
nuclear programme. In addition, the signing of the
Libyan political agreement and the recent steps towards
the establishment of the Libyan Government of national
accord are also promising for the restoration of stability
in Libya.

We have affirmed our full support to the future
Libyan Government during the visit to Ankara on
11 January by Prime Minister-Designate Fayez Sarraj.
We stand ready to respond to future requests of the
Government of national accord.

