Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), for her briefing
today and for introducing the ninth report submitted to
the Security Council pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011).

Jordan stresses its continued support for the
International Criminal Court based on our conviction
in the principles on which it was founded. The Court is
a main pillar for the promotion of criminal justice, for
putting an end to impunity for the perpetrators of the
worst crimes and for the maintenance of international
peace and security and the rule of law.

Jordan welcomes the continuing consultations
between the Libyan Government and the Office
of the Prosecutor of the ICC, as noted in the report.
Jordan stresses that the Court's success in achieving
its objectives mainly relies on consultations and the
building of bridges of mutual cooperation. In that regard,
we would like to call upon the Libyan Government to
cooperate with the Court and to provide all possible
material and logistical support to enable the Court to
gather evidence, investigate incidents, and coordinate
and exchange information on the arrest and surrender
of individuals.

We would also like to highlight our appreciation
of the huge challenges that face Libya today. It is
important that Libya continues to work to establish
the rule of law and to ensure the investigation of all
criminal incidents for all crimes, without exception, in
accordance with international judicial criteria and with
the goal of establishing justice. That is particularly
necessary since the number of displaced persons and
asylum seekers has continued to increase due to the
barbaric practices of murder, kidnapping, torture and
arbitrary arrests, which all fall within the competence
of the Court.
In conclusion, we would like to emphasize the
importance of establishing criminal justice as a
main pillar of stability in Libya. We also stress the
need to respect the unity, sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence of Libya, as well
as its commitment to comprehensive dialogue, to the
denunciation of violence and to support for the political
process. We underscore the importance of providing full
support to Libya's legitimate constitutional institutions
and putting an end to all hostilities on Libyan territory.
We also stress the necessity of the efforts of all Libyans
in enabling the Libyan State to restore control over its
entire territory and continue the democratic transition
and political process.

