Mr. Ruiz Blanco (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin by thanking Malaysia for its initiative
to convene today's open debate during its presidency
of the Security Council and for circulating the related
concept note (S/2016/662, annex). I also welcome the
statement by the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon,
as well as the briefings by his Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, and
the Executive Director of UNICEF, Mr. Anthony Lake.

In the 20 years since the publication of the Machel
report (see A/51/306), the challenges in the protection of
children in armed conflict persist, and its call to action
remains in force. The Machel report was a milestone in
the protection of children affected by armed conflict
and outlined elements that served as paths for building
regulatory frameworks and national policies. That
is why Colombia hopes that today's open debate will
serve as a opportunity to reiterate the commitment to
the findings and recommendations of the report and to
making progress in building a safer world for children.

I also want to highlight the Children, Not Soldiers
campaign led by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
which is aimed at achieving the commitment of States
that still recruit boys and girls into their national
forces to eliminating this practice. We believe that the
commitment of the international community as a whole
is essential in order to achieve similar results in relation
to non-State groups.

Colombia rejects any kind of linkage between
children and armed conflict. Since 1999, this practice
has been completely banned in my country and is a crime
under Colombian criminal law. In 2007, the Colombian
Government established an intersectoral commission
at the highest level to prevent the recruitment and use
of children and adolescents in the conflict. It has been
working throughout the country, using the guarantee of
rights as a basic element of prevention.

In the framework of this debate, I wish to highlight
the effort the country has been making over the past
four years to find a negotiated settlement to the internal
armed conflict, keeping the victims at the centre of the
process. As a result, today we can present significant
advances for the children's welfare, in particular - as
many prior speakers have mentioned - through the
agreement on the release ofminors under 15 years of age
from the camps of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia - Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP) and the
agreement on drafting a road map for the release of all
other minors and a special comprehensive programme
on their care that was introduced in May.

I also highlight the announcement of the
renunciation of recruitment by the FARC-EP and the
establishment of a technical committee headed by the
Ombudsman - an organ independent of the branches of
public power - and the presidential council for human
rights with a view to facilitating the release of the
children who are involved with the FARC and to ensuring
the full restoration of their rights. Throughout those
efforts, we have had the support of the United Nations,
particularly the Office of the Special Representative for
Children in Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, for
whose commitment we are grateful.

Colombia has a long tradition of measures to restore
the rights of children who are victims of conflict,
which we make available to countries in similar
situations, along with all of the expertise my country
has developed in this domain. From 1999 to date, more
than 6,000 children have received assistance by way of
the specialized programme for children demobilized
from the armed groups, led by Colombia's family
welfare institute. So far we have progressed in building
a pathway that, taking the lessons learned from our
experience, establishes the best way to re-establish the
rights of children from the FARC camps and to ensure
that they have access to all State services, including
reparations. It is our hope that we can very soon
announce the release of all of those boys and girls.

The Colombian State considers it essential that
all States assume their primary responsibility in the
protection of the children within their borders. From
that perspective we recognize the need to durably
strengthen institutional capacities. In that regard, we
believe that the United Nations plays a central role, and
the report of the Secretary-General is undoubtedly a
fundamental tool. Council members may rest assured
that Colombia will continue furthering that endeavour.

