Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I would like to
start by congratulating you, Sir. I am very pleased at
your assumption of the presidency for the month of
April. Allow me to reiterate our thanks to Ambassador
Traore for the brilliant way that he guided the work of
the Council during the month of March; our thanks go
also to the entire delegation of Guinea.

By adopting resolution 1373 (2001), the
international community took a far-reaching step
forward in the global fight against terrorism. Through
the establishment of a set of mandatory provisions and
the creation of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) to monitor implementation of the resolution by
all States, the Security Council took the effective lead
in this fundamental combat against one of the main
threats to international peace and security that the
world faces today.

It is on the work produced by the Counter-
Terrorism Committee that we concentrate our attention
today. In that respect, we would like to express our
appreciation to Ambassador Jeremy Greenstock, who,
with unique energy and determination, has conducted
the work of the Committee since its inception. Now
that his mandate draws to a close, we fully endorse his
declared intention, expressed during the Security
Council meeting on 20 January, when he referred to the
Committee as one with a sense of purpose, direction
and momentum. He now entrusts the Committee to the
new Chairman, Ambassador Arias.

We wish Ambassador Greenstock all the best. To
Ambassador Arias, we wish the best of luck in
conducting the Committee, and we take the opportunity
to ensure him of our full cooperation. As Vice-
Chairman of the Committee, and after having gone
through an initial period of adjustment, we are now
more knowledgeable of the Committee's methods and
procedures, which will allow us to perform better.

The fight against terrorism requires sustained,
long-term and global action, with the United Nations
playing a central role in combining its own leadership
with national efforts. It has been fully understood by
the international community that States are primarily
responsible for adopting measures aimed at combating
the financing of terrorism and preventing all active and
passive support for terrorism, in compliance with the
relevant Security Council resolutions, particularly 1373
(2001), which imposes binding measures on all States.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) was
created as an instrument of the Security Council to
promote the implementation, by Member States, of all
aspects of the resolution. After one and a half years of
work, the Committee finds itself at a critical juncture.
First, with the sound teamwork built around the
outstanding chairmanship of Ambassador Greenstock
and, secondly, having secured the cooperation of the
entire membership of the United Nations, the CTC now
has a clear picture based on the self-assessment made
by Governments in their reports of existing legislation
and gaps that need to be filled. The practical
consequences of that approach are translated into the
revision and the creation, by a large number of States,
of legislation that is in keeping with resolution 1373
(2001). There is a collective effort worldwide that has
become more real, and particularly more tangible.

For a large number of countries, among them my
own, it is not an easy task to comply fully with the
provisions of resolution 1373 (2001). That is not due to
a lack of commitment or failure of recognition of the
importance of the fight against terrorism. Rather, it is
essentially due to the lack of both national and regional
capacity to meet the requirements of the resolution.
Many developing countries have enacted anti-terrorism
legislation, but their scarce financial, technical and
human resources impede full implementation of the
legislative framework. Moreover, those countries lack
the capacity for dealing adequately with border control
and security, the movement of criminals, the smuggling
of illicit drugs, illegal firearms, fissile materials and
possible terrorist links.

We recognize the necessity that my country and
the countries of the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) approach international standards
in order to meet the great challenges and risks that lie
ahead. But to achieve that goal, we need sustained
long-term assistance, focused on national and regional
capacity-building in areas relevant to resolution 1373
(2001).

The recent special meeting held in Gabarone,
Botswana, with SADC members, is a good example of
such "joint effort", and we welcome it. Only with
concerted effort and international assistance will we be
able to meet the reporting requirements of the CTC and
strengthen our capacities in the fight against terrorism.

I would like to recall here that the root causes of
terrorism lie in injustice, poverty and social and
political exclusion. Therefore, a concerted international
effort and international assistance are needed to help
many countries upgrade conditions and create legal
institutions to fight terrorism. There is an urgent need
for the international community to enhance dialogue
and understanding among civilizations by addressing
unresolved regional conflicts and the questions of
poverty, social and economic development and the
creation of political institutions that promote justice
and the common good. In our view, that is the core
issue, and if the international community is really
determined to score decisive victories in the fight
against terrorism, it must pursue a two-pronged
strategy in dealing with terrorism and its root causes.
In that sense, we praise the practical contribution of the
CTC to strengthen anti-terrorist capabilities at national,
regional and global levels.

We conclude by reiterating our thanks to Sir
Jeremy for his valuable contribution to the work of the
Committee and for the working methods he has been
able to instil in this body. The CTC has become one of
the most active Committees of the Security Council
today. I would like to assure Ambassador Arias of our
full cooperation in the future.

