Ms. Bird (Australia): I thank you, Sir, for bringing
this important issue to the Council's attention today.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General and
the High Commissioner for Human Rights for their
insightful briefings, and welcome the Secretary-
General's announcement of a United Nations plan
of action on preventing violent extremism and his
proposal to convene an advisory panel on inter- and
intra-sectarian dynamics.

The Middle East has long been the home of great
ethnic and religious diversity. A majority of the world's
population belong to a creed that has its origin in the
Middle East. The peoples ofthat region have long taken
pride - and rightly so - in the mosaic of languages,
cultures and confessions that call it home. Through
immigration, the Middle East's diversity has enriched
Australia, where many of the region's peoples and their
descendants have found a home.

Sadly the Middle East's religious diversity is under
threat as never before. The emergence of extremist
groups like Daesh and Al-Qaida has led to horrific
atrocities, forced conversions and the deliberate
targeting of those they consider unbelievers. The
reckless destruction of antiquities is an assault on
thousands of years of heritage. We note with alarm
the Human Rights Council's recent report that Daesh
may have perpetrated genocide against Iraq's Yazidi
community.

Australia is working in support of the Iraqi
Government and with other regional partners to
confront the threat posed by Daesh. Of great concern,
the conflicts in Syria and Iraq have taken on a sectarian
dimension. Terrorists have targeted places of worship
with shocking consequences, as we saw last week in
Yemen. Australia firmly believes that freedom of
religion is a core human right. This freedom must be
respected in all countries.

Australia stands with the peoples of the region from
all religious and ethnic groups, including a great many
of those from local majorities, who wish to preserve
their rich cultural heritage. We urge Middle Eastern
States to fulfil their responsibility to protect ethnic and
religious minorities. In resolutions 2139 (2014) and 2165
(2014), the Security Council demanded that the Syrian
authorities do so. We ask that the States of the region
give particular attention to enabling the protection of
women and girls in these vulnerable communities from
sexual and gender-based violence. We urge all Member
States to look at the role they can play in supporting
freedom of religion in the region, including by helping
those States burdened by displaced populations and
preventing the travel of foreign fighters, many of whom
have been responsible for shocking atrocities.

There are, however, positive examples in the region.
Jordan has long protected religious minorities, and
Lebanon's experience in its civil war shows not only the
high toll that conflict between religious communities
can exact, but also that, over time, wounds can heal
and followers of many religions can again share a
proud national identity. It points us to the urgency
of a political solution in Syria in which all of Syria's
communities can have a voice in that country's future.
Diversity, once lost, is hard to regain. All States must
do what they can to protect freedoms of religion and
respect for ethnic diversity throughout the Middle East.

