Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): Let me start by
congratulating you, Foreign Minister Ne'stor Popolizio
Bardales, and Peru on your successful presidency of the
Security Council this month, as well as to commend
Lima's initiative to organize this timely briefing on
peacebuilding and sustaining peace. My delegation
expresses appreciation to the Secretary-General's
determined effort to strengthen the United Nations
peace and security pillar, and offers our full support
in that endeavour. We also thank the Romanian State
Secretary, Mr. Dan Neculaescu, and the African Union
Commissioner for Peace and Security, Mr. Smail
Chergui, for their substantive briefings.

Kazakhstan believes that early warning,
preventive diplomacy, mediation and peacekeeping
are interdependent and complimentary components
of a comprehensive, integrated strategy in which
peacebuilding and sustaining peace should be an integral
element running through the entire cycle. Investments
in sustaining peace should begin early to avoid conflict.
Without it, such stability can be uncertain, fragile and
vulnerable to new shocks. We could not but agree
with the Secretary-General's observation that instead
of responding to crises, we need to invest far more in
prevention. Prevention works, saves lives and is cost-
effective.

Since gaining its independence, 27 years ago,
Kazakhstan has been at the forefront of preventive
diplomacy, conflict prevention and confidence-building
measures, which are the core principles of our foreign
policy. That is not a political declaration, but rather
the working methods of my country. We have existing
mechanisms that demonstrate how we have carried
out those principles in real life. An outstanding
example of that has been the initiative of my President
to create the United Nations Regional Centre for
Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia, which has
been successfully functioning in our region for the past
10 years, as well as the foundation of the Conference
on Interaction and Confidence-building Measures in
Asia, which today is comprised of 26 countries from
far beyond Central Asia, over a wide geographic space
from Cairo to Beijing, engaging the nations in measures
to ensure peace and stability in Asia through dialogue
and trust-building.

We strive to use all possible venues and platforms,
including the United Nations, to prevent threats and
maintain peace. We therefore consider Kazakhstan's
election as a non-permanent member of the Security
Council as a high responsibility, as well as a symbol
of trust from the United Nations States Members in
our country and its peace-loving policy, initiatives
and proposals for strengthening the role of the United
Nations in ensuring peace and security.

In the context of the overall efforts for peacebuilding
and sustainingpeace, Kazakhstan is currently promoting
an initiative of a three-fold strategy to address today's
conflicts and sustaining peace, which are the security
and development nexus, a regional approach and the
United Nations Delivering as One. That is a simple,
pragmatic and workable formula based on our national
experience, as well as the experience we have gained
in the Council through interactions with different
interlocutors during several Security Council visits to
various countries and regions, including the regions
of Lake Chad and the Sahel, Haiti and Colombia, and
Afghanistan in January during our presidency.
In addition, it is complementary to the efforts
undertaken by the Secretary-General in his reforms of
the peace and security architecture, the development
system and management. That strategy may be seen as a
combined policy of implementing three of the Secretary-
General's reforms and will help to solve problems on
the ground globally. None of the three approaches is
new to the United Nations system; however, in our
View, a combination of them could create a universal
model to address conflicts and sustain peace that can be
replicated in different parts of the world suffering from
local conflicts. We need to create a new United Nations
paradigm for addressing and preventing conflicts.

The importance of the three-fold strategy was
recognized by the Security Council when it adopted
presidential statement S/PRST/2018/l on 18 January.
It is our aim to introduce this strategy to the wider
United Nations membership. In that regard, we call on
the Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding
Support Office to use their venues to explore the
efficiency of this strategy. Indeed, it has a cross-pillar
bridging and convening role, as well as the ability
to bring together diverse actors, including Member
States, host Governments, the United Nations system,
international financial institutions and regional and
subregional organizations, as well as civil society
and academia.

Kazakhstan is of the firm view that it is a time
to actively engage in the reform of peacebuilding
and sustaining peace systems in order to bring more
efficiency and better coordination to our efforts to build
a safer world. Kazakhstan has been contributing to this
process financially and otherwise - locally, regionally
and globally - and will continue to do so in future
because there is no alternative if we wish, for ourselves
and the next generation, to live in peace and prosperity.

