Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Jenca and High Commissioner
Al Hussein for their briefings on the situation in
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. We
supported the proposal to discuss this item in the
Chamber based on the understanding and vision that
all issues - even those that are the most sensitive,
difficult and complex - should be addressed through
constructive dialogue in a balanced and equitable
manner with all Member States.

At the same time, while the political and security
situation has a direct impact on human rights, as in the
case of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea,
we believe that the Human Rights Council is a more
appropriate platform to discuss country-specific human
rights issues. The mechanisms and procedures of the
Human Rights Council, as well as the Office ofthe United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, play a
key role in monitoring human rights in all countries and
have the appropriate mandate and experience to address
them. We also reiterate that human rights must be seen
in an impartial and objective way, in keeping with the
accepted principles of international law, and should
be realized through diplomacy, mediation, inclusive
dialogue and capacity-building.

We have taken note of some positive developments,
such as to include a human rights-based approach in
the strategic framework between the Government of
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and the
United Nations for the period 2017-2021. We also see
that the recommendations of the second cycle of the
Universal Periodic Review in relation to humanitarian
support and the rights of women and children, as well
as to health care and education, are being implemented.
Another step forward has been the visit of the Special
Rapporteur on the rights of persons with disabilities.

We encourage Pyongyang to continue substantive
and constructive engagement with the United
Nations human rights system to effectively follow the
guidance and directives of international human rights
mechanisms, including treaty bodies. We also call on
North Korea to resume negotiations with Japan to bring
the issue of Japanese abductees to a close.

In addition, we urge the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea to allocate more resources for
development goals, including overcoming food
shortages and malnutrition and providing decent basic
social services to its population, instead of spending
more on developing its nuclear programme.

Once again, we encourage the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea to hear the message of humankind and
seek the path of prudence and dialogue. We hope that,
in response to the concrete steps that Pyongyang takes
in implementing the United Nations recommendations,
the situation in the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea will ease. That will allow the much-needed
sustainable international funding to be channelled into
humanitarian assistance, therefore improving overall
conditions in the country.

Kazakhstan joins the international community in
working for peace and stability on the Korean peninsula.
To achieve that goal, we must redouble our efforts to
introduce confidence-building measures and revitalize
and conduct meaningful, sincere dialogue to create a
balance between accountability and engagement in
order to improve the human rights and living standards
ofpeople in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.

