Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I would like to
start by welcoming the presence, at the beginning of
the meeting, of the Secretary-General. I know that he
had to leave to attend to other business. I welcome in
particular the presence of Mr. Michael Steiner, the
Special Representative, and the report that he
introduced this morning (S/2003/1 13).

We welcome the recent developments, as
presented in the report before us this morning, and we
note that the situation has improved considerably since
the adoption of resolution 1244 (1999), which created
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo. The implementation of the resolution has been
satisfactory, judging from the report before us this
morning.

It is very important for a political settlement to be
reached, and we think that the proposals contained in
the relevant resolutions and the efforts of the
international community, including, in particular, the
recent Security Council mission to the region, are very
encouraging. My delegation believes that the
international community has a very important role to
play in this process. But the primary responsibility for
resolving the conflict lies with the parties.

The process of negotiation aimed at a lasting
political settlement that is acceptable to all parties will
require concessions, and we therefore encourage the
parties to spare no effort to reduce the mistrust and to
reach out to each other. We also encourage continued
dialogue between the authorities in Belgrade and in
Pristina; that is important for bringing about the
consolidation of a more stable situation in the Balkans.

My delegation urges the parties to abide by the
principle of "standards before status" and other
recommendations in order to improve security in the
region and in the country. We also welcome the three
priorities for 2003 which were presented by Mr. Michael
Steiner this morning. We feel that progress in that area
will bring closer the successful conclusion of the
Mission - one of our Organization's most effective
missions.

