Mrs. Ogata (United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees): I appreciate very much the varied and very
in-depth comments that were made by the members of the
Security Council, and I should just like to respond to the
questions that were directed to me. However, the questions
too are very varied, and I do not know whether I can do
justice to the very important issues that were raised, but I
shall do my very best.

First, there was a series of questions about the
modalities of military intervention. I think the particular
modalities of military intervention that are chosen are really
up to the Security Council and to the political leaders of the
various countries. I am not in a position to say, "I like this
intervention better than the others". At the same time, what
I could ask is to please think of the humanitarian
consequences of particular modes of intervention.

I think that I am also in a position to say that, whether
an intervention is being carried out unilaterally,
multilaterally or through the Security Council, there are
always consequences on human movement or displacement.
In this area, I should like to make a strong plea for that
aspect to be kept in mind in choosing the various modalities
of intervention. Sometimes interventions are necessary in
order to push the political negotiations, and that I accept. At
the same time, the cost also has to be considered.

Why do I now try to work with the Secretary-General
and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations on the
ladder of options? Because I think there has to be a better
preventive measure that would simplify or prevent
unnecessarily complicated and prolonged processes of
human displacement. We learned this bitterly in many parts
of the world, but especially recently in the Great Lakes
region of Africa, where there was a mix of people in the
refugee camps - innocent refugees with armed elements.
We did our very best to try to separate them, but we could
not manage to do so. I think this is a point that has been
widely recognized by the Governments in the region as
well. The separation of mixed people in refugee camps is
a very important starting point, because we must maintain
the neutrality and the civilian character of refugee camps if
the refugees are to be protected. This is a starting point
for our very serious enquiry.

I think this has been given a lot of attention. I have
support from the Governments in the region for the idea
that this kind of mechanism has to be addressed and to be
put into practice. Also, I think that the Economic
Community of West African States Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG) in its consultations is looking into this, and
the Southern African Development Community countries
are also examining it. I think this is an area that might
help prevent further complications of the kind that we
saw in the Great Lakes region of Africa. If the separation
had taken place earlier, I think some of the conflicts that
followed in the region might have been, if not contained,
considerably ameliorated. I think this is one thing that we
have been working on as a preventive measure.

The delegate of Costa Rica asked if the existing
mechanisms were not sufficient. There are none. There is
an ad hoc arrangement based on political and strategic
possibilities, but I think there may be some things that
can be put in place so that at least we know where to turn
when the chips are down.

I think in connection with these issues questions
were also raised about why more innovative,
comprehensive approaches are not employed. There have
been many. I would say the approach of the International
Conference on Central American Refugees (CIREFCA)
was very innovative. It took longer, maybe, than we had
wanted. But it was an attempt to promote refugee return,
peacemaking and then development. This comprehensive
approach could still serve as a good lesson if we try to
look into the mechanisms that supported it. Maybe it will
prove a quicker way of approaching some of the complex
refugee problems.

What I wanted to raise in connection with the Sudan
and Afghanistan is that these are situations that have
continued intermittently for more than 20 years - 25
years in the case of the Sudan. I think there must be more
room for efforts to make people suffer less and for a
shorter period. This is what I am trying to encourage.

I do not have any ingredients for a comprehensive
approach, but I think some of the directions that the
United Nations and the concerned countries are taking
may be moving in the right direction. But these are the
points that I wanted very much to raise in connection
with the importance of intervention, standby mechanisms
and comprehensive approaches.

 

There was a question about how to arouse more
political interest in Africa. That is a very big question. I
think Ambassador Satoh asked this question. I think he was
very much influenced by the experience of the Second
Tokyo International Conference on African Development
(TICAD II), which I would say was a development
conference regarding Africa - a conference that, in its
agenda, for the first time gave formal attention to the
importance of governance and conflict prevention and
resolution as a precondition to really launching
development. I think this may be a very realistic approach
that may exert some pressure for considering development
in a different manner, not as if everything were certain and
development could proceed along a peaceful path. Not only
in Africa but in many places the lack of development is
caused by a substantial lack of governance and by the need
for conflict prevention and resolution.

In this sense TICAD II is a very important starting
point. It would certainly link our refugee-protection and
refugee-return efforts with the developmental process. I
would very much welcome an examination along those
lines as well.

Regarding the question of what is happening in Kivu
today: recently there was a mission headed by the Office
for Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in New York, in
which we also participated, at the request of the people
concerned in Kivu. We were asked to go and look into the
humanitarian conditions. There is no doubt that there are
tens of thousands of displaced people who could turn into
refugees if they were allowed to cross borders. But
currently the access is very difficult. I think that whether
vigorous humanitarian assistance can be provided to this
region will depend a lot on how the conflicts there are
resolved. I think questions of ethnicity and nationality are
relevant. And in Kivu the role of the flow of arms in
contributing to displacement should not be overlooked.

The Ambassador of France has asked me a very
difficult question: was it good or bad that the multinational
force was not deployed in 1996? All I can say is that it was
an enormous disappointment for us, and that if there had
been an active intervention at that time, maybe a lot of
lives could have been saved. But these are the lessons that
I think that the Security Council is in a position to learn,
because there are all sorts of other pros and cons relating
to these kinds of decisions.

What can the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees do today in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and in the Great Lakes region
besides trying to help human beings survive? That is a
very tall order that we have: to try to help human beings
survive, and the bottom line is that we have to help
people survive. I think this is the bitter lesson we learned:
we cannot return people to ideal conditions. But even if
the conditions are less than ideal, we can help people
survive, and they may be able to make a second choice
later, when conditions improve. This is the reality that we
must deal with.

I personally would not be able to play a political
role, but I think that from the point of View of helping
people survive, I can raise issues and bring them to the
Council's attention. This is what I am very much hoping
to be able to do. There are other humanitarian
organizations, non-governmental organizations, that are
dealing with these problems. The thing we can do is bring
the reality of the fragility of peace and also the suffering
of the people to the Council's attention so that it can
make realistic decisions, taking into consideration the fate
of the people.

The representative of Gabon asked what we are
doing about conferences. I think the Central American
lesson - CIREFCA - was an important one. I think the
1996 effort of the Commonwealth of Independent States
(CIS) countries was also a realistic attempt to stabilize
population movement. Streamlining and strengthening the
legal provisions with regard to protecting refugees,
managing population control and providing emergency
capacity to the CIS countries have been very positive
undertakings.

With regard to the countries in Africa, and especially
in the Great Lakes region, we were able to have a
conference in Kampala in May this year. The
representatives of eight countries, for the most part
Ministers of the Interior, came. There were three areas
that we agreed upon. The first was that it is important to
reinforce respect for refugee protection and humanitarian
principles. The second point was that the refugees should
not be a menace, undermining national security. Here
again the issues of refugees and security are very much
intertwined. The third point was to really help the
countries. All the conference participants recognized that
the peace they had attained was a very fragile peace.
Fragile peace can be made less fragile given appropriate
investment, attention and assistance to countries going
through this process. Here I think the issue of post-
conflict activities became very real, because in today's
world, in many places where conflicts are internal, peace
is no longer a certainty. I think that traditionally in inter-

 

State conflict you either had peace or war, but today
between war and peace is a very blurred situation.
Naturally, then, you have to deal with a situation in which
more direction towards peace can be assured. There, the
questions of education, community-building efforts and
working with development agencies become very important.

I believe the question of coordination was raised. I
think multifaceted coordination is what is required here -
first and foremost, between the humanitarian agencies and
the development agencies. But for the humanitarian
agencies and the development agencies to be really working
together, and for one being able to hand over to the other,
the need for flows of development assistance resources
should be re-examined, too, because it is usually of an
"either/or" nature. The resource flow goes through
Governments. We cannot hand over our operations until,
theoretically speaking, Governments are strong enough to
benefit from development assistance. It does not really
work that way today. Therefore, I think this "in-between
period" of fragile peace does not really move in the
direction of better development efforts and better peace in
that sense. I think there is something here - and I do not
know whether it is a primary responsibility of the Security
Council, but it does have security implications - regarding
how post-conflict situations are dealt with.

Going back to the question of how we can arouse
public support for Africa, I believe conferences are very
useful. I thought the Tokyo International Conference on
African Development (TICAD) was a very good first step.
Right now I do not know if I can repeat a Kampala II. We
have maintained close working relations with all the
countries in the Great Lakes region, but I doubt very much
that in the current situation they would be willing to sit
together for any kind of post-conflict peace conference. I
hope very much that the actual conflict will be contained
and lead to some kind of a peaceful arrangement, because
the people there need it very much.

There were a few specific questions about amnesty
versus justice. I think many times we do advocate amnesty
for those who are not war criminals. Justice, I believe, has
to be put in order; but, at the same time we must take into
consideration those who, because of their situations - draft
evasion, for instance - perhaps were placed in an
incriminating position. There are a lot of situations where
we think amnesty would help solve the problem of lack of
confidence. For example, in Kosovo, we believe that those
who fled should be given amnesty if they go back. Just
because they fled they should not be considered to be
criminals. This is the kind of thing that we are advocating.

We do coordinate with human rights observers and
monitors, especially when they are in the field. We have
to coordinate, and we very much hope that they will be
actively on the ground in many places.

There were a few questions on the tripartite
mechanism in Tanzania. The mechanism is there, and I
think it provided a useful beginning in trying to promote
the return of Burundi refugees from Tanzania back to
Burundi. We had several meetings on this, but whether it
could really turn into a mechanism that can arrange for
repatriation would depend a great deal on the state of
suspicion and conflict in the region. So, I would say it is
a useful mechanism, and I want to keep it there. But it is
not really solving the situation right now.

As for Tanzania, the things we were doing in trying
to help the Tanzanians we have done to some extent in
Kenya, too, in terms of enhancing local security. This is
an attempt to ensure the civilian character of the refugee
camps, and in Tanzania UNHCR, in close cooperation
with the authorities, has put in place some security
arrangements. That covers 278 policemen who patrol the
refugee camps in the Kagera and Kigoma regions. We
provide them with communications equipment, vehicles
and accommodation facilities in the camp area. We are
going to do some more training of these people. We are
now assessing how far we have come and seeing whether
this kind of thing is useful or not.

There were a series of questions on Kosovo. If you
ask me whether I am satisfied with the conditions of
internally displaced persons - refugee conditions - I
think they could be better; but if you ask me whether I
am happier now than I was three weeks ago, I would say
"yes". People are beginning to come back. They will stay
home if they feel that there is a chance of having portions
of their houses winterized, or that at least they have
shelter. If they feel that the police are not there to harass
them and so on, they will come back. Many of them have
come back. We estimate that most of the people are now
back either in their Villages or in their friends' or
relatives' homes. Some 20,000 houses need to be rebuilt
or repaired, but we are now carrying out a Village-by-
village survey in every municipality of Kosovo, so that
we will know exactly how many houses can be repaired,
how many have to be reconstructed, how many people are
back and so forth. I hope we can share these results later
this week.

I hope that the United Nations will be able to
provide a helping hand on the landmine issue. There is

 

the larger issue of whether Kosovo is not distracting
attention from other parts of Bosnia, from Serbia - and I
have a feeling it may be. We are trying very hard to
maintain the importance of Bosnia, where minority return
this year was below what we had expected. We welcome a
high target for minority return next year: 120,000. If
international will can be mobilized to make this possible,
we will be the first ones to be pleased.

At the same time, the reasons for the slow return have
been set out very clearly in our strategy paper that we
presented to the Peace Implementation Council in the
spring. Many political and administrative measures are
required on the part of the Governments and the local
people. Suspicion and the public attitude are very real
issues that can be overcome with time and with sustained
efforts. But this cannot be enforced. You cannot say, "You,
return!" and think that people will return. We find ourselves
between this reality and a very strong desire to see a more
active return. I am very hopeful that this target of 120,000
will become a reality next year.

I believe that the one issue I should really address
before ending is that of staff security. I am very grateful to
the Permanent Representative of Bahrain for having raised
this issue, for it is a very real one. Humanitarian workers
have to be protected by conventions and by resolutions, but
on the ground they have to protect themselves. I think the
backing of the international community is important. They
can refer to the resolutions and to the conventions, but in
reality what happens is that they try to work with the local
forces or authorities who are there to negotiate. These are
checkpoints you go through by negotiation. This is the
reality of all operations. We did it through Bosnia and
through what was Zaire. We have done it in Kosovo, and
we will have to continue doing it. However, I think the
Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel, which is still awaiting ratification,
should be ratified quickly. At least, it does show that the
Government considers this an important issue.

Beyond that, I hope there will be other resolutions,
strong resolutions, with implementing clauses to protect
humanitarian workers. Humanitarian workers are of great
concern to me, but they are the ones who are protecting
the victims, too, and it should be looked at in that
connection. Humanitarian workers are the ones who are
at the forefront of helping the victims.

Perhaps the Council would like to go back to the
original question about what kind of interventions at the
military front it would provide. Short of that, however,
humanitarian workers are the ones there and they are the
ones who are suffering more casualties today than, I am
afraid to say, some of the military people. I think it is my
duty, on behalf of all my humanitarian colleagues, to raise
this issue. Perhaps the Security Council or the General
Assembly could put it on their own agendas. It should
come out at the forefront of the United Nations concerns.

Preparedness, yes. We have preparedness everywhere
in the world. We upgrade our preparedness if there is an
imminent possibility of refugee outflow and we try to
make sure our preparedness is up to date.

I do not know if I have satisfied the questions that
were raised, but I will be happy to respond on an
individual basis.

