Mr. Viinanen (Finland): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Nordic countries: Denmark, Iceland,
Norway, Sweden and my own country, Finland.

We thank the Secretary-General for the sober
assessment and concrete recommendations in his
report (S/2012/376), as well as all the briefers today.
We share the Secretary-General's grave concern about
the unacceptable toll that conflicts around the world
take on civilians and about the continuing disregard for
international humanitarian, human rights and refugee
law on the part of many parties to conflict.

The Nordic countries condemn the continuing
atrocities in Syria in the strongest possible terms. We are
horrified by the killings ofcivilians, the brutal executions
of innocent children and the use of torture, including
rape and sexual violence. The continuing obstacles to
humanitarian access, despite Syria's commitment to the
negotiated ceasefire, are unacceptable. We join the vast
majority of the international community in urging the
Government of Syria to immediately end the violence
and all attacks on civilians, and to cooperate fully with
the Joint Special Envoy for Syria, the United Nations
Supervision Mission in Syria and the commission of
inquiry mandated by the Human Rights Council. We
strongly condemn the attacks against United Nations
monitors, and recall that the Syrian authorities are
responsible for ensuring the security and safety of the
Mission.

We have taken note of the statement by the High
Commissioner for Human Rights that the indiscriminate
and possibly deliberate targeting and killing of civilians
may amount to crimes against humanity and other forms
of international crime. There must be no impunity for

those responsible for serious international crimes.

The Nordic countries call on all parties to conflict
to comply with their international obligations, and on
national authorities to take all possible measures to
provide accountability for violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law. Ensuring
accountability is first and foremost a national
responsibility. Building the capacity of national justice
and security institutions also serves the broader aim
of strengthening the rule of law and respect for human
rights.

We congratulate the International Criminal Court
(ICC) and the Special Court for Sierra Leone for having
concluded landmark cases in the international fight
against impunity. The judgement in the Lubanga case
provides an important broadening of the definition for
children who participate in hostilities; the Taylor case is
the first time that an international court has convicted
a former head of State of responsibility for sexual
violence. We now encourage the Council to improve
the consistency of its practice in referring situations to
the ICC and to consider adopting a checklist to guide
its engagement with the Court, including in assisting
the Court in cases of non-cooperation and in matters
concerning the funding arrangements for such cases.
We also support the recommendations for increasing
the use of commissions of inquiry.

Finally, the Secretary-General focuses attention in
his report on increased attacks on health-care facilities
and health professionals. In Syria, we have seen doctors
and surgeons targeted directly, wounded and killed.
Ambulances have been attacked and hospitals damaged
by explosive weapons. Such threats and attacks
against health-care workers, facilities and vehicles
are becoming more frequent in conflict situations and
have devastating consequences for civilians. The direct
effects on the security of health-care personnel has a
multiplying effect on those who need their services the
most - the victims of armed violence and conflict.

It is of the utmost importance to improve the
security and delivery of effective and impartial
health care in situations of armed conflict and other
emergencies. The Nordic countries therefore fully
support the recent Health Care in Danger initiative
launched by the International Committee of the Red
Cross at the thirty-first International Conference of
the Red Cross and Red Crescent. Stronger efforts to
create an environment conducive to health care in a
humanitarian crisis are needed by States. All parties to
conflict must respect and protect humanitarian relief
and medical personnel, hospitals and ambulances in
all circumstances. States must step up their efforts to
bring those responsible for attacks against health-care
personnel and facilities to justice.

