Mr. Tidjani (Cameroon) (spoke in French): I
should like at the outset to thank you, Mr. President,
for having taken the initiative of placing the important
issue of HIV/AIDS on today's agenda. I should also
like to thank Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno and Mr. Peter
Piot for their detailed and instructive briefings. The
presence of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, a
short while ago is proof of the importance of the issue
we are discussing and of his interest in the fight against
the pandemic.

Security Council resolution 1308 (2000), whose
implementation we are reviewing today, gave rise to a
series of measures necessary to fight the spread of
HIV/AIDS in urgent conflict and humanitarian
situations. In particular, they involve education and
training measures - to be provided to peacekeeping
operations personnel before their deployment on the
ground - in the area of HIV/AIDS prevention,
screening and treatment. We therefore welcome the
progress that has been made, but note that much
remains to be done in this endeavour, which appears to
be long-term. All that is clear from the briefings by
Mr. Guehenno and Mr. Piot.

The AIDS pandemic feeds on conflict and
population shifts caused by conflict. Among refugees,
women and girls are most exposed to HIV/AIDS
infection. We share the view that training of
humanitarian and police personnel in methods of
protection concerning HIV/AIDS prevention are
initiatives that should be continued.

Since it emerged two decades ago, HIV/AIDS has
spread quickly throughout the world. However, two
thirds of the 42 million people infected with the virus
live in Africa, where the epidemic is spreading at
devastating rate. The scourge of HIV/AIDS is
threatening the survival of the entire population of the
continent, but it is affecting in particular adults of
working age, which in turn is aggravating social
problems and leading to a tragic increase in the number
of very young orphans. Furthermore, it is leading to a
worsening of the economic situation. The countries
most affected by the epidemic in Africa have seen a
notable drop in their rate of growth. In addition, in
many countries in sub-Saharan Africa, almost half of
the armed forces and the police are infected by
HIV/AIDS. Law and order are thus threatened within
those countries, as well as from outside.

The impact of HIV/AIDS is clear and
devastating: it is hampering the development of the
continent of Africa and its future. At the national level,
policies aimed at prevention must therefore be further
developed. Access to treatment must be progressively
increased and voluntary HIV testing centres must be
set up. That is something that Cameroon is doing for
civilians and for the army and the police, including in
barracks.

We believe that prevention must be the main
pillar of the international community's struggle against
this scourge. This is a collective struggle in which the
United Nations must continue to play a increasingly
important role.

My delegation fully endorses the
recommendations made by UNAIDS, and we also
agree with the views expressed here today about the
need for a joint evaluation report by UNAIDS and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations.

In conclusion, I would like to remind members
that the HIV/AIDS pandemic does not respect borders
and that its elimination will require international
solidarity. As the Secretary-General said a few months
ago, we must combine our political will, mobilize our
resources and adopt specific measures in order to
ensure a future for the world. That is our only option if
we are to meet this challenge to the future of the
human race and ensure human rights for all so that all
peoples can flourish.

