Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union.
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary,
Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and
Slovenia, Cyprus, Malta, Turkey, Iceland and
Liechtenstein also subscribe to this statement.

The last time the Security Council held a public
meeting on this issue, the European Union expressed
its hopes for the 10 April meeting of the "quartet" and
warmly welcomed Secretary of State Powell's mission.
The outcome of the Madrid meeting demonstrated the
international community's firm commitment to peace
and to a better future for the peoples of the Middle
East. In the joint statement read out by the Secretary-
General and supported by the Security Council
(S/2002/369, annex), we all expressed our grave
concern at the current situation, including the growing
humanitarian crisis and the ever-increasing risk to
regional security. We reiterate our shared
condemnation of violence and terrorism, express our
deep distress at the loss of innocent Palestinian and
Israeli lives, and extend our deepest sympathy to the
families of those killed and wounded. We believe that
there has been too much suffering and too much
bloodshed. We call on the leaders of Israel and the
Palestinian Authority to act in the interests of their own
people, the region and the international community,
and to halt immediately their senseless confrontation.

The European Union deplores the fact that,
despite all calls of the international community,
Security Council resolutions 1402 (2002) and 1403
(2002) continue to be ignored. In this regard, we call
on Israel to halt immediately its military operations in
the Palestinian territories. We call for an immediate,
meaningful and effective ceasefire and the immediate
and full withdrawal of the Israeli troops from all
Palestinian cities reoccupied since 29 March and other
areas under the control of the Palestinian Authority.
These resolutions must be implemented fully and
immediately. There is no room for selective
implementation. We recall the obligation of all
Members of the United Nations to accept and carry out
the decisions of the Security Council in accordance
with the Charter.

The virtual destruction of the Palestinian
Authority and its infrastructure, the continued isolation
of Chairman Arafat, the humiliation and confinement
of the Palestinian civilian population and the disregard
for them and for their most fundamental rights and the
violations of international humanitarian law are
unacceptable. These actions must end immediately;
they are contrary to international law and they are
unjustified. Israel must immediately stop extra-judicial
killings, lift the closures and restrictions in the
territories and reverse its settlement policy.

Chairman Arafat, the recognized and elected
leader of the Palestinian people, and the Palestinian
Authority, for their part, must undertake immediately
the maximum possible effort to stop terrorist attacks,
act decisively within their capacity to dismantle
terrorist infrastructures and stop incitement to violence.
Terrorist attacks against Israelis must end immediately.
They are unacceptable, illegal and gravely harm the
legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people. We
note in this regard the statement issued on 13 April by
Chairman Arafat and welcome in particular his
condemnation of all terrorist acts targeting Israeli and
Palestinian civilians and his rejection of the use of
violence and terror against civilians as a way to
achieve political goals. We believe he must show
clearly that he is capable of living up to his
commitments and must produce concrete results.

The humanitarian situation in the Palestinian
territories is appalling and constitutes a matter of deep
concern to us. It is absolutely unacceptable that
humanitarian and medical organizations and personnel
continue to confront risks and restrictions in
performing their work and in accessing those
populations in need. Israel must allow them full and
unimpeded access.

We reiterate our call on Israel to allow diplomatic
and consular representatives to fully perform their
tasks, in particular to gain access to and protect their
own citizens in the territories.

The European Union considers the reports on the
humanitarian situation at the Jenin refugee camp to be
extremely alarming. Although there is wide
discrepancy in reports on the number of casualties,
missing people and those still trapped under collapsed
buildings, we deplore the loss of civilian life that has
taken place and the widespread and senseless
destruction of civilian, medical and humanitarian
infrastructure reported by the international
humanitarian agencies granted limited access to the
camp.

Israel's legitimate fight against terrorism is not
served by intimidating and harassing innocent
civilians, depriving them of their dignity and erasing
their means of livelihood and hopes for the future. It
only breeds more irrational desperation and hatred.
Israel must fully comply with international
humanitarian principles, including the United Nations
Conventions on the protection of civilians in times of
war, and refrain from excessive use of force.

It must extend its fullest possible cooperation to
humanitarian agencies and organizations, including the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency (UNRWA)
and the International Committee of the Red Cross,
consistent with its obligations under international
humanitarian law, both in Jenin and across the
territories. These organizations urgently need to gain
unrestricted access to the camp in order to allow them
to care for the large numbers of people in need of basic
relief supplies and carry out their humanitarian
mandates.

The unresolved standoff at the Church of the
Nativity in Bethlehem is also a cause of deep concern.

This conflict has no military solution. The
political road-map and goals to put an end to it are well
known and have already been set out very clearly:
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973) and the principle of land for peace, which
formed the basis for the Madrid Conference of 1991,
the creation of a politically and economically viable
Palestinian State and security guarantees for the State
of Israel, as spelled out in resolution 1397 (2002), as
well as the Arab League's recent support of Crown
Prince Abdullah's initiative for peace. What is needed,
more than ever, is political will from both parties and
statesmanship from their leaders.

We urge the parties to fully cooperate with the
efforts of Secretary Powell as well as of Special Envoy
Zinni and others to implement the Tenet work plan and
the Mitchell report's recommendations with the aim of
resuming negotiations on a political settlement. There
must be immediate and parallel movement towards
near-term and tangible political progress and towards a
series of concrete steps leading to permanent peace.

The European Union remains convinced that an
impartial third-party monitoring mechanism on the
ground is essential to the process of restoring mutual
confidence and making progress on both the political
and security fronts. We stand ready to participate in
such a mechanism. Further, we support the Secretary-
General in his call for a multinational force to be sent
to the Middle East. Nevertheless, to be effective it will
have to be acceptable to both sides. It is time to take
concerted action to help bring an end to the violence
and to provide space for political and diplomatic
negotiations.

The European Union continues to make every
effort with the parties, the countries in the region, the
United States, the United Nations and Russia to find a
definitive settlement to this conflict. In this regard, the
Quartet of principals plans to meet in Washington,
DC, on 2 May. The European Union is fully behind
the efforts of Secretary of State Powell to bring both
parties to an agreement on a ceasefire. We stand ready
to assist the parties in implementing their agreements
and would be ready to attend an international peace
conference.

We want to reiterate in the present circumstances
our aim of improving the living conditions of the
Palestinian people and our declared objectives of
supporting the reconstruction, preservation and
strengthening of the Palestinian Authority, including
through efforts to rebuild its infrastructure and security
and governance capacity, of providing humanitarian
assistance to the Palestinians and of assisting in
economic and institutional reconstruction.

The present dangerous situation in the Middle
East threatens regional security and stability. We
reiterate our concern at the violence along the border
between Lebanon and Israel. In conclusion, we call for
an end to the violations of the United Nations-
determined Blue Line, condemn the attacks originating
in Lebanese territory and call on all parties involved to
show the utmost restraint.

