Mr. Djani: On behalf of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, I wish to begin by congratulating Sweden on its
election to the Security Council and on its presidency,
and by congratulating the other newly elected members,
Bolivia, Ethiopia, Italy and Kazakhstan. We express
our appreciation, as well, for the outgoing Council

members - among whom there are members of our
own Committee - and recognize their efforts during
their mandates - Angola, Malaysia, New Zealand,

Spain and Venezuela. Allow me also to congratulate
His Excellency Secretary-General Antonio Guterres on
assuming his duties at the helm of the United Nations.
The Committee looks forward to working closely with
the new Secretary-General and the wider United Nations
family towards resolving the question of Palestine,
which has been on the agendas of the Security Council
and General Assembly for far too long. While the
necessary components for the settlement of this long-
standing issue are well known to all, the Secretary-
General's good offices, vigour and experience will be
pivotal in making the two-State solution and a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace a reality.

Despite efforts to break the political stalemate,
the year 2016 saw limited achievements on the part
of the international community in realizing enduring
peace and a negotiated two-State solution on the basis
of the relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid
principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the Quartet road map. In the meantime, the two-
State solution continues to be severely threatened by
unrelenting developments on the ground, including
the decade-long blockade of Gaza, which amounts
to collective punishment, and the construction and
expansion of settlements, the transfer ofIsraeli settlers,
the confiscation of land, the demolition of home and the
displacement of Palestinian civilians in the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem, which amount to altering
the demographic composition, character and status of
the Palestinian territory occupied since 1967. All are
in Violation of international humanitarian law and the
relevant resolutions. All of those actions are in violation
of international humanitarian law and the relevant
resolutions and, along with other ongoing provocations
and incitement, they raise tensions and fuel resentment
and Violence. Similarly, preventing Palestinian
development in Area C of the occupied West Bank and
taking Palestinian land for Israeli settlement activities
only increase a sense of frustration and hopelessness
and call into question Israel's commitment to the two-
State solution.

Yet there were reasons for hope last year and
in the first weeks of the new year, including action
by the Council and the French initiative, which the
Committee supported. On 23 December, by resolution
2334 (2016), co-sponsored by three members of the
Committee and New Zealand and supported by another
10 members of the Council, including two Committee
members/observers, namely, Egypt and Ukraine, for a
total of 14 in favour and one abstention, the Council
demonstrated its much-needed leadership at this stage.
The Council unequivocally reconfirmed support for a
two-State solution on the basis of the 1967 lines and
its Charter-based principled positions. It reiterated that
Israeli settlements in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, are illegal. The acquisition of
territory by force is inadmissible. All parties must take
immediate steps to prevent all acts of Violence against
civilians, as well as acts ofprovocation and destruction.
The international community must distinguish, in its
relevant dealings, between the territory of the State of
Israel and the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem, that is, all lands occupied since
1967. The Council also urged the intensification and
acceleration of international and regional efforts aimed
at achieving the two-State solution.

Breaking its silence of nearly seven years on this
issue with resolution 2334 (2016), the Council has
generated a unique momentum for peace in a very
difficult environment by reaffirming the core purposes
and principles of the Organization and the parameters
of the international consensus on resolving the question
of Palestine. That momentum must be maintained at all
cost and the international community, most notably the
Council, must follow up on its determination to secure
the full implementation of this and its other relevant
resolutions, rally around the legal principles set out
in the resolution and hold perpetrators accountable
for violations of international norms. The Committee
looks forward to the Secretary-General's reporting on
the implementation of the provisions of the resolution.

Similarly, the Committee welcomes the joint
declaration issued at the Paris Conference over the
weekend, in which participants welcomed international
efforts to advance Middle East peace, including
through adoption of resolution 2334 (2016), and
reiterated that a negotiated two-State solution should
meet the legitimate aspirations of both sides, including
Palestinians' right to statehood and sovereignty, fully
end the occupation that began in 1967, satisfy Israel's
security needs and resolve all permanent status issues
on the basis of resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
While the joint declaration did not go far enough in
condemning those who seek to actively undermine this
outcome, the Committee urges all interested parties to
ensure that the two-State solution remains a realistic
possibility and that a just, lasting and comprehensive
peace is achieved.

As thoroughly documented by United Nations
agencies and others, the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem,
remains dire and the two-State solution is in real peril.
The Committee urges the international community to
actively seize the moment and exert collective efforts to
ensure the reversal of the negative trends on the ground
and the launch of credible negotiations on all final
status issues in the Middle East peace process with a
View to achieving a comprehensive peace agreement
that justly resolves all final status issues. Both Israelis
and Palestinians must show leadership and make the
difficult decisions required for peace.

During this year, tragically marking 50 years
of the Israeli occupation of Palestinian territory,
the international community must spare no effort
to ensure that this untenable situation is ended and
that the Palestinian aspirations for independence and
sovereignty in their State, as well as Israeli security
needs, are met. The Committee will mark this solemn
anniversary by organizing several events, in the hope
of drawing attention to the continuing plight of the
Palestinian people in all its dimensions and generating
further momentum towards ending the Israeli
occupation. The Committee, lastly, calls upon all
States and organizations to enhance their cooperation
and support to the Committee in the performance of its
General Assembly mandate, including with respect to
achieving the end of the Israeli occupation, the capacity-
building of the State of Palestine and recognition on the
basis of the 1967 borders and its eventual admission to
full membership in the United Nations.

