Mr. Gumende (Mozambique): I would like to
begin by extending my warm congratulations to you,
Madam President, on the accession of your country to
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
February, and to thank you for inviting me to participate
and deliver this statement on behalf the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP) in this briefing
on the situation in Guinea-Bissau, a member of our
Community.

The Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
welcomes the comprehensive report of the Secretary-
General (S/2014/ 105) on the current status of the
process leading to the full restoration of constitutional
order in that country and the valuable and insightful
information provided by His Excellency Mr. Antonio
Patriota, Permanent Representative of Brazil and Chair
ofthe Guinea-Bissau configuration ofthe Peacebuilding
Commission, gathered during his recent visit to Bissau,
as well as the statement by the Permanent Representative
of Cote d'lvoire on behalf of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS).

The briefings provided on the latest developments
in the country, which the CPLP has been following with
keen interest, convey a mixed picture of encouraging
progress coupled with the persistence of areas of
concern, to which all stakeholders should continue to
pay particular attention.

The successful conclusion of the voter registration
process and the adoption of a national electoral security
plan for 2014 - arrangements aimed at ensuring the
holding of credible, inclusive, peaceful, free and fair
legislative and presidential elections - constitute a
positive development, of which we should take note.

We welcome the preparations by all political
parties to participate in the elections, which can be
seen as a demonstration of a renewed commitment of
those national political actors to the irreversibility of
the process of restoration of constitutional order in
Guinea-Bissau.

We recognize that such positive developments
are in no small measure thanks to the support of the
international community for the people of Guinea-
Bissau in their endeavours to find a lasting solution
to the political crisis precipitated by the coup d'etat of
April 2012.

We would like to commend the tireless efforts of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Jose' Ramos-Horta, who has done a remarkable job
in rebuilding the trust and encouraging sobriety among
all stakeholders by managing with zeal, patience and
dexterity the numerous and intricate issues that arise
in a stabilization process of that nature in a balanced
fashion.

Although under the prevailing circumstances one
might suppose that a delay in the elections may be
reasonable, we must note that we are facing the third
successive postponement. That is particularly worrying
in a country where the people have been exposed and
subjected to all types of suffering and traumas since
the onset of the current political crisis two years ago.
The international community must continue to impress
upon the current authorities the urgency of holding free,
fair and inclusive elections on the new date of 13 April.

Similarly, the recurrent reports of episodes of
intimidation, the violation of human rights, the lack
of concrete actions to fight impunity and restrictions
on the right to freedom of expression and assembly,
which create a persisting climate of insecurity, are a
cause of concern. Those aspects were plainly visible
in the beating of the Minister of Transportation and
Communications last November or the serious incident
of the forced boarding of passengers with forged
documentation on a Bissau-Lisbon Air Portugal flight
in December.

The economic and humanitarian situation has
deteriorated substantially, posing a threat to the
stabilization process on the eve of the elections. The
strikes that are taking place over the non-payment of
salaries in various economic and social sectors amply
demonstrate the underlying seriousness of the situation.

A lasting solution to such problems, among others,
requires the continued strong commitment of national
stakeholders to the cause of the political stabilization
and greater involvement of the international community
in supporting the future democratically elected
authorities. We must mobilize our efforts to provide to
those authorities, if they so require and in cooperation
with other regional and international organizations,
the security conditions to allow them to implement the
necessary reforms in the country that will once and
for all pull Guinea-Bissau out of the vicious cycle of
recurrent instability.

As part of the long-standing commitment to
the Bissau-Guinean people, the Community of
Portuguese-speaking countries in January appointed
Ambassador Carlos Moura as its Special Representative
to Guinea-Bissau. Ambassador Moura has the
responsibility to monitor developments and to cooperate
with all stakeholders, whenever necessary, until the
completion of the electoral process. His deployment
represents a concrete, albeit modest, contribution by
the CPLP to the efforts of the international community
and conveys our sense of permanent solidarity with the
people of Guinea-Bissau.

Let me conclude by once again calling upon the
international community to continue supporting
the electoral process in Guinea-Bissau and to begin
preparations to support the future legitimate authorities
immediately after their election in the medium- to long-
term perspective. The holding of a free, fair, inclusive
and credible election, the implementation of its results
and the submission of the military to the civilian
authorities are the conditions required for the return to
constitutional order, in line with the relevant resolutions
adopted by this body, in collaboration with the African
Union and other international stakeholders.
