Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): I wish, at
the outset, to thank you, Madam President, because this
meeting devoted to Kosovo is taking place in a setting
that makes it possible for States not members of the
Council to hear firsthand, at an open meeting,
information furnished by the Secretariat. It is our wish
that this type of free and interactive format be retained
to the extent possible at open briefings.

In this spirit and in response to the very
comprehensive briefing given by Mr. Annabi, the
French delegation will confine itself to three brief
comments and one question.

First, on 9 June 2000, Mr. Kouchner came before
the Council and gave us an overall assessment of the
situation in Kosovo, one year after the adoption of
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999). One of the
major issues raised at that meeting was the question of
restoring dialogue between the communities within the
Joint Administrative Structures. A Kosovo Serb
delegation was present, and their concerns were
brought to the Council's attention. The Kosovo Serb
representatives have since decided to participate again
in the Joint Administrative Structures set up by the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). We must welcome this decision and
recall that all the Kosovo communities should enjoy
equal security. Cooperation among representatives of
all Kosovars and international organizations can only
serve to promote this and make it possible to set up
democratic institutions in which all acknowledge the
others.

Of course, difficulties remains. Thus, we have
taken note of what Mr. Thaci has said. We know that
UNMIK and Mr. Kouchner are continuing their efforts
to find a solution, and we encourage them in that
direction.

Secondly, the next important stage will be the
holding of local elections. Those elections may cause a
genuine democratic shock among the Kosovar
population, which will be positive for the development
of this society. It is therefore essential that the elections
be prepared meticulously. It is necessary to continue
encouraging the Kosovar Serbs to participate. By
creating impediments to registration and thus to
participation of Kosovar Serbs in the elections,
Mr. Milosevic is preventing them from deciding their
own destiny and is showing that he is not, as he as
pretends to be, the defender of their interests.

Thirdly, UNMIK's success does not rest solely
with the establishment of political and administrative
structures allowing future coexistence to prevail in
Kosovo. Success also depends on its action to restore
basic public services, rebuild housing and reopen
schools. That counts above all in the eyes of the
population.

The success of UNMIK has been possible thanks
to contributions provided from the onset of the
operation and, in particular, thanks to the contribution
of the European Union. The European Union is still by
far the major contributor to Kosovo, with a
contribution of more than 3 billion euros in 1999 and
2000 in the civilian domain. Its member States provide
almost two thirds of KFOR's troops, bringing the
European Union's total contribution to 8 billion euros
for those two years.

Finally, I have one question. UNMIK must
continue to have the necessary resources for its work,
and particularly in the area of personnel. Could the
Secretariat give us its assessment of personnel needs
and steps planned to cope with the difficulties caused
by rotation and departures in summer?

