Mr. Mladenov: Over the past decades, a broad
consensus has been built around the understanding that
the Palestinian-Israeli conflict can only be resolved
through negotiations and on the basis of a two-State
solution. That consensus is at the core of the work
of the Middle East Quartet, which continues to work
with the parties and the region to bring about the
necessary conditions for the resumption of meaningful
negotiations. The Quartet is also finalizing its first
report on the impediments to the two-State solution
and the way forward. In a matter of days, a number
of countries and the Secretary-General will come
together in Paris to reaffirm their commitment to a
negotiated two-State solution and to discuss how they
can constructively support both parties in achieving
that goal.

All those efforts, as important as they are, cannot
be divorced from the stark reality on the ground that
is affecting the lives of Palestinians and Israelis alike.
Despite the general downward trend in violence, on
18 April a Hamas-affiliated Palestinian teenager
detonated a bomb on a bus in Jerusalem, injuring 21
people, several of them seriously. I welcome President
Abbas' firm rejection of that brutal attack. It is
deplorable, however, that some Palestinian factions
chose instead to praise it. The United Nations is
firmly convinced that there can never be, under any
circumstances, justification for terror. Days later, on
27 April, a pregnant, 23-year-old Palestinian mother
and her 16-year-old brother were tragically shot and
killed under questionable circumstances at a checkpoint
close to Jerusalem, reportedly by Israeli private
security contractors, after allegedly attempting to carry
out a knife attack against security forces. However,
Palestinian eyewitnesses refute that claim, and the
case has once again raised concerns about the need to
calibrate the use of force. I note that Israeli authorities
have initiated an investigation, and I encourage them to
conduct it in a swift and transparent manner.

The beginning of May saw the biggest escalation
in violence between Israel and Hamas since the 2014
conflict. Two tunnels were discovered, and Israel
carried out 14 incursions into Gaza in order to destroy
them and seek out others. In the violent exchanges that
followed, militants fired 40 mortars and 8 rockets at
Israel, and the Israeli Defence Forces conducted 13
air strikes on targets in the Gaza Strip. Tragically, a
Palestinian woman was killed by shrapnel and several
others were wounded. Those incidents of recent weeks
underscore the fragility of the security dynamics on the
ground, particularly the threat to the ceasefire in Gaza,
which needs to be vigorously upheld by all sides if we
are to avoid slipping into another devastating conflict.

Against that backdrop, the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee for the Coordination of the International
Assistance to Palestinians (AHLC) met in Brussels
on 19 April and expressed concern over the damaging
consequences of the current political impasse, the
importance of preserving the two-State solution
and the sharp decline in donor aid to the Palestinian
Authority. I am encouraged that both sides agreed to
work with donors during the next two years to build
a more sustainable Palestinian economy by reducing
the budget deficit and stimulating long-term economic
growth.

As Palestinians face mounting financial and
institutional challenges, negative developments continue
in the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem.
Talks between Israeli and Palestinian officials on
security arrangements for Area A have all but reached
an impasse. I urge both sides to continue to work to
bridge existing gaps. It is important to strengthen the
capacity, capability and authority of the Palestinian
security forces in the areas under their responsibility.
Continued security coordination between both sides
has played, and continues to play, a key part in reducing
violence. In that context, I welcome the announcement
by Israeli authorities to facilitate access through a
number of West Bank checkpoints. I encourage them
to make further efforts to ease movement between
communities within the West Bank, including to East
Jerusalem.

I take this opportunity to note the continuation of
demolitions of Palestinian structures in the West Bank.
While the pace has somewhat slowed as compared to
the past month, the number of structures that have
been demolished across the West Bank in 2016 exceeds
the total for all of 2015. At least 900 people have been
displaced. Although many of the structures that have
been demolished are not dwellings, the loss of water
wells, solar panels and animal shelters has impacted the
livelihoods of more than 2,500 people.

Allow me to turn now to Gaza, where the situation
continues to be desperate and highly volatile. We in the
international community have a responsibility not to
fail the Palestinians in Gaza. We have a responsibility
to help them recover from the physical and emotional
traumas of war. We have a responsibility to assist them
in rebuilding their lives and livelihoods and, ultimately,
to see Gaza and the West Bank reunited and the closures
lifted.

In early April, Israel suspended the private import of
cement following the diversion of a substantial amount
from its intended legitimate beneficiaries. After 45
days and intensive efforts by the United Nations team
on the ground, that suspension has been lifted. I highly
appreciate the constructive work by all authorities to
successfully address the situation. A11 sides need to
ensure that cement is used for civilian purposes only.
Individuals or groups seeking to benefit from the
deviation of construction materials - for corruption,
for building tunnels or other reasons - must understand
that they selfishly compound the suffering of their own
people and sow the seeds of further violence.

Reconstruction is a lifeline for the people of Gaza.
However, Gaza's chronic energy and water crisis needs
to be tackled without delay. Today, residents receive at
most 8 to 12 hours of electricity. On 6 May the crisis
turned to tragedy, as three children from the Al-Hindi
family burned to death when their house in Gaza City
caught fire from a candle lit during a power cut. It is
deeply regrettable that some political factions have
sought to use the tragedy to trade accusations and score
points, instead of uniting to address the energy crisis.

Gaza's hardships seem to have no limits.
Palestinians in Gaza are growing ever more desperate
as they see their prospects for living normal lives and
recovering their economy blocked by Hamas's military
build-up, by Israel's security measures and closures,
by the lack of Palestinian unity and the insufficient
fulfilment of aid pledges by donors. Recent events
clearly demonstrate that the spectre of violence looms
ominously over the territory. Unless radically more is
done to address the chronic realities in Gaza, it is not
a question of if, but rather of when, another escalation
will take place. I once again encourage donors to fulfil
their commitments to support Gaza's reconstruction,
recovery and development.

I welcome the recent opening by Egyptian
authorities of the Rafah border crossing on 11 and
12 May, during which just over 2,000 Palestinians
entered and exited. I encourage Egypt to explore ways
to facilitate more frequent openings of the crossing,
particularly for humanitarian cases, while respecting
its legitimate and pressing security concerns in the
Sinai.

I want to briefly turn to an extremely worrying
most recent development, that is, the announcement by
Hamas of its intention to implement a number of death
sentences. International law limits the application of the
death penalty to the most serious crimes and pursuant
to a trial and appeals process that scrupulously follows
fair-trial standards. I have serious doubts as to whether
capital trials in Gaza meet those standards. There
are also disturbing media reports indicating that the
sentences could be carried out in public. That raises
even more alarms, as public executions are prohibited
under international humanitarian law. What is also
concerning is that the executions will be implemented
without the approval of the Palestinian President, which
is required under Palestinian law. Palestine is one, and
Gaza and the West Bank are its two integral parts. I
urge Hamas not to carry out those executions, and I call
on President Abbas to establish a moratorium on the
implementation of the death penalty.

As circumstances on the ground continue to
deteriorate, for many lamenting the disappearance
of a negotiated two-State solution has become the
default narrative. And yet, according to a recent study
conducted by Tel Aviv University, close to 60 per
cent of the Jewish population and over 70 per cent of
Palestinians remain in favour of conducting peace
negotiations. The will to advance towards peace clearly
exists. What remains glaringly absent is the political
will and bold leadership to make genuine progress a
reality. We need collectively to ask ourselves whether
those Israelis and Palestinians who today support the
return to negotiations will continue to do so next year
or two years from now if the prospects for peace remain
out of reach. Prolonging the current impasse will sap
any remaining optimism for finding a solution to the
nearly 50-year occupation.

Turning briefly to other regional matters, the
Council will be briefed separately on Syria this week.
With regard to Lebanon, yesterday the Secretary-
General and the Security Council reiterated their calls
on the Lebanese political parties to build on the holding
of municipal elections and to elect a President of the
Republic, a post that has now remained vacant for two
years.

In conclusion, let me welcome the recent statement
by Egyptian President Al Sisi expressing Egypt's
readiness to mediate a reconciliation between rival
Palestinian factions so as to pave the way towards a
lasting peace agreement with Israel. Also, his call to
Israelis and Palestinians to continue the historic step
towards peace taken by Israel and Egypt 37 years ago
must not go unheeded i not in Israel, not in Palestine
and certainly not in the rest of the Arab world. I urge
Palestinian leaders in Gaza and the West Bank to take
up that opportunity and to deliver, at long last, to the
Palestinian people an end to the issues that divide and
a commitment to strengthen the ties that bind them.
I also urge Palestinian and Israeli leaders to engage,
through the initiatives put forward, to bring a just,
comprehensive and enduring peace to the people of
Israel and Palestine.

