The President (spoke in Spanish): Under rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Bangladesh, Brazil, Canada,
Ecuador, Egypt, Iceland, Indonesia, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Israel, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Malaysia, Norway, Qatar, Saudi
Arabia, Sri Lanka, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia,
Turkey, the United Arab Emirates, the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela and Viet Nam to participate in
this meeting.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 12 October 2012 from the
Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United Nations,
which will be issued as document S/2012/762 and which
reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in accordance
with its previous practice, the Security Council
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the
United Nations to participate in the meeting of the
Security Council which will be held on Monday,
15 October 2012, on the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
the Permanent Observer of Palestine to participate in
the meeting in accordance with the rules of procedure
and the previous practice in this regard.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
to participate in this meeting.

Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Abdou Salam
Diallo, Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, to
participate in this meeting.

Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Thomas Mayr-
Harting, Head of the Delegation of the European Union
to the United Nations, to participate in this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
I give the floor to Mr. Feltman,

