Mr. Timerman (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to express Argentina's pride at seeing
the sister Republic of Chile as a member of the
Security Council and, on this occasion, at seeing you,
Madam, preside over it. I would also like to take this
opportunity to congratulate the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela on joining the Council, and my friend
Rafael Ramirez for being present. I am also thankful
for the invitation to take part in this debate on a topic
of crucial importance for international reality: the
role of inclusive development in the maintenance of
international peace and security. I would also like to
thank my friend Ambassador Antonio Patriota and
Ms. Leymah Gbowee for their briefings, as well as their
dedication to this very important topic.

At this very moment important negotiations
taking place in the framework the Organization in
which all Member States are democratically taking
part with the commitment and responsibility to
elaborate an agreement on a new development agenda
for the next 15 years that will be a worthy successor
to the Millennium Development Goals and succeed in
fulfilling the goal of eradicating poverty. The Security
Council cannot overlook that process, and that is why
we believe it is timely for an open dialogue that links
the outstanding task of achieving development with
other fundamental issues on the international agenda,
such as international peace and security.

Argentina believes that any development agenda in
the United Nations must be based on a human rights
perspective, that is, it should aim at ensuring that all
men and women worldwide have access to their rights
and enjoy their fundamental freedoms.

My country's historic circumstances and the
political convictions in our society have shown that
development, human rights and international peace
and security are clearly interrelated in such a manner
that they cannot be cannot be addressed separately.
It is in the General Assembly that we have developed
the indispensable tools and capabilities to define,
agree upon, support and follow up on the efforts of the
international community for sustainable development
in its three dimensions. As a result, opportunities such
as the present one allow us to analyse the ways to keep
oopen the channels of communication and to be alert
to avoid watertight compartments or the use of double
standards.

Public development policies that incorporate social
inclusion are the path of progress that we have chosen
in our region, and we hope that the new international
agenda will continue in the direction of inclusive
development. Indeed, development without exclusion
means societies will move forward in the restoration
and the broadening of rights and in the consolidation
of a national State that is present and active and that
promotes public policies while constantly cooperating
with provincial and local governments as well as social
organizations, developing and implementing initiatives
that repair social inequalities in an ongoing task of
searching for inclusion.

This necessarily leads to the perception of persons,
families and communities as rights-holders and requires
the effective recognition of all fundamental rights and
the development of active, anti-discriminatory policies.
That means that we must strengthen the United Nations
commitment with the comprehensive perspective of
human rights.

Those are the objectives that led Argentina to
establish a broader framework for inclusion, from
the promotion of cultural change, which is necessary
to combat the sources of discrimination in a
structural manner and to build a society with greater
representation, recognition and civic participation. All
of this comes with the understanding that inclusive
development and the fight against discrimination
help to improve stability and strengthen democracy,
including the governance of public affairs, the rule of
law, peaceful settlement of disputes and, accordingly,
international peace and security.

We cannot help but mention at this meeting the
close link between the development of human rights,
peace and security in the context of the underlying
causes of international terrorism. We were all moved by
the terrible attacks that took placejust a few days ago in
France, Nigeria, Yemen, and Lebanon that claimed the
lives of many innocent people.

Argentina condemns terrorism in all of its forms
and manifestations. We must prioritize the prevention
and the fight against terrorism in the multilateral
framework and attribute particular importance to the
United Nations Global Counter Terrorism Strategy,
adopted by the General Assembly eight years ago,
and its four pillars. I would like to emphasize that the
Strategy recognizes and includes a first pillar referring
to measures to address the conditions conducive to
the spread of terrorism. Those include human rights
violations; ethnic, national and religious discrimination;
political exclusion and socioeconomic marginalization.
While this in no way justify terrorist acts, we must
recognize that they can lead to radicalization and
recruitment to those ends.

Argentina is convinced that the basis of prevention
is to be found in policies that promote full respect
for human rights and the social inclusion of the most
vulnerable sectors of the population. Young people and
immigrants are potentially vulnerable to radicalization
and recruitment, especially if they are unemployed or
marginalized. N0 transnational criminal organization or
terrorist group would find fertile ground in societies that
succeed in developing high levels ofpeaceful coexistence
through social justice and where the elimination of
poverty is a main objective of their development policy.
Accordingly, the mere consideration of the use of
repression in the fight against terrorism must be
offset by efforts to promote equality, eradicate
poverty, and create decent work, education and
universal access to health care. In another words, we
must promote development with social inclusion as a
prority challenge in achieving tangible progress in the
effective mitigation of the threat posed by transnational
crime and international terrorism, thereby significantly
reducing conditions conducive to their spread.

I would like to conclude by referring to the final
document of the Open Working Group on Sustainable
Development Goals, endorsed in September by
the General Assembly, in which we agreed on the
conceptual framework for the sustainable development
goals and the 17 goals to guide the international
community's renewed efforts on inclusive development.
This document establishes that people are at the heart
of sustainable development and that poverty is the
major problem facing the world today. Eradicating
poverty, along with the modification of unsustainable
modes of production and consumption, the promotion
of sustainable modalities, and the protection and
management of natural resources, which are the basis
of economic and social development, are the global
objectives of sustainable development and the sine qua
non for achieving it.

The result of more than a year's strenuous work
by all Member States, with the support of the United
Nations system, civil society and international experts
within a broad consultation process, the document
reaffirms the importance of freedom, peace, security
and respect for all human rights, including the rights to
development and to a decent standard of living, as well
as to food and water, the rule of law, good governance,
gender equality, the empowerment of women and
the general commitment to achieving more just and
democratic societies through development.

We are convinced that it is only through inclusive
development, based on equal rights and full respect for
diversity and the dignity of all, will we be able to achieve
the sustainable development goals, justice and human
rights, and thereby contribute to the maintenance of
international peace and security in a more lasting and
effective way.

