Mr. M'Beou (Togo) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Kosovo, Mr. Farid Zarif,
for presenting the quarterly report of the Secretary-
General (S/2012/8l8) on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). I would
also like to welcome Mr. Ivan Mrkie and Mr. Enver
Hoxhaj and to thank them for their respective statements.

We welcomed the favourable conditions in which
the presidential and legislative elections took place in
Serbia in May, with the participation of Kosovo Serbs.
However, we regret that the elections interrupted the
dialogue coordinated by the European Union between the
Kosovo and Serbian authorities and the implementation
of the seven agreements that were previously concluded
between the two countries. Today, we welcome the fact
that the two parties have shown their willingness to
resume peaceful dialogue in the context of joint efforts
to settle their differences once and for all.

We note with satisfaction that that new dynamic has

led to the implementation of some technical agreements,
in particular the endorsement by the Serbian authorities
on 25 September of the protocol to the agreement on
integrated management for crossing points, and the
publication that month of an instruction that allowed
for ambiguities in interpretations of the use of the
footnote reference to be overcome. That has enabled the
Serbian and Kosovo representatives to participate in
same regional forums. We urge the two protagonists to
continue along those lines in order to fully implement
the seven technical agreements and to strive to reach
a consensual agreement on the final status of Kosovo.

Furthermore, we note the decision taken on
10 September by the Kosovo authorities and the
International Steering Group to bring an end to
the supervised independence of Kosovo by the
International Civilian Office. Nonetheless, we note
that, while progress has been made by Kosovo since
its declaration of independence, in particular regarding
the overall stability and security of the country, efforts
still need to be made, particularly in northern Kosovo,
which remains an area of tension due to the fact that
the status of the country has not yet been unanimously
agreed upon within the population.

It is worrying to note that the local Serbian
community still refuses to recognize the authority of
the central Government, resulting in persistent, tangible
tensions. The blockade for several days in July of the
crossing at gate 1 at Jarinje in Leposavie municipality
to protest the continued presence of Kosovo police and
customs officers there, as well as a number of armed
incidents occurring in the north of the country, such as
the firing of automatic weapons at Kosovo police and
vehicles belonging to the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), clearly demonstrate the
fragility of the situation in that part of the country.

The persistence of such incidents, like the
inter-ethnic violence and the refusal to live together
peacefully, are simply the result of the lack of consensus
between the Serbian and Kosovo authorities on Kosovo's
final status. That is why we believe it crucial for the
international community, and the Security Council in
particular, work tirelessly towards a rapprochement
between Serbia and Kosovo. In that regard, we commend
the European Union's continued efforts to maintain the
momentum of a peaceful dialogue between the two
countries.

We urge all the parties concerned to pursue and
promote the negotiations that are the only route to a
peaceful and lasting settlement of their differences, and
to avoid any act that might exacerbate tensions between
the various communities and dim the prospects for
their reconciliation. We also again encourage the
Kosovo authorities to take all measures necessary to
protect cultural and religious heritage sites from theft
and vandalism.

Finally, my country reiterates its congratulations to
UNMIK, the Kosovo Force, EULEX, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe and all the
partner organizations that continue to work not only to
help Kosovar institutions run smoothly and to restore
security and the rule of law, but above all to bring the
various communities of Kosovo together and beyond
that to arrive at a definitive settlement of its status.

