Mr. Al Nafisee (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me first to thank His Excellency the Secretary-
General for his report on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict (S/2009/277). My thanks go also to
Mr. John Holmes, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, for his statement. I also take this
opportunity to congratulate you, Sir, as your friendly
country, Austria, presides over the work of the Security
Council this month.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict has
become an important item on the Security Council
agenda. The issue has the political dimension of
encompassing threats to international peace and
security and also has a legal dimension because of
violations of international law and international
humanitarian law during armed conflict. It also has
humanitarian and economic dimensions, reflected in
the forced displacement of civilians and the consequent
misery and humiliation that can overnight turn civilians
into refugees or persons who have been displaced,
either internally or externally.

Participation in the discussion of this issue, in my
view, is not solely a matter of rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure of the Security Council. It does not
only mean being invited to sit at the Council table, to
make a statement, to listen to dozens of other
statements and to exchange compliments. It also means
that Security Council members must take into
consideration the opinions offered by countries during
discussion of the resolutions and documents adopted
by the Council. That would enhance the credibility,
efficiency, openness and transparency of the Council's
work and would make it possible for the Council to
take into consideration other views as a means of
achieving respect and appreciation.

There is no way for the Security Council to
enhance its respectability and consideration other than
by the demonstration of political will, strong
determination and sincere desire on the part of its
members, particularly the permanent members, which
bear the primary responsibility for achieving the
aspirations of Member States and all peoples without
exception, preference or discrimination among the
States.

While we welcome General Assembly resolution
64/10 on the follow-up to the report of the United
Nations Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict
(A/64/490, annex), we are somewhat frustrated by the
positions of some countries, including certain members
of this Council. How can we understand that those
countries emphasize in their statements the importance
of protecting civilians in armed conflicts while they
vote against a resolution that seeks to protect those
civilians? Are we to conclude that civilians differ from
one county to another, or that moral and legal
responsibilities differ according to ethnic groups and
nations? Some claim that they seek to protect civilians
through a variety of ways and means but do not want to
discuss such issues in the Security Council. That is a
living example of double standards in addressing
similar issues within and outside the Security Council.

The international arena is dominated today by
many crises and sources of conflict of varying form
and characteristics. Furthermore, the goals of those
conflicts vary from one region of tension and conflict
to another. Those and other elements create for all of us
a tense reality that demands a different approach by the
United Nations and its bodies, particularly the Security
Council. Thus, the United Nations policy of response
must be replaced by a policy of initiative. Such
initiative should respect the principles of justice and
promote a culture of responsibility and intolerance for
impunity. It must also defend the principle of the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of States and non-interference in their
internal affairs, which constitutes a strong guarantee
for the protection of civilians, the principal casualties
in conflicts.

The discussion of the protection of civilians must
not be restricted to the Security Council, but should be
extended to the policy and strategy sessions of many
other departments and agencies of the United Nations,
such as the Department of Field Support, the
Peacebuilding Commission, United Nations
peacekeeping missions, the Department of Public
Information and other divisions. Furthermore, civilian
protection and its improvement must be priorities of
those agencies and departments.

There are numerous instruments for civilian
protection. The Security Council, fulfilling its duties in
full transparency, is an important tool for preserving
and maintaining the dignity and lives of civilians. The
dispatch of fact-finding missions is a powerful
instrument to prevent the recurrence of such violations.
Moreover, the assignment of commissions to
investigate violations of international law and human
rights and to identify and prosecute those who are
responsible for such violations at the national and
international levels sends a strong message to parties to
conflicts that the protection of civilians is a high
priority of the United Nations.

The Fact-Finding Mission led by Justice
Goldstone had a specific mandate and objective. The
Mission's report (A/64/490, annex) finds that flagrant
violations of international humanitarian law led to the
killing of 1,420 Palestinians, 1,170 of whom were
civilians. How would the situation look if the Special
Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the
Human Rights of the Palestinian People and other
Arabs of the Occupied Territories, established more
than 40 years ago, were enabled to carry out its duties
in the investigation of Israeli practices? If that
Committee were to execute its mandate, what would its
report include? What would be included in that
Committee's report about over 40 years of atrocities
and horrors? There is no doubt that the report of that
Committee would be painful and sad for us and
embarrassing for Israel.

