Mr. Belinga-Eboutou (Cameroon) (spoke in French): At the outset, my delegation would like to
thank you, Sir, for the initiative of convening this
meeting.

It will be recalled that we said last month that this
meeting would provide us with an occasion to make a
sort of mini-assessment of the action of the United
Nations in Kosovo. We felt it would be appropriate at a
given time to measure the distance travelled and,
especially, to look to the future by outlining a strategy
based on acquired experience and on an unflinching
evaluation of that past action. In other words, today's
meeting is very important, and we welcome the Deputy
Prime Minister to this discussion, all the more so
because his important statement contained much
valuable information.

We also welcome the presence among us of Mr.
Steiner and the chance to benefit from his insight. His
briefing was particularly illustrative of all the United
Nations comprehensive achievements in the region and
it will hold a place of honour among the documents
that assist our consideration. We have in the past
expressed our thinking on the initiatives and,
especially, the philosophy for action of Mr. Steiner. We
warmly praise his tact and, especially, his ability to
listen. I believe that those qualities have counted for
much in the resolution of the crisis and in the creation
of a conscientious administration in Kosovo.

We would also underline and welcome the efforts
made and measures taken for the creation of a multi-
ethnic society in Kosovo. We do so because we are
convinced that Kosovo will not be able to achieve its
potential unless security, fraternity, tolerance and,
especially, respect for difference prevail. Without those
qualities - as we have often said - there can be no
Kosovo, whose survival depends on the recognition of
two elements of which Mr. Steiner has just spoken so
forcefully: its multi-ethnic nature and the resulting
integration.

We recall the positive qualities of Mr. Steiner's
actions and of the Council's action on the ground
because they are fully in line with Cameroon's long-
standing concerns with respect to the question of
Kosovo. We have expressed those concerns in all our
preceding statements: strengthening security, disarming
armed groups, encouraging the return of all minorities
and reviving lasting economic and social life in
Kosovo.

The pursuit and intensification of such activities
remain priority issues in that region. We are pleased to
see that Mr. Steiner has emphasized them and put them
forward as benchmarks. In order for them to be fully
implemented, everyone must contribute to the process.

That is why we would like to reiterate our appeal
that an end be put to the violence and murder in
Kosovo. We call also for the effective participation of
all political parties in the process of rebuilding
Kosovo - a process that now more than ever requires
determined generosity on the part of the international
community.

The United Nations set lofty goals for itself in
Kosovo, as enshrined in resolution 1244 (1999). It is in
duty bound to achieve them, and that is why we
consider that we must now focus fully on the
benchmarks outlined by Mr. Steiner. If those
benchmarks are not consolidated, our efforts will not
be productive in the long term.
