Mr. Sommaruga (interpretation from French): First
of all I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
made possible this substantive, high-level meeting, which
for me is an affirmation of Canada's leadership and of
yours personally in humanitarian action. I would also like
to express my appreciation to all members of the Council
who have expressed gratitude to the International
Committee of the Red Cross, particularly to its personnel
working in the field in sensitive situations everyday in order
to protect and assist victims and to disseminate international
humanitarian law. I wish also to tell my friends Ms.
Bellamy and Mr. Otunnu how very much I appreciated their
statements. I learned a great deal from what they said, and
I look forward to learning more from them.

The question that kept arising was that of what the
Council can do. Not being a part of the United Nations
system, and keen to maintain our mutual independence, I
wish to respond with several points on the responsibility of
States that also touch, I believe, on the responsibilities of
the United Nations and the Council. These are points that
have already been addressed to a certain extent, but I wish
to emphasize them. They are points that might also be
included in the Secretary-General's report.

First, I believe I should stress that no effort must be
spared to prevent human suffering. These efforts should
include education on international humanitarian law and
on human values throughout the population, especially
among young people.

Secondly, we must strive to gain universal adherence
to humanitarian law, especially the conventions - there
is one country today, for instance, that is involved in an
international conflict but is not a party to the Geneva
Conventions - their Additional Protocols and the Ottawa
Convention, on which I had the pleasure of working with
you, Mr. President. That Convention must achieve
universality, as must the existing weapons protocols, such
as that on blinding laser weapons.

One element has not been mentioned: the application
of individual criminal jurisdiction, as laid down in the
Geneva Conventions, which has no territorial or national
limitations for war criminals. A fact-finding commission,
as provided for in Protocol 1, already exists. This
commission must enjoy the broadest participation and this
provision must be invoked. In examining the Geneva
Conventions, we find provisions on the Protecting Power
in humanitarian law. States seem to have forgotten that,
and the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)
constantly has to act as a substitute for the Protecting
Power. But I believe that States should give some thought
to this subject. Moreover, when we consider the threats
that loom over peace and security, any decision on
appropriate operations to ensure respect for international
law must take into account a provision of humanitarian
law that I would like very briefly to cite. Article 89 of
Protocol I to the Fourth Geneva Convention states that:

"In situations of serious violations of the
Conventions or of this Protocol, the High
Contracting Parties undertake to act, jointly or
individually, in co-operation with the United Nations
and in conformity with the United Nations Charter."

It is important for there to be no ambiguity on this
subject. While I am here today as an independent agent,
I am also here because I believe that there is a bond that
allows us to say that we are not politicizing human rights.

Action must be taken with regard to arms. We have
spoken of embargoes. I believe that the movement to
achieve better control of the transfer of light weapons -
to which we have already referred - is also very
important from the point of View of international human
rights law. This is the "ensure respect for" of common

 

article 1. The person who is responsible for a transfer of
arms must realize that he must ensure that humanitarian law
is respected. The study to be published shortly on the
consequences brought about by the availability of arms in
conflicts, which was done by the International Committee
of the Red Cross and which was mentioned by the
Ambassador of France, will emphasize this point.

I would also like to say that we ourselves need - and
this is something that I believe is a responsibility of the
Security Council - is to create a humanitarian environment
that provides the humanitarian space needed by institutions
to be able to assist all victims. 1 would also like to make an
appeal that the term humanitarian not be misused. I believe
that when we speak of humanitarian action we must always
bear in mind its independence, impartiality and neutrality
and not allow the term to be employed in reference to
actions that do not have a humanitarian character.

I would like to close by saying that we must never
forget the provisions of common article 3 of the four
Geneva Conventions, which I would like to consider a
mini-convention in and of itself. This has to do with
conflicts that are not of an international nature and is aimed
at ensuring that not only States but also the other actors in
non-international armed conflicts abide by basic
humanitarian rules.

You, Mr. President, and the members of the Security
Council have demonstrated the political will to act. I
believe that you have shown your sense of responsibility.
At a time when we speak so much about globalization -
of communications, of economy, what we desire, and what
you have contributed to today is the globalization of
responsibility.

