Mr. Straw (United Kingdom): I speak on behalf
of a very old country, founded in 1066 by the French.
In opening, I would like to thank Mr. Blix and
Mr. ElBaradei for their reports and to express my very
great appreciation to them and to their inspection teams
for their great efforts in the face of what I think is still
very clear: Iraq's failure fully and actively to comply
with resolution 1441 (2002).

The issue before us could not be graver. It is
about the authority of the United Nations and about the
responsibility of the Security Council for international
peace and security. Just three months ago, on 8
November, we unanimously adopted resolution 1441
(2002), submitted by the United States and ourselves.
We said then that Iraq's proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction and of long-range missiles and its
non-compliance with Council resolutions were a threat
to international peace and security.

We all knew - and we all know - that they
have had these weapons. It is why we said that Iraq had
them, why all 5 permanent members and all 10 elected
members said the same thing. We knew that the issue
was not whether Iraq had them, but whether Iraq was
actively cooperating to get rid of them. We emphasized
that Iraq had been found guilty 12 years ago by the
world community.

It is worth just reminding ourselves that Iraq is
the only country in the world that has launched missile
attacks on five of its neighbours, invaded two of its
neighbours - both Muslim - and killed without any
justification hundreds of thousands of innocent people
in Iran, in Kuwait and in Iraq itself.

In his report, Mr. Blix referred to the decisions
that were made in 1991, and he said that regrettably the
high degree of cooperation required by the Council of
Iraq for disarmament through inspection was not
forthcoming in 1991. It is worth reminding ourselves,
when we discuss this issue of time scales, that on 3
April 1991, this Council gave Iraq 90 days to disarm -
by 2 July 1991. In the 11 years, 7 months and 12
days- quite a lot of time - since the Council's
deadline to Iraq ran out, what is it they have done?

Well, they have lied; they have concealed; they
have played games - the game of catch as catch can,
as Mr. Blix told us on 27 January. Saddam said for four
years that he had no biological weapons programme,
no anthrax bacillus, no smallpox virus, no VX nerve
agent. And indeed, the inspectors found absolutely
nothing. It took the defection of Saddam's own son-in-
law to uncover Saddam's biological weapons
programme, more terrible than anybody had thought.

To bring us up to date, as Mr. Blix and
Mr. ElBaradei spelled out in their report on 27 January,
Iraq has failed to account for thousands of tons of
chemical weapons and precursor chemicals, of shells
and bombs for anthrax, for mustard gas and for VX
nerve agent. They have failed to make a full and
complete disclosure, as required of them, on 7
December. They have failed to cooperate fully and
actively on substance, as well as on process, with the
inspectors. And they have failed substantively to meet
the obligations imposed on them.

I have listened with very great care to my
colleagues who have spoken so far. We all agree on the
importance of resolution 1441 (2002), and it is striking
that nobody who has spoken so far - and, I warrant,
nobody who speaks after me - has suggested for a
second that Iraq is fully and actively complying with
the obligations that we imposed on them on 8
November of last year. So, Iraq's material breaches,
which we spelled out on 8 November, are still there.

In that regard, I would be glad to put the
following questions to the inspectors: Why did
Mr. Blix think that Iraq has refurbished equipment like
the engine casting chambers at Al Mamoun and the
chemical processing equipment at Al Falujah, both of
which were destroyed by the United Nations Special
Commission (UNSCOM) because they were
prohibited? Since the last report, how many interviews
have taken place with the officials that the inspectors
have asked to interview, and how many in places to
which the inspectors are sure are not subject to
electronic interception and bugging by Iraq? Has any
of the outstanding material identified by UNSCOM. in
early 1999 - the missing 8,500 litres of anthrax, the
1.5 tons of VX nerve agent, the 6,500 chemical
bombs - been satisfactorily dealt with by Iraq? Do
recent documents provided by Iraq give any serious
evidence of this? As for the nuclear dossier, how many
of its open issues has the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) been able to close through Iraq's
cooperation?

I thought that the most significant point made by
Mr. Blix in his report, which has subsequently been
echoed by everyone who has spoken so far, was in his
closing remarks, when he said that three months after
the adoption of resolution 1441 (2002), the period of
disarmament through inspection could still be short if
the immediate, active and unconditional cooperation
with the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC) and IAEA were
to be forthcoming.

I take those words to mean that Iraq has yet to be
forthcoming with that immediate, active and
unconditional cooperation. I would like to ask
Mr. Blix, picking up a phrase from his report of 27
January, whether he believes that Iraq has yet come to a
genuine acceptance of the disarmament that has been
demanded of it.

The issue before us is of the authority of the
United Nations and of the defiance of United Nations
resolutions. On 8 November, we said unanimously that
Saddam was to have a final opportunity. Can anyone
say - does anyone truly believe here - that he has yet
taken that final opportunity? Like every other member
of this Council, and, I believe, of the international
community, I hope and believe that a peaceful solution
to this crisis may still be possible. But this will require
a dramatic and immediate change by Saddam, and that
will be achieved only if we, the Security Council, hold
our nerve in the face of this tyrant, give meaning to our
words and to the decisions that we have already
collectively taken, and make ourselves ready to ensure
that Iraq will face the serious consequences that we all
decided would have to happen if Iraq's defiance did not
end.

I want to close by saying this. The period of 12
years since resolution 687 (1991) was adopted on 3
April 1991 has, frankly, been a period of humiliation
for this body - the Security Council - and for the
United Nations, as games have been played with the
Council's authority. And the period after the inspectors
were effectively kicked out by Iraq at the end of 1998
until 8 November will hardly be described as the best
in the Security Council's history, because Iraq was in
open defiance of the United Nations and nothing
effectively was being done about its weapons of mass
destruction.

I am proud that, with the United States, the
United Kingdom took the initiative on this issue and
tabled what became resolution 1441 (2002). I am glad
to note the progress on process that has been made. I
am glad to note that, notwithstanding the clear
statement by the Government of Iraq on 10 September
last year that inspectors would never go back into Iraq,
inspectors have now gone back into Iraq. We note the
progress on process that has been made.

But I also say this: in our efforts to secure a
peaceful conclusion to this crisis, as we must, I know,
and I think everybody else here knows, that we have
reached this stage only by doing what the United
Nations Charter requires of us, which is to back a
diplomatic process with a credible threat of force and
also, if necessary, to be ready to use that threat of
force. If we back away from that - if we decide to
give unlimited time for little or no cooperation on
substance - then the disarmament of Iraq and the
peace and security of the international community, for
which we are responsible, will get not easier, but very
much harder.

This issue is notjust about Iraq - it is about how
we deal with proliferators elsewhere across the globe.
If we send out the message to proliferators the world
over that defiance of the United Nations pays, it will
not be peace that we will have secured.

