Mr. Motoc (Romania): I should like to start by
commending your presidency, Sir, for convening this
open debate and for its unflagging dedication to the
topic at hand.

Allow me to point out that Romania associates
itself with the statement soon to be made by you on
behalf of the European Union.

In my turn, I would certainly like to join others in
thanking Under-Secretary-General and Emergency
Relief Coordinator Egeland for his briefing, as well as
Vice-President Forster for his inspiring intervention
and, more generally, to commend through him the
valuable work relentlessly pursued by the International
Committee of the Red Cross to protect victims
everywhere.

While acknowledging the disturbing facts that
have been presented to us this morning, we are also
considering today all possible options for consolidating
the practice of protection of civilians in armed conflict.
Let me, in light of the brief time at our disposal,
highlight what is of particular importance to my
country.

Under the British presidency, our delegations are
working progressively towards the adoption of a new
resolution - one that we have awaited these past five
years - on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. Our most recent resolution, 1296 (2000),
raised the human rights and humanitarian dimension
higher on the working agenda of the Security Council.
Since then, we have not hesitated to deal with the
devastating effects of armed conflict on civilian
populations. We have mandated peacekeepers to ensure
the protection of civilians. We have activated
mechanisms to end impunity and stop abuses in the
Darfur region of the Sudan, northern Uganda and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Following our call,
the International Criminal Court is bringing to justice
the perpetrators of the most serious crimes in those
conflict situations. We have pledged full support for
the appointment of a Special Adviser of the Secretary-
General on the Prevention of Genocide. We have called
for unimpeded humanitarian access and reacted
promptly when humanitarian workers and United
Nations personnel have themselves become targets.

Gaps remain, without a doubt, and the sober
representation contained in the report of the Secretary-
General that is before us is indeed alarming. It is our
desire, of course, that the measures we take here have
an immediate and relieving impact on civilians trapped
in armed conflict. Much depends, however, not only on
the action of the Security Council, but on the
willingness of States to assume responsibility for
protecting their own citizens.

My delegation is working with members of the
Security Council to have this issue reflected as a matter
of principle in the new draft resolution that we are
negotiating on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. After five years, we are close to the adoption
of that new draft resolution, which we hope will make
a difference and stand as a more coherent and
comprehensive response and approach by the Security
Council. At this point, I would also like to add that our
chances of successfully protecting civilians in armed
conflict increase significantly when we understand the
need to engage regional organizations and other key
partners in that endeavour. Like other delegations that
have spoken here, we have been consistently in favour
of regional thinking in the Council's actions and of
mutually reinforcing cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations.

The previous practice of this Council in the field
of protection of civilians in armed conflict and our
current reflection on the matter, including in the
preparation of the new draft resolution, show clearly
that we have gone beyond the search for a mere vision
of protection. We have designed solid safeguards and,
with the valuable help of other good-faith partners, we
have been able to move to concrete actions. From now
on, it will only take applied willingness to promote and
implement our own mechanisms for protection.

