Mr. Petrov: Today the Security Council is
discussing for the last time the activities of the United
Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT)
and the implementation of the General Agreement for
peace and national reconciliation in Tajikistan. The main
provisions of the peace Agreement have been
implemented, and the transition period came to an end
with the holding of the first multi-party parliamentary
elections and the first session of the new Parliament.

The positive outcome of the peace process in
Tajikistan is attributable to three main factors: first,
United Nations involvement from the very beginning of
the hostilities in the country; secondly, the strong support
of eight neighbouring States - especially the Russian
Federation and Islamic Republic of Iran - that later
became guarantors of the General Agreement and
members of the Contact Group; and thirdly, but not least
the political will of the two Tajik parties and their
leadership to resolve differences through dialogue.

I want to begin with the first main factor, United
Nations involvement. The United Nations was
instrumental in assisting the negotiation process, which
was conducted under its aegis. UNMOT was given a clear
mandate by the Security Council, based on the General
Agreement. The Security Council supported the Mission
and responded positively to its needs whenever that was
necessary.

The process of implementation of the provisions of
the General Agreement was not free of serious crises.
These were expected, as the level of suspicion and lack
of confidence between former military opponents
prevailed for a long time. Many times the work of the
Commission on National Reconciliation was put on hold.
However, all of these crises were resolved through the
good offices of UNMOT, together with the Contact
Group. Special mechanisms, such as ad hoc working
groups chaired by the Mission and comprising
representatives of both sides, were developed, and they
performed efficiently.

 

The second factor is the contribution of the Contact
Group States. The Contact Group of Guarantor States and
international organizations conducted more than 130
meetings and played a most Vital role as a crisis
management mechanism. Throughout the transition period,
the Contact Group maintained close working relations with
all actors involved in the implementation of the provisions
of the General Agreement, including the Government, the
Commission on National Reconciliation and a number of
international organizations. I would like to underline the
fact that during the whole period of the functioning of the
Contact Group, the interest of the peace process has always
been the priority for the guarantor States.

The third factor is the contribution of the Tajik sides.
The Government of Tajikistan and the United Tajik
Opposition made the most decisive contribution to the
success of the peace process. President Rakhmonov and the
leader of the United Tajik Opposition, Mr. Nuri, played a
historic role in this regard. Both sides' goodwill and
commitment to the achievement of peace and national
accord in Tajikistan are an important guarantee for a viable
peace in the country in the future. The 32 months taken to
implement the General Agreement, as compared to the 12
to 18 months stipulated in the Agreement, ought not to
detract from this achievement, given the adverse
psychological effects of five years of civil war. Working
together in the Commission on National Reconciliation
created a new attitude for both sides towards the most vital
problems of the country.

Despite the successful completion of the transitional
period, the country is still facing a lot of problems. There
are too many people in arms. The country is regarded by
organized crime as a preferred transit route for drug
trafficking to Europe. The situation in Afghanistan is a
constant source of instability in the whole region. In View
of these challenges, Tajikistan requires continued support
from the international community for stabilization and post-
conflict peace-building.

The key to maintaining peace and political stability in
Tajikistan is sustained economic growth. Tajikistan remains
the poorest Commonwealth of Independent States country,
with an average monthly wage of less than $10. According
to a recent World Bank/United Nations Development
Programme Living Standards Survey, 80 per cent of the
population suffers from extreme poverty. Recent poor
harvests, the collapse of the social safety, public health,
sanitation and educational systems has meant continued
dependence on international assistance.

The country has received humanitarian assistance,
and the figures for donor response to the appeal for 2000
are also encouraging: 28 per cent of the total requested,
$34.8 million, has been pledged or committed. However,
it must be stressed that the country needs not only
humanitarian assistance; the problem of economic and
social recovery and structural changes, including market
reforms, requires significant international development
assistance. This has been highly inadequate so far.
Without international economic assistance, the Viability of
the political achievements might be endangered.

In the case of Tajikistan one can say that, in
proportion to their accomplishments, the Tajik sides and
the Tajik people have received less support than other
States and peoples in a similar situation. This could be
rectified through assistance for the new period of post-
conflict stabilization in that country.

The United Nations Mission of Observers in
Tajikistan (UNMOT) could be regarded as a success story
of United Nations peacekeeping. This was possible
because of the factors I mentioned at the outset, but also
because of the dedicated work of the people who have
participated in the mission over the past five and a half
years. I wish to stress here the highly professional work
of my predecessors, the Special Envoys and
Representatives for Tajikistan, Ismat Kittani, Ramiro
Piriz-Ballon, Gerd Merrem and Jan Kubis, as well as
heads of mission Liviu Bota and Darco Silovic.
Commendation for work well done should be addressed
to all members of the staff of the United Nations Mission
of Observers in Tajikistan, both civilian and military, both
international and local.

