Mr. Matuszewski (Poland): It gives me great
pleasure indeed to congratulate you, Sir, on your

 

assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of January.

I would also like to ask Ambassador Lavrov to accept
the assurances of my delegation's deep appreciation for the
excellent manner in which he presided over the Council in
December 1995.

The Polish delegation remains concerned over the
situation in Abkhazia. It may be concluded, on the basis of
the reports of the Secretary-General, including the last one,
that the most appropriate words to describe both the
substance and the pace of the process of normalization in
the area are "deadlock" and "unchanged". Moreover, the
continuing acts of human rights violations against the
Georgian population, and the recent killings strengthen the
view that more efforts are needed to achieve a genuine
breakthrough in the situation.
The political aspects of the normalization continue to
determine the chances for progress in all other areas. The
picture presented in the Secretary-Generals latest report is
rather a bleak one. We sincerely encourage all parties
concerned - and especially the Abkhaz side - to do all
they can in order to achieve a comprehensive political
solution.

We believe that last year's presidential and
parliamentary elections in Georgia, while greatly
contributing to the process of democratic evolution in that
country, create a more propitious climate for addressing the
outstanding issues in the conflict. We refer in particular to
President Shevardnadze's comments on the constitutional
arrangements in Georgia in his inaugural address.

The humanitarian situation in the conflict area is of
particular concern for the delegation of Poland. We regret
the lack of positive changes in this regard and call upon all
the parties concerned to alleviate the situation - and not
just on a temporary basis - in the first place, by
committing themselves to full and unequivocal fulfilment of
their obligations. Again, our appeal is addressed in
particular to the Abkhaz side, which is expected to better its
record with regard to the process of return of refugees and
displaced persons, as stipulated in the draft.

The United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia
(UN OMIG) continues to be an indispensable element of the
situation in Abkhazia. That is why we are in favour of the
extension of the mandate, although the situation that I
referred to earlier in my statement would warrant a cautious
approach in the face of further delays in the peace process.

In conclusion, let me extend words of appreciation
to the Secretary-General and his envoys to the region for
their efforts to resolve the conflict, as well as to the
Russian Federation for its assistance as facilitator.

Finally, we wish to pay tribute to the personnel of
UNOMIG and its Commonwealth of Independent States
(CIS) partner in the area.

