Ms. Taft: It gives me great pleasure to be able to
present some highlights of the role of the United
Nations Development Programme as it helps to
maintain peace and security in the Central Africa
subregion.

It is well known that impoverishment can be a
cause and a consequence of conflict. Unstable
situations thwart development efforts. But lack of
development can also be a contributory factor to
instability. As the speaker from the World Bank
underscored, there is a consensus that the two are
interdependent.

This interdependence between poverty and
conflict determines the UNDP entry point to conflict
prevention and peace-building. The interdependence
further means that development programmes must
contribute to the political purpose of consolidating
peace and preventing future conflicts, as well as serve
their normal purpose of improving conditions of life
and relieving hardships. Hence, new and effective
strategies, tools, and partnerships with new partners
such as the World Bank, the other funds and
programmes of the United Nations system, and
international and national civil service organizations
are all becoming part of a sustained effort to meet these
challenges.

In 2001 the United Nations Development
Programme Executive Board endorsed this broad
relationship and the connection between the role of
UNDP in development and peace-building, and
supported our strategy of response as well.

While conflict is by no means limited to Africa,
that continent has experienced an especially large
number of conflicts and complex emergencies. The
Central Africa subregion has been one of the areas
most affected by ongoing or recurrent conflict. The
extent and the impact of these conflicts on
development underscore our urgent need to assist the
Governments whose normal development operations
have been overwhelmed by the implications of conflict.

The parameters of the strategic framework for the
United Nations Development Programme are conflict
prevention, recovery, peace-building, and capacity-
building of regional and subregional organizations.
Conflict prevention efforts focus on capacity-building
of national institutions and actors to do better conflict
analysis and to identify risk factors and a range of
appropriate responses.
Recovery interventions focus on developing
strategies to bridge the relief-to-development gap, with
emphasis on the reintegration of ex-combatants and
civilians displaced by war, as well as on community-
based rehabilitation and reconstruction. Recovery also
supports the rebuilding of governance and socio-
economic institutions to promote political and social
inclusion, the rule of law and effective and fair
administration of justice to prevent relapse into
conflict. In the area of peace-building, UNDP has been
heavily involved in disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes, removing small arms from
communities, rebuilding social capital and launching
reconciliation processes.

Let me highlight one regional example to
illustrate the range of activities we are engaged in. As
part of its global mandate to address the consequences
of the availability and use of illicit small arms, UNDP
has undertaken a range of activities in the Great Lakes
region to assist States and communities where the
transition from armed conflict to economic recovery is
currently impeded by continuing insecurity and
violence.

The United Nations Development Programme
will be launching a cross-border project in November
2002 that aims at reducing armed violence through
community recovery activities, voluntary disarmament,
strengthening capacities of the Republic of the Congo
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
facilitating the repatriation of Democratic Republic of
the Congo ex-combatants and refugees. In addition,
UNDP, in close collaboration with INTERPOL and the
World Customs Organization, is currently developing a
multi-country programme to improve the capacities of
States in the region to control the illicit proliferation of
small arms. In addition to an assessment of zones of
high-risk trafficking in illicit small arms and the
development of a training programme for border and
customs officials, the project aims to contribute to the
development of regional security frameworks within
the Great Lakes region.

The United Nations Development Programme
also provides support to the Nairobi secretariat in
implementing the Nairobi Declaration on Illicit Small
Arms and Light Weapons as part of its effort to
implement regional inter-governmental initiatives to
address small arms.

At the country level, UNDP carries out a number
of programmes that are worth mentioning briefly. In
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, within the
framework of the Peace Accords, programmes to kick-
start economic recovery in war-affected regions and to
reintegrate the Congolese ex-combatants are critical to
breaking the link between insecurity and chronic
underdevelopment. In that context, UNDP has been
asked by the Government and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to take a lead
in DDR in collaboration with the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC), the World Bank and other
partners. In addition, UNDP will provide technical
expertise and training to Government officials in how
to secure weapons collection, management and
destruction procedures to assist in the development of
needed registration and identification systems and to
undertake assessments to identify optimal disarmament
strategies and weapons availability and distribution
patterns. UNDP is also currently collaborating with
MONUC and civil society organizations in promoting
increased awareness and sensitization on small arms
among local communities.

Through its Reintegration of Ex-combatants and
Collection of Weapons Project in the Republic of the
Congo, started in June 2000, UNDP has reintegrated
approximately 8,000 ex-combatants in return for the
voluntary surrender of more than 12,000 small arms
and explosives, all of which have been destroyed.

In Rwanda, UNDP has supported over the past
four years the Rwanda Demobilization and
Reintegration Programme for over 16,000 troops. A
national summit on unity and reconciliation is planned
for the end of October 2002, with the support of UNDP.
We are also seeking to address the problem of the
resettlement of the internally displaced population of
over 170,000. A policy research institute on national
and regional peace and conflict prevention issues, the
Centre for Conflict Management, affiliated with the
National University of Rwanda, was established by and
continues to be supported by UNDP.

In Burundi, in addition to the ongoing internally
displaced persons and returning reintegration
programme, UNDP will support the Government in the
formulation of a programme to address the reinsertion
and the reintegration of ex-combatants.

In Angola, we are also concerned about and
involved in the ex-combatant issue. Following the
peace agreement between the Government and UNITA,
we formulated a private regional recovery programme
to enhance municipal governments to help them
provide services for returnees. Our initial proposal is to
begin in two provinces, and as soon as the Government
of Angola approves our project, we will initiate a major
effort to mitigate the effects of war in those provinces.
In the Central African Republic, in 2001, the
Government requested UNDP and the United Nations
to reorient the objectives and the strategies of their
national programme of disarmament and reinsertion.
During the initial implementation period of the project,
thousands of items of ammunition and small arms were
collected and publicly destroyed in a "flamme de la
paix". UNDP has also provided direct training of
national officers on basic procedures in handling
weapons and explosives safely. In Chad, we are also
engaged in the reintegration of ex-combatants, as well
as mine-clearance activities.

Finally, I would like to say that some of our
efforts in Cameroon have really been to support a very
important role the Government has played in the
creation of mechanisms to preserve peace and security
in the subregion. The joint Central African Republic-
Cameroon Commission has been actively encouraged
and assisted by the United Nations country team in
dealing with the circulation of arms and human
trafficking. Thus, Cameroon has an important role in
the context of the six-monthly ministerial meetings of
the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on
Security Questions in Central Africa.

Additionally, the areas of support to the
Government from UNDP include advocacy, the
preparation of programmes to halt the proliferation of
small arms, capacity-building through the United
Nations Centre for Human Rights and Democracy in
Central Africa, as well as technical support to the
National Human Rights Institution of Cameroon.

Let me just say that those highlights are only a
few of the concrete measures that UNDP is
undertaking. We obviously need to do more, and we
look forward to integrating and expanding our efforts
in collaboration with others. UNDP remains committed
to ensuring priority support for those programmes that
contribute to peace and security throughout the Central
African subregion now and in the years to come.

