Mr. Heusgen (Germany): At the outset, I wish to
commend you, Mr. President, for organizing this debate.
You have been very successful in terms of holding the
shortest and most interactive briefings ever.

Germany wishes to pay tribute to the peacekeepers,
soldiers and police deployed worldwide and recognizes
their actions, achievements and the sacrifices they must
often make.

Turning to Major General Cheryl Pearce, those
who do not follow the developments in Cyprus on a
daily basis might have the impression that the situation
there is rather quiet. She helpfully pointed out that there
has been an increase in violations and a hardening of
positions, which certainly has an impact on the overall
situation in Cyprus. She mentioned in particular that
the authority of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force
in Cyprus in the buffer zone is questioned. Given that,
what more can be done to re-establish or strengthen
the authority of the mission? What can be done
internally, perhaps with the Secretary-General or with
Mr. Lacroix? Perhaps she could tell us a bit about the
"internal cuisine". Also, what action can the Security
Council take?

Turning now to the situation in the Sudan, I do not
think anyone perceives the situation there to be quiet.
I would like to commend Lieutenant General Leonard
Muriuki Ngondi for his briefing, which was very precise
and very much to the point. I understood from his
statement that he finds the situation worrisome. I also
understood that the handover of team sites to civilians,
as foreseen by the mandate, is not taking place, but that
there is an order by the Transitional Military Council
to give the team sites to the Rapid Support Forces
(RSF). We all know that the Rapid Support Forces
were previously known as the Janjaweed, who were
responsible for the mass atrocities in Darfur.

The Lieutenant General mentioned looting at team
sites and said that the Government is not fulfilling its
obligation to allow access. Furthermore, he said that
land ownership was the major issue at the root of much
of the conflict, which had not been addressed. In that
context, I have of course listened to all of those who
said how important it is for peacekeeping operations
to have good relations with the authorities and that
host authorities have the main obligation to protect
civilians. The challenge, then, is what happens if the
authorities do not fulfil their obligations? Two weeks
ago, in Khartoum, the authorities were responsible for
the death of over 100 people. Sexual violence was once
again used. What happens in such cases, or when the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights is violated by
the authorities?

I would like to ask the Lieutenant General what
military consequences he expects if we continue with
the drawdown of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), a decision
that was made when the weather was fair. What
consequences are expected when the Rapid Support
Forces, as the Transitional Military Council decrees,
takes over the team sites? What can he tell us about his
experience on the ground? How is the RSF accepted by
the local African population? Does he expect renewed
clashes in Darfur? Perhaps he can tell us something
about the situation in Darfur over the past week.

Lastly, I would like to add on to what my colleague
from Peru said with regard to sexual violence. Two
weeks ago, we again witnessed sexual violence being
used in Khartoum. Khartoum is no longer UNAMID's
area of operation, but what can the Lieutenant General
tell us about sexual violence in the area where UNAMID
is operational? What can be done? What has Lieutenant
General Ngondi been doing to fight sexual violence
in conflict?

