The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Cote d'Ivoire in which he requests
to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Djangone-Bi
(Cote d'Ivoire) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Russian): the Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council welcomes the
signature, on 30 July 2004 in Accra, by the
President of the Republic of Cote d'Ivoire,
Mr. Laurent Gbagbo, the Prime Minister of the
Government of National Reconciliation,
Mr. Seydou Elimane Diarra, and all the political
forces of Cote d'Ivoire, of an agreement (the "Accra III Agreement") that consolidates the
implementation of the Linas-Marcoussis process.
It recalls that it endorsed the Linas-Marcoussis
Agreement. It welcomes the resolute commitment
of the African heads of State and Government, in
particular of the acting Chairman of the
Economic Community of West African States,
Mr. John Agyekum Kufuor, President of the
Republic of Ghana, and the Chairperson of the
African Union, Mr. Olusegun Obasanjo, President
of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, as well as of
the Secretary-General of the United Nations and
the other participants to the Accra summit of

29 and 30 July 2004, thanks to which the
conclusion of this agreement was made possible.
"The Security Council welcomes the spirit
of dialogue and responsibility shown by President
Gbagbo and each of the Ivorian parties, who have
clearly demonstrated their willingness to lead the
political process in Cote d'Ivoire to its
completion. It welcomes the concrete measures
agreed upon by the signatories of the Accra III
Agreement, with a view to facilitating the full and
comprehensive implementation of the Linas-
Marcoussis Agreement and because of the serious
threats, caused by the continuing crisis, which
persist against the territorial integrity of Cote
d'Ivoire. It urges the parties to adhere strictly to
the deadlines that have been fixed, in particular to
settle the issue of eligibility for the presidency of
the Republic and to start the disarmament, in
accordance with the Linas-Marcoussis
Agreement, of all paramilitary groups and
militias, and to disband disruptive youth groups.

"The Security Council urges all parties to
implement in good faith, without delays or
preconditions, the obligations they have
undertaken in signing the Accra III Agreement. It
calls upon them in particular to remain committed
so that open, free and transparent elections could
be held, as agreed, before the end of 2005. It
reaffirms its complete readiness to take any
appropriate measure against individuals who
impede the full implementation of the Linas-
Marcoussis Agreement.

"The Security Council takes note with
profound concern of the preliminary results of the
investigation led by the United Nations Operation
in Cote d'Ivoire of the massacres that occurred in
Korhogo. It reiterates its firm condemnation of all
atrocities and violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law committed in C6te
d'Ivoire and in particular those that occurred on
25 and 26 March 2004 in Abidjan. It reiterates its
full support to the international commission of
inquiry put in place by the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights in order to
establish the facts and circumstances of the
perpetration of violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law which occurred in
Cote d'Ivoire since 19 September 2002 and, as far
as possible, to identify their authors. It recalls

that all persons responsible for such violations
will be brought to justice. It encourages the
Ivorian parties to establish without further delay,
as they have committed themselves to, the
National Commission for Human Rights provided
for by the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement.

"The Security Council expresses its
intention to continue to follow closely
developments of the situation in Cote d'Ivoire
and the implementation of the Linas-Marcoussis
Agreement. It emphasizes in this regard the
importance of the follow-up mechanism and
looks forward to the regular reports provided for
in the Accra III Agreement of 30 July 2004. It
requests in this regard the Secretary-General to
keep the Council regularly informed about the
implementation of commitments under the Accra
III Agreement."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2004/29.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.

