Mr. Bennouna (Morocco) (spoke in French): I
wish to add my voice to those have already done so in
expressing our full confidence in you, Sir, as President
of the Council this month. I also wish to congratulate
Ambassador Emyr Jones Parry for a very determined
and innovative presidency last month.

Syria, a fraternal country and member of the
Council, was a victim of Israel's recourse to the use of
force, in violation of the Charter. Article 2, paragraph 4
of the Charter calls on all Member States to refrain
from the use of force against the territorial integrity or
the political independence of any State. The Israeli
attack that took place last night or this morning was a
flagrant violation of Syria's sovereignty and territorial
integrity. The fact is there. No one is denying it. That
fact cannot be the object of the sole legal justification
envisaged by the Charter - legitimate self-defence. If
words still have meaning and if international law still
exists, the concept of legitimate self-defence has
nothing to do with the deliberate attack against Syrian
territory.

Striking because a reprehensible, odious and
unacceptable act was committed in Haifa recalls times
of sad memories when blind, collective punishment
took the place ofjustice. In any case, we would be far
from the principles of the Charter and the fundamental
standards of international law.

Therefore, if the facts are evident, it is the
responsibility of the Council to take note of them and
to determine if they pertain to Chapter VII of the
Charter - namely aggression, a breach of the peace or
a threat to peace - and then to take the measures
required of the Council as the organ primarily
responsible for the maintenance of international peace
and security.

The Kingdom of Morocco can only express its
alarm at the escalation of violence in the Middle East,
an escalation that runs the risk of including all
countries of the region, and beyond that endangering
peace and security in the world. We sincerely hope that
the Council will take the appropriate measures to stop
this escalation by requiring Israel to respect the
sovereignty of its neighbours and their territorial
integrity, particularly of Syria, to which the Kingdom
of Morocco expresses its full solidarity.

