Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I am appalled that
Russia vetoed today's draft resolution (S/2017/172),
and I am surprised and disappointed that China
chose to join it, at complete odds with the principles
of non-proliferation that both China and Russia claim
to support so strongly. As permanent members of
the Security Council and as parties to the Chemical
Weapons Convention, Russia and China have a clear
responsibility to take action against the use and
proliferation of chemical weapons. By vetoing the draft
resolution today they have undermined the credibility
of the Security Council and of the international rules
preventing the use of these barbaric weapons.

In resolution 2118 (2013) we all agreed - Russia
and China included - that any use of chemical weapons
by anyone in the Syrian Arab Republic would lead to
the Security Council imposing measures under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations. Thanks to
those vetoes today, we have failed to do so.

This was not a political text. It was a technical draft
resolution in response to an impartial and factual report
by the Security Council-mandated United Nations-
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM). It was a report we
all called for. It was an investigation we all supported.

But instead of backing the draft resolution, we have
seen yet again that Russia is prepared to abuse its veto
power to stand by a regime that has no regard for its own
people, that has no regard for the basic rules of war or
international treaties, a regime that has indiscriminately
bombed and besieged its own people, a regime that has
turned chemical weapons on its own population, killing
6-year-old children like Mohammad.

This is Russia's seventh veto on the subject of Syria
in five years. What further evidence do we need that
Russia will always prioritize the Al-Assad regime over
the protection of the Syrian people? Today we have
learned that they will plunge to new depths, that they
would rather cover up for Al-Assad than prevent the
further use and proliferation of chemical weapons.

The Russians will say that this draft resolution was
based on weak or flawed evidence, but the JIM. was
a fully independent United Nations mechanism that
Russia created. Russia agreed to the methodology that
the JIM. would apply, and yet when it came up with an
answer that Russia did not like, all of a sudden there
was a problem. Russia's answer is that Syria should
conduct its own investigation. The idea that the guilty
party should investigate itself is absurd, and it is clearly
on record that the Syrian regime has obstructed the
JIM. investigation.

Russia will claim that the JIM. does not meet a legal
standard of evidence, but it was never intended to. As
we all agreed, in resolution 2235 (2015), it was meant to
examine the available evidence in an impartial manner
and come to a conclusion. Russia will claim that we
should be focusing on the use of chemical weapons by
Da'esh. But we already have robust and comprehensive
measures in place to combat Da'esh. Today's draft
resolution would have reaffirmed our commitment
to those measures and reiterated our condemnation
of Da'esh. Russia will say that supporting this draft
resolution would disrupt the Syrian political process.
That is simply not true. The United Kingdom remains
committed to working with Russia and everyone else,
through the United Nations, to help the Syrian people
reach a lasting political settlement. But not taking
action against the use of chemical weapons undermines
confidence in the international community's ability
to tackle flagrant violations of international law. It
undermines the confidence and trust of the ordinary
Syrians affected by these horrific attacks, and that
is no way to build the right conditions for successful
political talks.

Despite Russia and China's actions, I would like
to reiterate our thanks to the JIM. for its work, and
to the international partners who helped it. Because
of that tireless work, we know without doubt that the

Al-Assad regime and Da'esh used toxic chemicals as
weapons against civilians in Syria. Those responsible
for such attacks remain free and unpunished to this day.
Today we had a chance to step up and begin to end that
impunity. Instead, Russia and China have let down the
people of Marea, Talmenes, Sarmin and Qmenas, and
the wider international community that seeks justice
for those horrific attacks. Without a clear response to
those flagrant abuses of international law, the Al-Assad
regime is only going to be emboldened to preserve its
chemical weapon capabilities and continue to use them.
We should all be concerned about the reports of further
use of chemical weapons in Syria, most recently in
Aleppo and eastern Hama last year.

In response to today's vetoes, Da'esh, too, will
surely only be encouraged to continue using chemical
weapons - something that Russia claims to oppose.
And the longer-term credibility and utility of the
Chemical Weapons Convention will also suffer. But
the United Kingdom will not let Russia's actions today
stop us from working with international partners to see
justice done for the victims and to prevent the use of
chemical weapons by anyone, anywhere. That includes
the international, impartial and independent mechanism
for Syria agreed on by the General Assembly last year.
We must be able to demonstrate that the international
system works and that we are able to bring those
responsible for using chemical weapons to account.
Anything less is not an option.

