Mr. Beleffi (San Marino): San Marino aligns itself
with the statement previously made by the representative
of Canada on behalf ofthe Group ofFriends of Children
and Armed Conflict.

First of all, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for this debate, as well as the briefers and participants
for their contributions.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his commitment and his annual report (S/2018/465),
and I would like to reiterate San Marino's support
for the Security Council's children and armed
conflict mandate.
The Secretary-General's report has documented
a very alarming trend: in 2017 there was a massive
increase in violations against children. Moreover,
the repeated attacks on schools and hospitals and the
denial of humanitarian access as a tactic of war clearly
show that civilians, and in particular children, are
vulnerable and very likely to be subject to abuses and
grave violations.

Unfortunately, children pay a very heavy price in
armed conflicts. In the past year, children, boys and
girls, were killed, maimed, abducted, raped and used
as human shields, and many of them were recruited
as soldiers. Furthermore, their schools have were
targeted and destroyed, thereby denying children their
basic rights, while health facilities were attacked and
damaged, depriving them of the assistance they need.

While calling all parties to fully comply with
international humanitarian law and human rights law,
we also reiterate that it is crucial that the international
community renew its engagement on the children and
armed conflict agenda.

San Marino has ratified the Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict and has
endorsed the Paris Commitments. San Marino calls
for the endorsement and ratification of the relevant
international instruments that strengthen the protection
of children in armed conflict. Respect for those
instruments is key in order to protect civilians caught
up in conflict. Today I am glad to announce that my
country will join the Safe Schools Declaration, an
important instrument for the protection of education
facilities from military use during conflict.

As previous speakers have done, I would like to
reiterate that protecting children affected by armed
conflict can contribute to conflict prevention and
sustaining peace. In that regard, placing children at
the heart of peace processes is crucial. If we want to
prevent their re-recruitment, effective reintegration is
essential. We must put in place long-term alternatives to
military life and support them through educational and
vocational programmes, so that we can finally break
the cycle of violence, consolidate peace and prevent
conflicts from recurring.

San Marino commends the work of Ms. Virginia
Gamba and her Office and welcomes the action plans
signed in 2017.

We all need to do more to safeguard the protection of
children and promote their rights. Those children should
finally be given a chance to build their own futures and
to become actors of peace for our communities.

