Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in French): I
should like at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on
having convened and presiding over this important
meeting of the Security Council on the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
(spoke in Spanish)

I should like also to express particular
appreciation for the statement made by the Secretary-
General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, as well as for the presence
of and the statement made by Mr. Raymond Tshibanda,
Minister for International and Regional Cooperation of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The proposal to focus our discussions today on
the gradual stabilization of the situation in the
Democratic Republic of Congo and identify key areas
to that end has led us to reflect on the immediate tasks
that we must accomplish without losing sight of our
main objective. Those tasks include helping and
cooperating with the authorities and institutions of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in the fulfilment of
its fundamental responsibility to provide security to its
people; leading the peacebuilding process; and
establishing a peaceful society in which the human
rights of all Congolese are respected and promoted,
with a view to laying the foundation for long-term,
sustainable development.

Over the past 15 years, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo has faced difficulties of a unique nature
and of a magnitude such that it is difficult to find
examples in the international community that can serve
as references or enable us to gauge the extent of the
challenges that have been overcome by the country's
Government, institutions and society as a whole. That
is why Colombia welcomes the progress made so far
and the good relations that prevail between the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the United Nations, whose contribution and
cooperation are essential.

While much work remains to be done in the
process of stabilization and peacebuilding, the concept
paper prepared by France clearly identifies and defines
the priority areas on which we must focus our actions.
The security situation, especially in the eastern
provinces and in North and South Kivu, is of particular
concern. The fight against armed groups must be
carried out in parallel with security sector reform,
offering comprehensive solutions that take account of
the political, legal, economic and human rights
dimensions, as well as of individual responsibilities in
the area of justice and the cross-border presence of
certain armed groups.

That will require a full assessment of the process
of the reintegration of former combatants of the Forces
armees de la Republique democratique du Congo,
which will serve as the basis for a dialogue with all
stakeholders and which will lead to the adoption of
corrective measures aimed at enabling the legitimate
authorities to exert full control over all components of
the armed forces.

Army and police reform must be promoted
through the adoption and implementation of the
necessary legislation, along with training and the
establishment of institutional structures that reflect the
clear subordination of the armed forces to the civil
authorities.

The successful outcome of the elections of 2011
and 2012 is of paramount importance for the future of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
participation of the United Nations in particular and of
the international community in general in the
upcoming elections should therefore be based on the
recognition of the ownership and responsibility of the
Congolese authorities and institutions with respect to
the entire electoral process.

Legislative, institutional and logistical measures
to ensure the holding of peaceful, free, fair and
transparent elections must be carried out in a peaceful
political environment that is orderly and promotes
productive discussions and in which all political actors
enjoy their full rights. In that regard, civic education
for the people is of fundamental importance. A
continuous, fluid dialogue with the National
Independent Electoral Commission is crucial in order
to identify specific areas where assistance may be
required. Here we call upon the donor community to
honour its commitments in financing the upcoming
elections. The Government, by funding 60 per cent -
as Minister Tshibanda has just told us - is doing its
part and shouldering its responsibility.

The consolidation of democratic institutions and
State authority throughout the territory will be possible
only through the adoption of measures that take
account of the interdependency of issues related to
security, institutional capacity, the promotion and
protection of human rights, and development.

In that context, it is particularly important to
combat violations of human rights and all types of
violence, including sexual violence. This has been one
of the most extreme cases that the Security Council has
dealt with, as a number of my colleagues have stated.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo, with the strong
support of the international community, must continue
to take actions such as the trial and conviction of
Lieutenant Colonel Kibibi and 10 other officers,
because the prosecution of those held responsible is an
essential element in preventing this type of situation
and promotes the development of national capacities to
reduce impunity and strengthen institutional
legitimacy.

The stabilization process will be successful only
if it takes place in the context of broader actions aimed
at developing the country's productive potential.

It is important that the Democratic Republic of
the Congo continue its fight against the illegal export
of natural resources and that it implement the decisions
taken at the Lusaka summit, as this will contribute to
the full utilization of its natural resources as an engine
for development and the welfare of its people.

Finally, allow me to wish every success to the
Government and the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in the preparations for and
holding of the upcoming elections, so that a solid,
democratic foundation can be laid that will ensure
peaceful coexistence and prosperity in the country.

