Mr. Moratinos Cuyaube (spoke in Spanish): I
would sincerely like to thank the members of the
Security Council for the opportunity to address the
Council in my capacity as Chairman-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) in order to inform it about the work and
priorities of our organization. This tradition allows us
to share some ideas from the perspective of the OSCE
as a regional organization, which was recognized as
2
such under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations in 1993.

The OSCE provides support to the Security
Council in the maintenance of international peace and
security. The three dimensions of the OSCE - the
human, the political-military and the economic-
environmental - have made it possible for us to work
together in conflict prevention, crisis management and
reconstruction. We have also worked together in the
fight against terrorism and organized crime, in
promoting respect for human rights and in
democratization, the protection of minorities and
environmental security.

The United Nations and the OSCE are linked by
the determination to strengthen a rules-based
international order, based on respect for human rights
and on cooperation in matters pertaining to security
among States and societies. The OSCE States made the
commitment to respond to the United Nations appeal
with the Declaration of Cooperation with the United
Nations, adopted in March 2006. That declaration
strengthens our cooperation and supports Security
Council resolution 1631 (2005), reiterating the OSCE
commitments as a regional organization.

The current chairmanship has reinforced the
ultimate objective of the OSCE, which is to shape a
Europe that is free and at peace with itself, aware of
the interrelations of challenges that affect security and
of the need to cooperate in a globalized and
interdependent world. For Spain, the OSCE is
something more than a set of institutions that provide
assistance to member States. It is more than 19 field
missions in 17 countries. And it is more than a
permanent forum for dialogue in Vienna.

The OSCE is, above all, a project of strategic
relevance, the shared resolve of 56 countries to work
together for a safer and more prosperous future. This
idea makes the OSCE unique, given its broad
membership and experience as well as the equality
among the participating States and the extent of its
territory, from Vancouver to Vladivostok.

Spain is aware that some of the main objectives
have not yet been reached and that new challenges
have emerged, and that has inspired the work and the
efforts of this chairmanship. Without a doubt, Europe
has greatly progressed since the Helsinki Act of 1975.
Walls have fallen, families have been reunited and
wars and tragic conflicts have been extinguished. We
07-52101
feel that we have advanced in the direction of the New
Great Europe, as reflected in the Charter of Paris.

When Spain sought the OSCE chairmanship, it
was aware of those challenges. The year 2007 is a year
of challenges for the OSCE, and it is necessary to
reiterate the call to participating States to work
together to overcome difficulties, to bring positions
closer together and to provide space for a constructive
consensus. In the past few months, we have seen
several serious incidents in Georgia, such as those in
Abkhazia and in the conflict between Georgia and
South Ossetia. These events concern us and highlight
the need to generate trust and cooperation.

Throughout this year, the Co-chairs of the OSCE
Minsk Group, with the active support of the personal
representative of the Spanish chairmanship, Mr. Jose
Borrell, have made considerable efforts to facilitate
peaceful solutions to the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict.
Their intensive mediation efforts have not yet led to a
breakthrough in the settlement process, though the
parties remain committed to the negotiations with the
aim of finding a compromise.

The OSCE is also working to facilitate a
settlement of the Transdnistrian issue through
participation in the 5+2 format of negotiations,
together with the mediators - the Russian Federation
and Ukraine - and the observers - the United States
and the European Union. During the past year and a
half, we have sought to convince the parties to
negotiate, as we share the conviction that negotiations
in this format are the most promising avenue for
achieving a sustainable and lasting settlement that will
enable Moldovia to face its future calmly.

We are approaching the time for a decision on the
future status of Kosovo. Efforts to find a just and
lasting formula that will contribute to stability have
been backed by the OSCE and by the Spanish
chairmanship, though it is true that we have maintained
a neutral position over the years with regard to the
status, as acknowledged by all the communities of
Kosovo.

Impartiality does not mean being non-committal;
quite the contrary. While the OSCE is not directly
involved in status negotiations, we contribute to
creating the necessary conditions on the ground for the
implementation of the status settlement. We are ready
to remain in Kosovo to monitor the protection of the
rights of communities, particularly in regard to
07-52101
decentralization and the protection of cultural and
religious sites.

The Central Asian States play a relevant and
crucial role in enhancing security throughout the OSCE
region. The fragility of Afghanistan, the terrorist threat,
drug trafficking and organized crime, together with
serious structural difficulties such as the management
of water resources, all pose urgent challenges to our
organization. We cannot ignore that the situation in
Afghanistan impacts security in all of Central Asia. In
that regard, the OSCE is preparing border management
projects, particularly in Tajikistan. We hope to engage
the Afghan side in these shared-security projects.

Kazakhstan has announced its candidature for the
OSCE Chairmanship. This announcement has been
welcomed by the organization for very good reasons.
The Kazakh candidature is the first from a former
Soviet Republic and the first from a Central Asian
State. That represents a tremendous opportunity for
Kazakhstan, for Central Asia and for the OSCE as a
whole. Although there is no consensus at present
regarding the date of the chairmanship of Kazakhstan,
Spain is actively involved in the creation of a
consensus of all OSCE States on this important
decision.

The Spanish OSCE chairmanship notes with deep
concern the stalemate regarding the future
implementation of the Treaty on Conventional Armed
Forces in Europe. This treaty has been a cornerstone of
European security since 1990, and it seems essential to
us to prevent regression in that regard. The
chairmanship calls upon all States parties to renew
their efforts and to display the necessary flexibility in
order to find a solution to the blockade, in a spirit of
trust, transparency and mutual cooperation. The
Madrid Ministerial Council will provide an opportunity
to move the process forward, with Spain contributing
actively.

The Spanish chairmanship has acted in a
balanced and concrete manner and it has given the
greatest priority to counter-terrorism. This year we
have organized four major conferences, on legal
cooperation and in criminal matters to counter
terrorism, on public-private partnerships in countering
terrorism, on the security of travel documents and, two
weeks ago, on victims of terrorism. In addition, a
conference on the use of the Internet for terrorist
purposes is scheduled.
3
The Spanish chairmanship has also championed
serious thinking on economic and environmental
security, with a particular focus on the threat of land
degradation and water management. I am convinced
that the OSCE can serve as a platform for dialogue and
a network for cooperation on environmental security,
as these areas make up a comprehensive concept of
security.

In 2007, we have enhanced the human dimension
of the OSCE, and there has been progress in the
promotion of diverse and pluralistic societies - an
issue intimately related to the commitment to deepen
democracy in States and societies. Diversity of our
societies is a fact, and without respect for diversity,
dialogue is useless. As we enter the twenty-first
century, this task is fundamental. In and the United
Nations Alliance of Civilizations initiative we have a
good instrument for managing and updating diversity
in the areas of youth, education, migration and the
media.

The OSCE has made substantive contributions to
the promotion of tolerance and non-discrimination as
itself the OSCE is an alliance of civilizations in action.
The OSCE chairmanship Conference on the Challenges
of Islamophobia, which will take place in Cordoba on 9
and 10 October, lies within the context of the
development of the human dimension. It reflects our
determination to promote tolerance and non-
discrimination in order to harmonize coexistence in all
of its dimensions.

The OSCE's to-do list is not shrinking but rather
expands with the advent of new challenges. Naturally,
our agenda for the OSCE Ministerial Council to be
held in Madrid is ambitious. Over the remaining
months, the Spanish chairmanship will actively seek to
forge consensus on vital decisions, such as
environmental security, the strengthening of pluralistic
societies, enhancing cooperation in counter-terrorism
and the fight against human trafficking.

Chairing the OSCE is quite a challenge, because
it is a delicate political instrument. Given its nature and
its evolution, it addresses the tensions that persist today
in Europe and the threats to Europe's security and
progress. For that reason, the responsibility of chairing
the OSCE is an exciting challenge in order to ensure
the unity of 56 States around a shared vision: that of a
free Europe that is at peace with itself, a vision that
was born in Helsinki, consolidated in Paris and in
Istanbul, and which we now strive to embody every
day within the organization.

I believe that the OSCE's strength lies also with
its cooperation with the United Nations, given that we
have established an order for cooperation in the area of
security, based on democratic values and norms, as a
way to overcome the divisions and inequalities that
still persist today.

