Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): The Russian delegation supported the unanimous

 
resolution aimed at ensuring the safety of the personnel of
the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Together with other Council
members, we once again convey our condolences to
France, whose citizens on this occasion have fallen victim
to terrorist acts, for which there can be no justification.

Russia, which has sent its own national contingent
and a significant number of military and civilian police
observers to Bosnia and Herzegovina, knows very well
how high is the risk to the lives and the safety of the
international personnel as they carry out their peace-
keeping functions in that region. The number of deaths in
UNPROFOR is already close to 200, not to mention the
hundreds of wounded and other victims. Unfortunately,
these losses are the result not only of accidents, but also
of deliberate acts by all the Bosnian parties against
UNPROFOR personnel as they were carrying out their
duties. Many Blue Helmets have suffered as a result of
artillery, mortar and sniper fire. We expect the resolution
to serve as a serious signal and warning to all who would
indulge in aggressive and provocative acts against the
United Nations Protection Force.

The safety of international personnel is directly
affected by the overall situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Unfortunately, the situation there continues
to worsen. In a whole range of areas, there is no halt to
military actions, in clear violation of the agreements of 21
and 31 December last year between the Bosnian parties
on a cease-fire and on a complete cessation of hostilities.
The situation is being aggravated by attempted offensives
from the Government forces and by disproportionate
responses from the Bosnian Serbs, including acts against
the civilian population which is absolutely inadmissible.
This is all leading inexorably towards an escalation in the
conflict, to yet more victims and further suffering.

Another indicator of the worsening situation can be
seen in the fact that recently a military helicopter reported
by the Secretariat as belonging either to the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Government army or to the Bosnian Croats
was used to attack a Bosnian Serb position in the area of
Donji Vakuf. That is the most flagrant violation of the
no-fly zone since the relevant Security Council resolution
was adopted, and is indicative of the danger that air
power and not just heavy ground-based weaponry will be
brought into play in the Bosnian conflict.

The shelling by the Bosnian Serbs of Dubrovnik
airport is also a cause for great concern, as is the earlier
attack by units of the Croatian regular army and Bosnian

 
Croat formations from the Livno area in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. I need hardly mention the constant and
massive violations of the arms embargo against Bosnia,
which are being conducted practically in the open.

In this connection, we think it extremely important
that the resolution clearly shows that the Council is
convinced of the unacceptability of using military means to
achieve a settlement in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
Security Council has clearly stated that violating the no-fly
zone is inadmissible, that the agreements of 23 and 31
December 1994 must be strictly observed and also
extended, and that the peace talks must be resumed as a
matter of urgency. We are convinced that it is possible if
the Contact Group plan is taken as the starting point, to
achieve agreements to suit everyone on a just constitutional
arrangement for Bosnia and Herzegovina that will ensure
equal rights for all the peoples living there.

I should very much like to hope that the Bosnian
parties will react appropriately to the Council's resolution
and that they will not allow new outbreaks of large-scale
war in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which would have
unforeseeable consequences.

