Mr. Skoog (Sweden): While Sweden fully aligns
itself with the statement to be made on behalf of the
European Union, we would like to make just a few
additional remarks in our national capacity.

First, I would like to thank Mr. Haysom,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, for his comprehensive briefing on the
worrying situation in Afghanistan and, more important,
for the work he has been doing with his team on the
ground. We take particular note ofthe continued fragile
security situation and the intensity of the conflict.
I would also like to take this opportunity to express
my personal thanks and the gratitude of the Swedish
delegation to Ambassador Zahir Tanin for his work
here. He is a true example of how an individual can
bring about positive change for his country. We have
observed his work with great admiration and wish him
good luck in the future.

I would like to focus on three points.

First, we welcome the results of the review of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) carried out by the Tripartite Review
Commission, which will feed into the debate here in the
Security Council. We would like to thank the National
Unity Government of Afghanistan for its constructive
contributions, and the UNAMA team for facilitating
that process.
Sweden remains a dedicated supporter of
UNAMA and agrees to the proposals put forward
by the Commission concerning the future of its
engagement. We are particularly pleased that the
recommendations acknowledge the normative role of
the United Nations in several important areas, based
on the cardinal principles of transparency, participation
and accountability. Afghanistan will need international
support for the foreseeable future. UNAMA will
therefore continue to have a role in donor coordination,
the facilitation of humanitarian access and support
for capacity-building for humanitarian response.
UNAMA's physical presence in the country is critical
to the effectiveness of the United Nations mandate and
to the ability of United Nations donors to deliver and
monitor assistance throughout the country, not least
in the humanitarian field. Furthermore, it is essential
that UNAMA's role in providing its good offices for
peace and reconciliation be maintained, in order to help
facilitate what must be an Afghan-led peace process that
is inclusive and representative of the population. The
participation of women in that process is particularly
important. Unfortunately, the prospects for a peace
dialogue, despite regional and international efforts,
which we welcome, have been threatened by repeated
attacks on the civilian population.

Secondly, recent events have brought with them a
worrying number of civilian casualties and conflict-
related displacement. Violence, in the form of suicide
attacks, targeted killings and abductions, is part of
the daily lives of millions of Afghans, and as is so
often the case, women and children are in particularly
vulnerable situations. That development is disturbing
and must be countered. We are very concerned about
the continuing violations of international human rights
law and humanitarian law, which cause great suffering
and despair. The universality of human rights must
not be compromised. It is important to ensure that the
violations are ended and mechanisms for achieving
accountability strengthened.

Thirdly, Sweden welcomes the recent senior officials
meeting at which a framework for self-reliance through
mutual accountability was endorsed. We welcome its
strategic focus and the efforts made to increase Afghan
ownership and ensure that development aid is spent
as effectively as possible. We would like to commend
the Government of Afghanistan for prioritizing work
on human rights and gender equality. The refreshed
framework reaffirms our mutual commitments and
long-term partnership, but it also provides an important
foundation for putting Afghanistan firmly on a path to
self-reliance.
In conclusion, Sweden's support to Afghanistan is
substantial and long-term. It began several decades ago
and will continue, with a commitment of $1.2 billion
throughout the transformation decade. The Afghan
Government and people can count on our continued
support regardless of the spiralling conflict. We
condemn every attack on the civilian population and
every effort to obstruct a meaningful dialogue on peace
and reconciliation. It is time for an end to the violence
that has plagued Afghanistan for too long. It is also time
for reforms to be implemented. Our shared vision of a
prosperous and self-governed Afghanistan, in which
the Afghan people can fully enjoy their rights and
freedoms as enshrined in the country's Constitution,
depends greatly on it.

