Mr. De Antueno (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
First, I wish to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Farid Zarif, for his introduction
of the Secretary-General's report on the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(S/2014/558). We also welcome the participation of the
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Dacie, and
Mr. Enver Hoxhaj.

Argentina, as is its tradition, would like to
emphasize the important role that the United Nations
plays in Kosovo through the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) by
promoting security, stability and respect for human
rights, as well as its cooperation with the Kosovo Force
and with the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo (EULEX). It maintains its neutral position
regarding the territory's status and under the auspices
of the United Nations.

Argentina continues to believe that resolution
1244 (1999), for which it had voted in favour when
it was a member of the Council, is the international
legal basis applicable in Kosovo in order to achieve a
comprehensive settlement through a political process
and through negotiations. We reiterate once again
the importance of the firm leadership of UNMIK in
support of Belgrade and Pristina.

As for the security situation, we welcome the fact
that the elections held during the period under review did
not result in any significant incident. Nevertheless, we
join Pristina, Belgrade and the rest of the international
community in condemning the attack on two EULEX
vehicles on 25 April. We call on the relevant authorities
to take measures to ensure that such acts do not recure
in the future.

Given the commitment shown by the parties to
the high-level dialogue under the auspices of the
European Union, we would urge them to resume high-
level negotiations so that progress can continue to be
made towards the implementation of the historic First
Agreement of Principles Governing the Normalization
of Relations of 19 April 2013, and to consolidate the
progress made towards reaching an agreement on the
establishment of an association/community of Serb-
majority municipalities. We encourage international
actors with a presence on the ground to continue
working together, in accordance with their respective
mandates, to consolidate their achievements and to
ensure the effective implementation of any outstanding
issues.

While we are encouraged that the overall security
situation in Kosovo has remained mostly calm, we must
call attention to the security situation in South Mitrovica.
We are concerned by the incidents that occurred in the
area of the main bridge in South Mitrovica between
18 and 22 June. As the Secretary-General has stated,
we consider that unilateral measures and incendiary
statements must be avoided so as to ensure a climate
conducive to dialogue. It should be reiterated that
UNMIK's important work remains essential in
providing maximal support to the political processes.
Special attention should be paid to the implementation
of the provisions of the 19 April Agreement. It is also
vital to continue prioritizing the task of overcoming
the impacts and legacy of the conflict, including the
pending cases of missing persons. In that regard, we
note the resumption of exhumations of a mass gave site
in Rudnica, Raska municipality, and urge the speedy
issuance of a judicial warrant to investigate and exhume
two other sites in Rudnica.

UNMIK should continue to support and encourage
efforts to determine the fate and whereabouts of missing
persons, and redouble its efforts and cooperation
to ensure that these grave human rights violations,
including in relation to cases mentioned in the 2010
report of the Special Rapporteur of the Council of
Europe, do not enjoy iompunity. We also deem it
important to take into account the findings of the Chief
Prosecutor of the Special Investigative Task Force at
the European Union.

We highlight UNMIK's work in support for the
rule of law, in particular its collaboration with all
relevant interested parties with regard to resolving the
main problems on the ground. We also stress the need
for those international actors with a presence on the
ground in Kosovo to continue strengthening mutual
cooperation in order to establish conditions conducive
to an improved implementation of the 19 April 2013
Agreement. Finally, we highlight the work carried
out by the Special Representative to promote security,
stability and respect for human rights in Kosovo, in
accordance with resolution 1244 (1999).

