Mr. Ceriani (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I wish
to convey the sincerest condolences of my country to
the people and Government of Nigeria and the United
Nations family for the reprehensible attack suffered in
Abuja.

We thank the presidency of the Security Council
for having organized this open debate and the
Secretary-General for his introductory remarks.

Peacekeeping operations have become a
fundamental and distinctive component of one of the
noblest tasks carried out by this Organization - the
maintenance of peace in the world. Keeping the peace
is a joint undertaking of the membership as a whole,
but, without prejudice to the efforts of any party, it is
primarily a task carried out by the troops and police of
contributing countries, which, in keeping with their
commitment to the principles and values enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations, make their police
and armed forces available.

In this sense, we must not underestimate the
importance of broad-based support among all Member
States for the mandates adopted by the Council, in
particular taking into account the characteristics of the
complex tasks that it has begun to mandate, such as the
protection of civilians in immediate physical danger.
This would not only lend greater legitimacy and reduce
resistance to the implementation of these activities, but
also generate greater commitment among all
stakeholders involved in implementation.

With regard to cooperation with troop-
contributing countries (TCCs) and police-contributing
countries, over the past two years we have seen
positive signs in several areas. These include greater
consultation between the Security Council and troop-
and police-contributing countries; greater interaction
between the Secretariat and the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations; and the active involvement
of TCCs in various consultation forums both at
Headquarters and in the field, demonstrating great
flexibility to adapt to the complex scenarios and tasks
assigned.

While all of this represents progress compared to
the situation a little more than one year ago, it is not
sufficient for the global alliance that is required to
provide comprehensive and effective responses to the
challenges facing peacekeeping to be solid and
sustainable. A genuine spirit of involvement cannot be
built simply by endorsing or rejecting ideas without
discussion; it must also include improved participation
in the building of agreements.

In this regard, we welcome the deepening and
strengthening of activities such as the holding of timely
meetings with TCCs prior to the renewal of mandates,
pursuant to resolution 1353 (2001). We see ample room
for improvement in this area, both in New York and in
the missions.

Our experience has shown that informal
mechanisms have been much more productive. First of
all, we underscore the case of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti, in which the existence
of an active informal coalition of countries that are
closely involved with and committed to the success of
the Mission makes a decisive contribution to ensuring
that the leading TCCs on the ground can participate
directly and substantively in the most relevant
discussions on the development of this peacekeeping
operation, including on mandate extension.

Secondly, we find the triangular exchanges
among the TCCs, the Council and the Secretariat in the
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations to be
extremely useful from a practical point of view. I take
this opportunity to commend the efforts of the
delegation of Nigeria as Chair of the Working Group,
not to mention our gratitude to Japan for the enormous
work it carried out in 2009 and 2010. Such interaction
is valuable if carried out in a frank and open way -
not as an opportunity to express dissatisfaction but as a
constructive exercise to avert threats, correct
weaknesses, promote strengths and take advantage of
opportunities.

Turning to the issue of capacities, we believe that
missions as complex as those demanding our greatest
attention today cannot be sustainable without serious
consideration of the resources needed for their
adequate functioning and without updating the
conditions offered by the system for making human

and material resources available to the United Nations.
That issue particularly affects developing countries,
which provide the great majority of troops, since it
influences the viability of their participation in
peacekeeping operations.

To conclude, I would like to state that this year
we are seeing tough and extensive negotiations within
the framework of the Working Group on Contingent-
Owned Equipment and in the second resumed session
of the Fifth Committee of the General Assembly in
order to approve the budget for peacekeeping
operations. We must express our satisfaction that in
both cases an increase was ultimately achieved, which,
while modest, will certainly be preserved, extended
and periodically updated, even if through General
Assembly resolution 63/285, by a working group or
another mechanism, so as not to put at risk the
participation of TCCs in the important undertaking of
maintaining peace in the world.

