Mrs. Juul (Norway): Norway welcomes this
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
and would like to thank Under-Secretary-General John
Holmes for his important briefing to the Council.

Resolution 1674 (2006) was a watershed in the
Council's work in the protection of civilians in
conflict. The commitment and cooperation of Member
States and the United Nations are key to ensuring the
implementation of that resolution. The Council must
systematically address the issue of protection in the
mandates of United Nations peacekeeping operations.
The issue of the protection of civilians must be
mainstreamed into the work of the United Nations,
including in reporting to the Council.

A major challenge in the protection of civilians is
combating sexual and gender-based violence. Norway
is deeply concerned about the continued use of sexual
violence as a weapon of warfare. In the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and especially in the eastern
part of the country, sexual and gender-based violence
seems to have taken on epidemic proportions. It is
unacceptable that impunity for such extremely severe
crimes seems to be the rule and not the exception.
Further, Norway supports the referral of such crimes to
the International Criminal Court and the consideration
of sanctions against Member States as well as non-
State actors that perpetrate such crimes.

Norway urges the United Nations, Member States
and non-governmental organizations to join forces in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, for example by
expanding health services for survivors, focusing on
transitional justice systems to build capacity to
prosecute perpetrators, and finding means to prevent
sexual violence from being perpetrated by ensuring
that peacekeeping operations make life safe for women
and girls. We support the recommendations of the
Secretary-General that ad hoc judicial arrangements be
established to address sexual violence in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in other
situations where impunity prevails.

The response of the Security Council to sexual
and gender-based violence in situations of armed
conflict must be intensified, including through the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). It is totally
unacceptable that United Nations officials should be
inactive witnesses to such atrocities or, even worse,
part of such acts.

The humanitarian problem caused by the use of
cluster munitions has been well documented. In each
and every conflict where such weapons have been
used, they have caused large numbers of civilian
casualties and injuries, both during their use and for
many years after the conflict has ended. The use of
cluster munitions leaves behind large amounts of
unexploded ordinance that is highly unstable and
continues to claim the lives and limbs of civilians for
years and decades after the conflict has ended. We
08-35364
therefore look forward to a successful outcome of the
ongoing negotiations in Dublin on a comprehensive
treaty to establish a complete ban on cluster munitions
causing unacceptable harm to civilians. Such a
preventive measure will certainly save lives and limbs.

Safe, timely and unimpeded access for the
delivery of humanitarian assistance is a crucial aspect
of the protection of civilians. The Council has an
important role to play in addressing that issue
systematically. In that regard, Norway welcomes the
initiative of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs to develop a monitoring and
reporting mechanism to facilitate more in-depth
analysis of the causes and consequences of access
constraints.

