Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe for
the briefing and update that he presented today. As we
come together in today's monthly debate, the
Colombian delegation once again would like to express
its conviction regarding the need and importance of
continuing to support all those actions that could lead

to the establishment of a lasting peace in the Middle
East and contribute to dialogue and rapprochement
between the parties, based on the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.

Accordingly, we back the actions of the Quartet
aimed at the implementation of the 23 September 2011
plan, which highlights, as reiterated at the 12 March
meeting in New York and the 11 April meeting in
Washington, DC, the significance and encouragement
the Quartet finds in the fact that new plans for dialogue
among the parties have been discussed, as have been
ways in which those initiatives could be supported. The
creation of a viable Palestinian State, living in peace
side by side with Israel with clearly defined, secure and
internationally recognized borders must therefore be
the fruit of direct negotiations between the parties,
ensuring coexistence between these two peoples.

The parties should continue in their efforts
towards rapprochement, working constructively in a
spirit of mutual trust, as dialogue is the only possible
and effective road towards the prompt renewal of a
negotiation process that ensures stable and lasting
peace. We invite the representative of the Quartet to
continue its active and intense work to achieve this
goal.

We note progress made by the Palestinian
Authority in the West Bank. However, we believe that
more efforts should be made to preserve law and order
to fight against all forms of extremism and to put an
end to provocation. We are concerned over the fragile
situation in Gaza. Rocket attacks launched from Gaza
must stop, as they affect the security and coexistence
of both peoples.

Israel for its part should take effective measures
to stop the violence of the settlers, including efforts to
bring those responsible for those acts to justice.

My country underscores the progress made by the
Palestinian Authority in the preparation of their
institutions with the goal of establishing a State. We
back the actions of the international community aimed
at bolstering capacity-building of Palestinian
authorities to ensure the viability of an independent
and sovereign State that provides for the well-being of
its people.
We believe that, in order to attain a lasting peace,
the parties should abstain from unilateral measures that
go against international law, harm civilians or endanger
them. The international community, for its part, should
ensure that the parties take effective measures that
ensure respect for and enjoyment of human rights and
the fundamental freedoms of the population.

Regarding the situation in Syria, it is clear that
Violence in all its forms and repression have not come
to an end. There are still attacks and incidents that are
violations of the 12 April ceasefire. Colombia voted in
favour of the establishment of the United Nations
Supervision Mission in Syria, which contributes to
additional efforts on the part of the Security Council.
We believe that the second unanimous decision by the
Security Council shows the Council's firm
determination to resolve the crisis in Syria through the
full support for and implementation of the Joint Special
Envoy's six-point plan, that is to say, the plan of
Mr. Kofi Annan.

As I said when the Council adopted resolution
2043 (2012), we hope that an expanded presence on the
ground will enable constant supervision and evaluation
of the compliance with the six-point plan, to which the
Syrian Government opposition have committed. The
Secretary-General should inform the Council on any
obstacle hindering the effective discharge of the
UNSMIS mandate.

My delegation believes that the Joint Special
Envoy's six-point plan is the ideal response in that it
seeks to put an immediate end to the violence, ensure
humanitarian access and facilitate a political transition,
led by Syria itself, towards a democratic and pluralistic
political system, through the creation of the conditions
needed to initiate a broad political dialogue between
the Syrian Government and the full spectrum of the
Syrian opposition.

The efforts of the Joint Special Envoy are fully
worthy of our backing and appreciation. It is crucial
that the Council and the Joint Special Envoy work
together. We must maintain an attitude marked by
cautious optimism, given the precariousness of the
situation, and we must also hope that the positive signs
can be consolidated. We must continue to urge the
Syrian authorities and the opposition to abide by the
ceasefire, so that it will be possible to work within the
framework of a political dialogue.
