Mr. Ryan (Ireland): We are grateful for today's
comprehensive further briefing from Under-Secretary-
General Guehenno and the opportunity given by
today's meeting to review recent developments.

I join Ambassador Doutriaux in observing that
Belgium, as Presidency of the European Union, will
make a statement later in today's debate. Ireland
subscribes fully to the position of the European Union
in that statement, and I make the following points in
my national capacity.

All communities in Kosovo must realize and
accept that the only possible future for Kosovo is as a
multi-ethnic society based on respect for minority
rights and for human rights. When we discussed
Kosovo last month, Mr. Guehenno noted that our key
task was to involve all communities in the political
process. The Kosovar Albanians must respect the rights
of minorities, and those communities must, as the
Under-Secretary-General put it, "accept the risk of
participation" (S/PV4335, p. 4).

The November elections will present the people
of Kosovo with a crucial opportunity to elect legitimate
interlocutors to represent their interests. We note with
great satisfaction the support of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia for the registration of Serbs in Kosovo, and
we welcome recent efforts undertaken by Serb parties
towards registration, with four parties now registered.

We are encouraged by those developments, but
more needs to be done. Kosovar Serbs must register for
the elections in larger numbers before the 9 September
deadline. It would be most desirable for their leaders to
continue to signal their wholehearted commitment to
and support for participation. That will not happen
easily, and there is an onus on Kosovar parties and on
civic leaders to do all possible to encourage a positive
climate for Serb participation. The Serb population has
to be enabled to believe that it is in its overall long-
term interest to take part.

In encouraging that environment, the Council
should sustain its strong message that all terrorist
activity must cease. Equally, we insist that all ethnic-
Albanian representatives must clearly distance
themselves from violence.

It is essential to make further early and
quantifiable progress in the security area, including
with respect to the illegal importation and trafficking
of weapons and the recovery of existing illegally held
weapons. In that regard, we welcome the establishment
of the new police and justice pillar and the
promulgation of three regulations of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
We are grateful and gratified to hear from Mr.
Guehenno of early Pillar-I action. We look forward to
hearing further of UNMIK's plans to resolve the
growing penal capacity problem.

Ireland welcomes the opening of the UNMIK
Office in Belgrade and the various meetings between
the Special Representative and President Kostunica.
We believe that the Mission must engage in even closer
liaison with the Administration in Belgrade, including
on conditions that could lead to the return of refugees
and internally displaced persons.

A comprehensive strategy is essential to address
the problems of Mitrovica, and we welcome Mr.
Guehenno's outline of such a strategy this morning.
That strategy will, of course, need to include political,
social and religious elements. The parallel structures in
northern Mitrovica must be removed. The economic
situation will also need to be improved systematically
and steadily, as elsewhere in Kosovo. I agree very
much with Mr. Guehenno on the importance of
progress under the economic-reconstruction pillar.
It was clear to the participants in the recent
Security Council mission that the lack of progress in
relation to missing persons is a source of great
contention for both communities. Progress must be
made on this. In that regard, we welcome the
announcement yesterday that the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Haekkerup, had signed a memorandum of
understanding with the International Committee for
Missing Persons on the DNA testing of hitherto
unidentified human remains. The sensitivity of that
issue cannot be underestimated, nor can its central
importance with regard to the wider promotion of
justice.

Since we last discussed Kosovo in this Chamber,
former President Milosevic has been placed under the
jurisdiction of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia, in The Hague. In our
discussions of conflicts around the world - indeed, as
recently as the discussion of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo here on Tuesday, 24 July - we have
asserted that those guilty of crimes against humanity,
of genocide or of grievous violations of humanitarian
law cannot and will not escape justice. There can be no
impunity. The arraignment of Mr. Milosevic underlines
the importance to all the countries of the region of their
obligation to, and also their interest in, cooperating
fully with the Tribunal.

I join other members and Mr. Guehenno in
stressing that we are also following with concern the
unfolding events in the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia. In the context of the Visit today of the
European Union High Representative, Javier Solana, of
the Secretary-General of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization, George Robertson, and of the Chairman-
in-Office of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, Romanian Foreign Minister
Mircea Dan Geoana, we call again on all the parties to
negotiate in good faith and with determination, with
the clear objective of achieving a realistic, equitable
and peaceful settlement.

