Mr. Prosor (Israel): As we begin a new year, I want
to take the opportunity to congratulate the five new
members ofthe Security Council. I wish each and every
one of them a lot of luck and success in navigating the
sometimes stormy waters of the Chamber.

Yesterday the people of Israel went to the polls.
Millions of men and women cast their ballots. Israeli
democracy continues to flourish. Elections are just
one component of Israel's vibrant democracy. Our
Government guarantees the protection of minorities,
women and gays. Our courts ensure that everyone
is accountable under the law. Our education system
teaches tolerance and peace, not violence and hate.

We long for the day when the scenes of real
elections built on the foundations of real democracy
will spread to all corners of a safe, stable and secure
Middle East. Such a day would mark a great turning
point in the history of our region. My question to the
Chamber is: How long must we wait? Today we see a far
bleaker picture in much of the Middle East. Repression,
instability and horrific violence continue to plague the
region.

More than 60,000 have been killed in Syria in
just the past two years. Al-Assad's victims include
hundreds of Palestinians. Since we have heard so much
about the Palestinian cause this morning, let me take
this opportunity to remind the Council that Al-Assad
has used fighter jets to bomb the refugee camps
where Palestinians live in Syria and that Palestinians
are fleeing the country by the thousands. In Lebanon
more than 1 million live under the brutal oppression of
Hizbullah, which has transformed the entire south of
the country into an Iranian terror base.

The world's most dangerous weapons are moving
within reach of our region's most dangerous actors.
We face the frightening possibility that Al-Assad's
vast stockpiles of chemical weapons could fall into the
hands of Hizbullah or Al-Qaida. The Ayatollah regime
in Iran threatens to combine its extremist ideology and
advanced missile technology with nuclear weapons.
The lives of millions hang in the balance.

Those are just a few of the great challenges that
hang over the Middle East. Once again, none of them
were prioritized for discussion this morning. Instead,
the Security Council continues to use the monthly
Middle East debate to single out, scrutinize and criticize
Israel - an island of democracy in the world's greatest
hotbed of tyranny.

I have a novel idea. Perhaps this discussion
could occasionally spend some time examining why
the situation in the Middle East remains unstable,
undemocratic and violent. I will give the Council a
hint: it has nothing to do with Israel.

There are many threats to security in our region.
But the presence of Jewish homes in Jerusalem - the
eternal capital ofthe Jewish people - has never been one
of them. Jews have been building homes in Jerusalem
since the time of King David, 3,000 years ago. Jewish
communities witnessed the rise and fall of the Roman
Empire. They lived in Jerusalem throughout crusades
and pogroms. Some here say that the preliminary
building plans announced last month prevent a two-
State solution, even though it is clear that all of those
neighbourhoods will remain part of Israel in any final
peace agreement.

I cannot understand how people can conclude that
a Palestinian State cannot exist if there is contiguity
between Ma'ale Adumim and Jerusalem, which
are seven kilometres apart. Those who make that
claim are the same people who stand up and speak
about a contiguous State between Gaza and the West
Bank - areas divided by more than 70 kilometres.
Connecting Gaza and the West Bank would cut Israel
into two. Yet, Israeli contiguity never seems to be a
concern for some in the Chamber.

The briefing that we heard this morning was
particularly selective in the facts it chose to present.
For instance, it does not take a Sherlock Holmes or New
York City Police Department detective to see that the
fingerprints of senior Palestinian Authority officials
were all over the recent provocations staged in the area
known as E-l. Conveniently, the involvement of those
Palestinian leaders in those activities was omitted,
miraculously, from the briefing of this morning. Since
selective perception is one of the greatest hallmarks of
this debate, I would like to take a moment to set straight
a few facts about the past two months.

In November 2012, President Abbas stood in the
General Assembly Hall and submitted a unilateral
resolution to that body (General Assembly resolution 67/19). He claimed it was an act ofpeace. He insisted that
it was "the last chance to save the two-State solution"
(A/67/PV44, p. 3). The Palestinian delegation promised
that they would immediately return to the negotiating
table after the voting, without preconditions. I know
that some in the Chamber voted for resolution 67/ 19 on
that basis. Today, those nations who supported Abbas'
bid have a duty to ask themselves: What, exactly, did
we vote for?

Suffice it to say that the Palestinians have not lifted
one finger to restart negotiations. We have seen neither
a single gesture, nor a single statement, nor a single
indication that they want to return to negotiations.
Just 10 days after President Abbas spoke to the entire
world about his commitment to a two-State solution,
his political party - Fatah - released a new logo that
completely erased the State ofIsrael from the map. Make
no mistake, the major obstacle to a two-State solution
is the Palestinian refusal to speak to their own people
about the true parametres of a two-State solution - to
speak a lexicon ofpeace, not a litany of war.

One will never hear President Abbas or any other
Palestinian leader use the phrase "two States for two
peoples." One will not hear them say it because they
have called for an independent Palestinian State but
want millions of their people to flood the Jewish State.
That would mean the destruction of Israel. Let me be
clear: that is not a solution for peace, and no one who
truly believes in peace could ever accept it.

Some in the Chamber may say that the Palestinians
know that they will have to give up the claim of return
at the negotiating table. Some Palestinian leaders might
even whisper it quietly behind closed doors. But they
have never, ever, said it publicly. The Palestinian people
have no idea that they will one day have to give up that
claim of return. Since the Palestinian leadership refuses
to tell the Palestinian people the truth, the international
community has the responsibility to tell them the
truth. Those truly interested in peace will begin by
speaking out forcefully and publicly and unequivocally
against that claim. We cannot abide by the voices of the
selectively principled.

Last December, a few days after President Abbas
appeared at the United Nations, we heard a very public
statement from Khaled Mashaal, the political chief of
Hamas. At a rally for hundreds of thousands in Gaza,
he called for Israel's complete and total destruction. He
said, "Palestine is ours from the river to the sea and
from the south to the north; there will be no concession
on one inch of land".

One would think that the call for Israel's
destruction might merit a joint statement of concern
from some prominent and some permanent members of
the Council. I was told that some of the prominent and
permanent members said something about that casual
call for Israel's destruction. Israel is known for having
amazing listening devices. The members must have
whispered something so quietly that even our most
sensitive equipment was not able to pick it up.

Apparently, Mashaal's speech was not only of

concern to President Abbas. Instead of seeking peace
with Israel through negotiations, he has devoted all his
energy to seeking unity with Hamas. Hamas is the same
terrorist organization that fired thousands of rockets
into the heart of Israeli cities last November. It is the
same terrorist organization that commits a double war
crime as a matter of policy, using Palestinian schools to
fire rockets at Israeli schools. The Hamas charter calls
for the destruction of Israel and the genocide of Jews.
It has turned Gaza into a destination of choice; I would
say a Club Med for global Jihadists.

Some in the Chamber have the audacity to suggest
that Israel should also welcome Hamas with open arms.
I ask, would they say the same if Islamic militants
were firing rockets into their backyards? Would they
say the same to France, which is now working with
the Government of Mali to fight Al-Qaida in the
Sahel? France's Foreign Minister said this month that
his country was fighting to prevent the creation of an
Islamist terrorist enclave "at the doorstep of France and
Europe". If Mali is on France's doorstep, Gaza is in
Israel's living room. Let me be perfectly clear. France's
principled stand should be commended. We only ask
that France and all the countries that are supporting its
principled stand today support Israel tomorrow when
we fight Islamic terrorism on our borders.

The Palestinian representative speaks in the
Chamber as if he represents a Jeffersonian democracy.
Yet, no amount of rhetoric, spin or bluster can change one
simple fact: the Palestinians clearly fail to meet the most
basic criteria for statehood. The only Palestinian State
in the Chamber is the Palestinian state of denial. Last
month's resolution did not confer Palestinian statehood.
It did not constitute recognition of a Palestinian State.
Many Member States made that clear on 29 November
and in the days that followed. Israel has placed its view
on record in connection with the adoption of General
Assembly resolution 67/19. That position remains
unchanged. The recent resolution does not entitle the
Palestinians to participate in United Nations meetings
and international conferences, join treaties or seek
membership in international organizations as a State.
The change in terminology and titles risks creating a
false impression of Palestinian statehood, when no such
State exists. That is clearly not mandated by resolution
67/ 19. In the real world statehood comes with control
of territory. Yet, the resolution did not change the fact
that the Palestinian Authority has no control over Gaza.
That is 40 per cent of the territory that President Abbas
claims to represent.

Any efforts to alter the Palestinian status outside
the agreed negotiating framework directly violate the
agreements between the parties. Those agreements
include specific limitations on the Palestinian capacity
in the sphere of foreign relations. They contain express
obligations to resolve all outstanding issues through
negotiations, and to refrain from any step that seeks
to alter the legal status of the West Bank and Gaza
pending the outcome of negotiations. Acting to
facilitate violations of those agreements undermines the
credibility of the Organization, which has repeatedly
affirmed that a Palestinian State can only emerge as a
result of bilateral negotiations.

Moreover, resolution 67/19 cannot serve as
acceptable terms of reference for future negotiations.
The resolution not only contradicts agreed terms of
reference, it also seeks to predetermine some issues
explicitly reserved for negotiation, while ignoring
others such as security and the end of claims, which
are core components of any future agreement. The
campaign that the Palestinian leadership has waged
at the United Nations is a false idol for the Palestinian
people. There is only one route to statehood. It does
not travel through this Chamber in New York. It runs
through direct negotiations between Jerusalem and
Ramallah. There are no shortcuts, no quick fixes, no
instant solutions. Peace must be negotiated; it cannot
be imposed.

Exactly 67 years ago this week, on 17 January
1946, the Security Council held its first meeting at
Westminster in London. On that day, the Council clearly
defined its mission, namely, to advance global peace
and security, to oppose tyranny and to safeguard the
rights of all people. It would be a true understatement
to say that the monthly debate on the Middle East falls
far short of that standard. Most of the millions in our
regions who live under oppression, fear and violence
are completely ignored in the debate. They are cast
aside to make way for a litany of half-truths, myths
and outright lies about Israel. Repeating a lie does not
make it true. Repeating a constant flood of falsehoods
does not and cannot change the facts. The simple fact
remains that Israel is not what is wrong in the Middle
East. Israel is what is right in the Middle East. Make
no mistake: cynical politics do no favours for the Arab
world. The silence of the Council in the face of terror
does no favours for those seeking a brighter future.
It is time to do some soul-searching in the Chamber.
The Council needs a Global Positioning System to
find its moral centre in the debate on the Middle East.
Just weeks after the Council's founding, Sir Winston
Churchill outlined the challenges facing us today.
He said the following about the newly formed United
Nations: "We must make sure that its work is fruitful,
that it is a reality and not a sham, that it is a true
temple of peace...and not merely a cockpit in a Tower
of Babel".

