Mr. Bildt: I have been listening with keen interest
to the comments of members, and I will try to answer all
or most of the questions that have been put. I note with
deep satisfaction that there is widespread support for the
ambitions and the efforts that are under way to set up
structures of self-sustaining stability in the region, but
also an understanding that we are not there yet, to put it
very mildly - that there are major challenges ahead and
that this is going to be a difficult time.

A number of speakers referred to the situation in
Kosovo. I am not going to go into the details of that; the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Bernard Kouchner, and General Reinhardt will be here
next week, and, as Ambassador Holbrooke said, the
Council will have an important meeting on the details of
Kosovo. But I would just like to reinforce what I said:
that Kosovo is a difficult but small place within a region
that is unstable. The task that has been given to the
United Nations in running Kosovo de facto is complicated
not only by the fact that there is no peace agreement but
also by the instabilities in the region, notably - as
referred to by several speakers - the situation in the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and in Serbia.

The representative of the Russian Federation raised
a number of issues that had to do with the wider approach
in the region: the coordination of the different attempts
under way, as well as the way in which we deal with the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and with Serbia. Let me
say, as I think I indicated at the beginning, that the
regional approach to the issues is one that has been there
with the United Nations system from the very beginning,
especially coming out of the fact that the United Nations
system was called upon early in the 1990s to deal with
the humanitarian consequences of these different wars.
And they are indeed regional by nature: there is no way
in which you can deal with these issues taking them piece
by piece; you need to deal with the region. So we have
been advocating a regional approach from the very start.

 

The launch last summer of the Stability Pact, an
initiative of the European Union and supported by the other
major Powers, was a recognition by the international
community of the fact that you cannot deal with the
countries in isolation; you have to deal with the entire
region. I have been trying to facilitate the support of the
United Nations system for the efforts of the Stability Pact.
We are now heading towards a couple of important
meetings; I think it was the representative of the
Netherlands who referred to the funding conference that is
coming up at the end of March.

But let me say, concerning the Stability Pact - and
these are words that I know are very much supported by its
Special Coordinator, Mr. Bodo Hombach, who is
responsible for it - that the Pact is a two-way process. It
takes two to tango. It is not a funding mechanism for
projects in the countries of the region. It is also an
undertaking and a commitment by the countries of the
region that they themselves will take initiatives to start to
cooperate. For the one to work requires that the other work
as well; that is essential.

Let me also stress that it is not primarily a question of
the reconstruction of the region after the devastating wars
there. I normally refer, as I did in my presentation today, to
the three Rs that I consider essential. The first is reform;
these countries all, to a greater or a lesser degree, need
substantial economic and political reform. The second is
reconciliation, that very, very difficult concept and that
very, very difficult word that is absolutely essential for
moving forward after war. And the third is reintegration;
that is necessary not only for political reasons, but also for
plain economic reasons: there is no way in which we can
ever revive the economies of these countries if we do not
allow the trade flows and the commercial contacts and the
integration to be there.

So there is a need for reform; there is a need for
reconciliation; and there is a need for reintegration. That is
part of the approach of the Stability Pact.

That being said, I am convinced that when we move
forward towards a political settlement for the region there
is a need to do something that goes beyond what is at
present on the table. There is a need for a structure that, in
its scope, in its firmness and in its perspective to the future,
goes beyond what we have had on the table so far.

Concerning the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and
Serbia, I think it was the representative of Canada who said
that the United Nations was walking a delicate line. That
was the understatement of the day, I guess. It is a very
complex problem. On the one hand, we have a concern
for the ordinary human beings; we want to help people in
need. And there are quite a number of people who are in
a rather desperate situation in Serbia. I think it was the
representative of the Russian Federation who referred to
the fact that this might well be the largest refugee
community that we have in Europe; and they are in a
country which might well be the poorest country in
Europe by now, after not only the consequences of war
but also the total absence of any sort of reform process
have brought that country down so desperately.

So the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and other agencies
are keen to help. But we are there to help the people, not
to fund the regime. That distinction is important, and it
also requires vigilance on our part, because the structures
of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and of Serbia are
to some extent deliberately corrupt. I say "deliberately
corrupt" because there is a risk of them setting up
structures which are really meant to fund the regime
rather than to help the people. We must, of course, be on
our guard there, not only for political reasons but also for
the simple reason that we want our money to reach the
ordinary people and not be a funding mechanism for a
regime that has difficulties funding itself in other ways.
I do not think there is any solution to the political or
economic problems of the region without Yugoslavia and
without Serbia. We want Serbia, and we want Yugoslavia,
as part of this. But we can only regret the fact that
Yugoslavia has excluded itself to a very large extent, first,
by retaining among its leaders those who have been
indicted by the International Tribunal for crimes against
humanity - and it has been our policy in the past, and I
think it must remain our policy in the future, not to have
any dealings with such personalities. And it has also made
life somewhat more difficult for itself by not undertaking
the reforms that are necessary in order to have a
functioning democratic life and a functioning economy.
This is a dilemma for the international community, but it
is a major problem for Serbia and a major problem for
the region.

The situation in Montenegro was alluded to by
several representatives. Let me just state that I am very
concerned about the situation as it is developing. Ibelieve
it is moving in the wrong direction marginally faster than
I would have anticipated a couple of weeks ago. The
reason is the moves we see on the ground by Milosevic
in terms of building up forces and building up capabilities

 

for direct intervention. There is no doubt whatsoever in my
mind that he is actively creating the preconditions for
exercising that option. We have seen him creating special
so-called military police units that are obviously recruited
on the basis of political loyalty and that are now deployed
at critical points throughout Montenegro. We have seen him
setting up a special and separate television network in
Montenegro, installed by military forces on military
installations in order to be the propaganda arm of any overt
intervention.

These are moves that are in no way compatible with
the federal constitution of Yugoslavia. They serve to
aggravate a situation between Serbia and Montenegro to
which it should be in the interest of all friends of
Yugoslavia to try to seek a solution. These are not only
concerns in terms of the stability of the region, but also, in
my view, a threat to the survival of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia.

I was asked what can be done to provide help and
support. Obviously one thing that can be done is to
highlight what is happening and highlight the concerns of
the international community, because these actions do have
regional implications. Another is of course to be willing
and able to extend financial help to the authorities of
Montenegro, who are, as I pointed out, subject to sort of
double sanctions, in a way that is unfortunate.
I know that efforts are under way by the European
Union, by the United States of America and others. There
is a need to do more. The United Nations system - the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs - is very active in terms of providing humanitarian
assistance to all those who are in need of it in Montenegro.
And due to the political and other circumstances, that is
quite a number of people.

Several of the speakers - the representatives of
Malaysia, Tunisia, Namibia, the Netherlands - have
highlighted the issue of the return of refugees. I cannot
stress too strongly how important this is, in my opinion -
and not only for the obvious humanitarian reason, but also,
I would say, in terms of the future political stability of the
region.

It is not entirely certain that everyone who has been
expelled or driven away wants to return to the places where
these horrible events happened. But if we refuse people the
right to return, we create a difficult situation for the future.
People who are refused the right to return become a
reservoir of revenge in the future in the region. This is
detrimental to the region's political stability.

In this regard, within the framework of the Stability
Pact, the Humanitarian Issues Working Group - which
has been in operation since the early 1990s, under the
leadership of Mrs. Ogata - is continuing its work. We
are discussing with the Stability Pact different ways of
further integrating this Working Group's efforts into the
work of economic aid and conditionality and so forth.

Finally, some words about Bosnia, which brings me
to Ambassador Holbrooke and his kind words, starting
with Georgetown, which might be somewhat outside the
scope of the Security Council. I think both he and myself
have a particular emotional attachment to that country and
what he managed to achieve in 1995. I was fortunate
enough to play a small role in that particular process. I
think it is worth stressing that, although that is a very
ambitious peace agreement, there are major problems in
Bosnia. We are making progress. It is of course slower
than some of us would like, but there is progress.

I would have liked to see a greater sense of
responsibility shown by the leaders of Bosnia itself. I was
particularly disappointed when the House of
Representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina a couple of
weeks ago refused even to consider the draft for election
laws that are necessary in order to build a functioning
common State and common society. But that
notwithstanding, progress is being made. And I would
very much like to support the comments by Ambassador
Holbrooke on Mostar, on the role that can be played by
the new political leadership in Croatia in order to
overcome that particularly difficult aspect of the problems
in Bosnia. If we can make progress on this issue, I think
we can further progress on all of the other Bosnian issues.

That brings me finally to what might be one of my
key points for my presentation: that while we did achieve,
in 1995, in Bosnia, a peace agreement that set the rules
for the internal structure of Bosnia after the war, as well
as the external position of Bosnia in the region, we do not
have that in the case of Kosovo. This makes the situation
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo and the task particularly difficult. It makes it
particularly difficult to move forward with a regional
agenda for seeking self-sustaining structures of stability.

We must be ready to start to consider within the
framework of this Council how we can move forward
with the political agenda leading to a peace settlement for

 

Kosovo, while remaining aware of the fact that as long as
we have the situation in Belgrade, such progress is going to
be virtually impossible. But that should not stop our efforts.

Then, perhaps we can continue with the work that was
started in the early part of the 1990s, in which several of us
around the table were active. There is a need to recognize
that we have done a number of things, but there is also a
long ways to go until we can say that we have self-
sustaining stability in this war-torn part of Europe.

