Mr. Mulet: I thank you, Sir, for this opportunity to
present the report ofthe Secretary-General (S/2014/537).
I will provide a brief update on the latest developments
since the publication of the report on 25 July. In
conjunction with that, an update on violations of the
status-of-forces agreement for the month of June was
circulated on I August.

The first major incident since the 9 May and 10 June
meetings of President Kiir and Mr. Rick Machar took
place in Nassir, Upper Nile state. On 20 July, forces
affiliated with the Sudan People's Liberation Movement
in Opposition launched an attack on Nassir. Fighting
continued until 24 July, when the Sudan People's
Liberation Army (SPLA) repelled the opposition forces.
The two sides clashed again on 26 July. Currently, the
SPLA remains in control ofNassir and is firing artillery
and other weapons towards the surrounding areas,
primarily to deter opposition forces from regrouping
and launching a counter-attack.

Furthermore, skirmishes between the SPLA and
opposition elements have also been taking place in
Renk, also in Upper Nile state, and in Ayod, Jonglei
state. On 16 July in Aweil, Northern Bahr El Ghazal
state, the United Nations Mission in the Republic of
South Sudan (UNMISS) received reports of clashes
between Government security forces and approximately
200 SPLA deserters who had abandoned their posts due
to the lack ofpayment of salaries. On 2 August, in Bunj,
Maban county in Upper Nile state, clashes erupted
between a local militia that calls itself the Maban
Defence Force and approximately 20 SPLA soldiers of
Nuer ethnicity who had deserted the SPLA.

The militia suffered heavy casualties during the
fight. In reaction to the clash, the militia began pursuing
Nuers in Bunj and surrounding areas including,
regrettably, those working for United Nations agencies
and international non-governmental organizations.
Since the fighting started, United Nations personnel
and aid workers have moved to the compounds of United
Nations agencies and international non-governmental
organizations for protection from the militia, while
thousands of displaced civilians have sought refuge
in a refugee camp near the airstrip. Sadly, initial
reports indicate that five humanitarian workers of Nuer
ethnicity have so far been killed by the militia, and one
is missing.

A quick-reaction force with four armoured
personnel carriers is about to reach the area, and
another platoon-size force is being deployed by
air. The extraction of non-essential United Nations
and humanitarian personnel via airlift has begun.
Non-governmental organization employees of Nuer
ethnicity remain inside some ofthe compounds and will
be escorted to the airstrip as soon as force protection
arrives in Bunj. That incident also demonstrates the
fragile environment in which violence can quickly
engulf communities not originally involved in the
conflict.

The situation on the ground therefore remains
precarious, with a risk of further polarization and
the conflict spreading to other parts of the country.
In the current environment of insecurity, UNMISS
also continues to encounter movement restrictions,
especially in high-risk areas.

In Bentiu, Unity state, local SPLA troops have
repeatedly obstructed movements of United Nations
personnel and internally displaced persons (IDPs)
around the UNMISS protection site. UNMISS flights
out of Bentiu have also been cancelled several times
due to the denial of flight safety assurances.

UNMISS is today hosting more than 95,000 IDPS
at its sites, comprising 40,000 in Bentiu, 31,000 in Juba
and 17,000 in Malakal. With the prolonged presence
of that considerable number of people at facilities that
were not built for such a purpose, conditions have
become extremely challenging. Heavy rains have
severely flooded large areas in the Bentiu and Malakal
protection of civilian sites, exacerbating the health
and sanitation situation. There have been a number of
incidents including serious crimes as well as incidents
compromising the safety of United Nations personnel.
A significant number of resources, both military and
material, are being expended to manage the sites. In
addition, the Mission continues to incur financial
expenses not budgeted as part of its mandate. While a
voluntary and dignified return of IDPs to their homes
in safety remains the ultimate objective, the situation
on the ground and the pace of the peace process
indicate that the displacement is likely to continue
for a relatively prolonged period. The status quo is
therefore not sustainable, and alternative options must
be explored.

We have commenced discussions with United
Nations agencies and humanitarian partners to better
delineate roles and responsibilities in an effort to
enable the Mission to focus on its core mandate as
prescribed in resolution 2155 (2014). In the meantime,
the Mission continues to encourage IDPs to relocate
to newly constructed sites in order to decongest the
existing ones.

The deployment of additional troops authorized
under resolution 2155 (2014) is well under way. As
of 4 August, a total of 3,525 out of the 5,500 surge
troops had been deployed. The remaining contingents,
including an infantry battalion, three military utility
helicopters, three additional aircraft and a tactical
helicopter unit are expected to deploy by October.

We have also identified police-contributing
countries for the deployment of four formed police
units (FPUs), comprising a total of 660 personnel.
The generation of the fresh FPUs is expected to take
approximately six months. Until then, the three
FPUs currently on the ground will remain, together
with individual police officers, and assist with the
maintenance of public safety and security within the
UNMISS protection of civilian sites.

UNMISS continues to provide logistical support
to the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) monitoring and verification teams now

deployed in Bor in Jonglei state; Bentiu and Pariang in
Unity state; and Malakal, Nasser and Melut in Upper
Nile state. Those monitors have been conducting patrols,
with the support ofUNMISS, while the regional troops,
with an additional responsibility to provide protection
for the monitors, have begun to arrive.
The scale of the humanitarian operation in South
Sudan has reached the point in which it now constitutes
the biggest aid operation inside any single country.
However, the capacity and funding of the humanitarian
operation falls far short in the face of the overwhelming
needs. Almost 4 million people are facing alarming
levels of food insecurity, amidst growing concerns of
a famine. There are 1.1 million people who have been
internally displaced by violence and fear, and 434,000
have fled across borders. Up to 50,000 children are at
risk of dying as a consequence of acute malnutrition
this year alone. The cholera epidemic continues to
grow, with more than 5,300 cases, including 115
deaths. While humanitarian assistance has been able to
reach some 2.4 million people, aid efforts have been
hampered by insecurity, obstructed access, insufficient
and delayed funding and delayed logistical, human
resource and political constraints. The deteriorating
humanitarian situation also carries with it security
implications, as communities begin to compete for
diminishing resources.

The IGAD-led talks between the Government
and the Sudan People's Liberation Movement/Army
in Opposition resumed on 4 August. The objective
is to engage in all-inclusive negotiations on issues of
security and humanitarian access; political transition
and the establishment of a Government of national
unity; justice, reconciliation and healing; and the
parameters of a new constitution for the country. Right
now - today i the parties are engaged in security
talks focused on the implementation of the cessation of
hostilities agreement.

The IGAD mediation will have to tackle several
challenges, including the need to align the positions
of all IGAD member States on the application of
sanctions against those who continue to undermine the
peace process, should the need arise. In the face of the
unfolding humanitarian crisis in South Sudan, it will
be important to make good on previous statements and
hold the parties to account for any further delays in the
peace process.

After three years of independence, South Sudan
is on the brink of a humanitarian catastrophe and a
protracted internal conflict. This is a man-made crisis,
and those responsible for it have been slow in resolving
it. Both sides continue to believe that they can achieve
more through the pursuit of a military option. There is
an urgent need for the international community to speak
with one voice to incentivize the parties to participate
meaningfully in the peace talks, but, more important,
to caution them with one voice on the consequences of
impeding the peace process, as well as on the futility of
pursuing the military option.

The visit of the Security Council to South Sudan
next week is particularly timely in that regard. The
parties must reach an agreement, without further delay,
on how to end the conflict and embark on the path of
reconciliation. Those responsible for committing serious
human rights violations must be held accountable. Both
sides must also ensure unhindered and safe access by
road, air and river for United Nations and humanitarian
personnel.

While UNMISS continues to carry out its mandate,
the four objectives identified in resolution 2155
(2014) - the protection of civilians, the promotion
of human rights and accountability, the facilitation of
humanitarian assistance and support for the cessation
of hostilities - should be a collective responsibility
of the United Nations and its partners, Member States
and, most importantly, the South Sudanese leaders.

