Mr. Patriota (Brazil): I would like to start by
thanking you, Mr. President, for inviting me to address
the Security Council in my capacity as Chair of the
Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC). I would also like to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Miguel
Trovoada for his briefing and his wise leadership, as
well as to acknowledge the presence among us of Prime
Minister Domingos Simoes Pereira.

I would like to say how encouraged I was by the
attendance at the International Contact Group meeting
this morning, which was co-chaired by the Foreign
Ministers of Ghana and Timor-Leste in their respective
capacities as rotating Chairs of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries.

There seems to be broad agreement that the new
authorities in Guinea-Bissau are moving in the right
direction and that international partners are ready to
fully re-engage with the country. As I mentioned this
morning and also to Security Council experts last
week, I recently took a short visit to the country, where
I found a political situation markedly different from
the one I saw in my last visit in January, as well as to
witness at first-hand the genuine commitment from the
national authorities to achieve the stability, prosperity,
development and institutional progress that Bissau-
Guineans need so much.

The defence and security sector modernization
process, which is an essential element to ensure long-
term stability in the country, is already under way. As
I mentioned in my report on the recent visit, which
was circulated to the members of the Security Council,
decisive steps have been taken in the past months,
especially in the update of the members of the armed
forces retirement roster, the identification of military
personnel to be retired by January 2015, paying
military personnel through the banking system and,
most notably, in the peaceful and very well-conducted
replacement of the Chief of the General Staff of the
Armed Forces.

One should recognize, however, that this progress
is viable mainly due to the efforts that have been put
forward by the ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau
(ECOMIB) on the ground. At the International Contact
Group meeting this morning, participants unanimously
agreed that ECOMIB had been playing an essential role
in the implementation of the security sector reform, and
therefore that the sustainability of the process depended
to a large extent on the continued presence of the force
in Guinea-Bissau. In that context, I would like to bring
to the Council's attention paragraphs 17 through 19 of
the final communique adopted today, which read as
follows:

"The Group strongly supported the position
of the new authorities of Guinea-Bissau regarding
the need to maintain an ECOMIB presence on the
ground. Such a presence will decisively contribute
to supporting the implementation of the identified
reforms and to build up confidence among
international partners. The Group underlined the
need for that force to enjoy a formal invitation
by Guinea-Bissau setting out a clear mandate and
time frame for its activities. It also invited the
United Nations Security Council to consider this
force's mission and coordinate it with UNIOGBIS'
mandate. The Group recognized and welcomed the
decisive contribution made by ECOWAS through
ECOMIB, which has been guaranteeing security in
Guinea-Bissau."

With regard to the socioeconomic situation, I was
equally impressed during my recent visit to witness
a newfound optimism prevailing among Bissau-
Guineans. Improved access to water and electricity and
the payment of salaries are notable dividends of the
re-establishment of constitutional order.

However, as the Prime Minister pointed out at this
morning's meeting, the food security issues worsened
by this year's sparse and irregular distribution of rains
are a stark reminder that multiple challenges need to be
faced. Moreover, it should be noted that any progress on
the socioeconomic front could also be threatened, if not
annulled, by the potentially devastating consequences
of an Ebola outbreak. While some international support
has been forthcoming, Guinea-Bissau's health system
remains extremely fragile. I would like to take this
opportunity once again to encourage the Government
and the United Nations counterparts to engage with the
United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response
and continue their efforts to bolster rapid response
capacity and preparedness in Guinea-Bissau.

I was encouraged to see that the final commuique
adopted this morning by the Contact Group also made
reference to that crucial point by emphasizing, in
paragraph 14,

"that the Group identified as a potential threat to
the socioeconomic structure in Guinea-Bissau
the Ebola virus disease, which had seriously hit
some countries in the West African subregion, and
expressed their firm commitment to put in place
an operational preparedness plan to forestall the
outbreak of the epidemic in the country."

I would agree with Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Trovoada that the best way
to describe the situation on the ground after the new
Government's first 100 days in office is to speak of
a fragile stability with room for cautious optimism.
While recognizing the positive developments so far, it
is important to note that the progress will be sustainable
only if due attention is paid to the political context.

Following a request made by the Prime Minister
at the Contact Group meeting, the PBC stands ready
to support the Government in its efforts to foster an
inter-institutional dialogue, with a view to ensuring
that Guinea-Bissau's most relevant political actors all
share the same commitment to the long-term prosperity
of the country. The international community, while not
interfering or prejudging a national dialogue that needs
to be conducted and decided upon by Bissau-Guineans
themselves, must remain vigilant to any source of
potential instability.

Furthermore, continuing progress will also greatly
depend on the Government's ability to maintain the
momentum for reform and mobilize sufficient internal
and external support for the implementation of the
established priorities, while effectively preventing
spoilers from threatening to unravel what has been
achieved so far. The political and financial support of
all stakeholders will be crucial for the new authorities
to survive this critical juncture.

In that regard, we are pleased to note that the
preparations for the upcoming round table scheduled to
take place in Brussels in February 2015 are under way.
In support of the round table, the PBC's Guinea-Bissau
configuration will work to facilitate international
coordination with a view to mobilizing sufficient
resources for the Government to implement as priorities
and maintain the positive momentum.

Finally, I would like to underscore that it is
of the utmost importance that the international
community speak with one voice and work in a
coherent manner - a call that was eloquently made
by the Prime Minister himself. As a platform that
includes neighbouring Governments, Security Council
members and many donor countries, the PBC's Guinea-
Bissau configuration is well placed to ensure that
international partners provide deep, sustained and
coordinated accompaniment for the country's progress.
In fact, Guinea-Bissau provides us with an example of
how constructive and complementary the relationship
between the Security Council and the PBC can be. I
am confident that by working together we will be able
to transform Guinea-Bissau into a success story for the
region and for the United Nations.

