Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): I would like to
join others in welcoming High Representative Valentin
Inzko back to the Council and to thank him for his
comprehensive and objective report (S/2014/ 314, annex).
The United Kingdom strongly supports the work of the
High Representative and his ongoing commitment to
ensure the implementation of the Dayton Peace Accords
against significant political and security challenges.

The United Kingdom shares the High Representative's
deep concern over the ongoing situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The country's development has been
brought to a halt by economic and political stagnation.

There continues to be no substantive progress towards
European Union and NATO membership and there
has been a worrying increase in secessionist rhetoric
and civil unrest. The violence and protests that broke
out in February in several major cities in Bosnia
and Herzegovina - like others, we regret that those
briefly turned violent - were a clear demonstration
of the population's deep dissatisfaction with the
country's current situation. That should be a wake-up
call for Bosnia and Herzegovina's leaders and for
the international community. We must now focus on
turning that difficult moment into an opportunity for
all the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina. That requires
a unified international response that sets out a new
commitment to a broader agenda in the country.

For their part, Bosnia and Herzegovina's leaders
need to engage fully with domestic grievances, in
particular those centred on socioeconomic issues. As
the High Representative has said, that is a fundamental
change in the political dynamics that is very necessary.
The political space needs to be filled with a genuine
commitment to promoting the interests of Bosnian
citizens, not with divisive nationalist rhetoric.

We support the High Representative's view
that an engaged and proactive civil society is vital
for the country's democratic future. Both Bosnia
and Herzegovina's politicians and the international
community should continue to engage with those
domestic voices for change. A strong sense of local
ownership will be the key to delivering those aspirations
for reform.

We share the High Representative's concern
regarding the recent increase in divisive rhetoric from
politicians in Bosnia and Herzegovina seeking to
manipulate the protests into an ethnic issue. Bosnia
and Herzegovina's leaders should be in no doubt that
the international community is unwavering in our
commitment to the territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a sovereign and united country. In that
context we welcome the constructive approach taken
by Bosnia and Herzegovina's regional neighbours,
including the Prime Minister of Serbia's visit to
Sarajevo on 13 May and his clear affirmation of the
Dayton Agreement and Bosnia and Herzegovina's
territorial integrity.

The United Kingdom calls on all signatories to the
Dayton Agreement to abide by their commitments. It is
entirely unacceptable that the authorities in Republika
Srpska have failed to cooperate with the Office of the

High Representative. Bosnia and Herzegovina's leaders
are obliged to cooperate with the High Representative
and the international organizations and agencies set
out in the Dayton Peace Accords and provide them
with the necessary access to officials, institutions and
documents in order to let them carry out their mandate.

The United Kingdom strongly supports the efforts
of the European Union (EU) and NATO to help the
country make progress on its Euro-Atlantic path and
work towards delivering the "5+2" conditionality
that would enable a closure of the Office of the High
Representative. But it is clear that we are not there yet.
Bosnia and Herzegovina's leaders need to demonstrate
that they are genuine partners for reform. The country
has a clear route towards EU and NATO membership,
which will provide the proven framework for peace,
security and regional cooperation. The United Kingdom
is fully supportive of that goal and will do everything it
can to facilitate progress. But Bosnia and Herzegovina's
leaders need to work together with their own citizens to
create real change and make progress on the country's
Euro-Atlantic future.

In that regard, we strongly support the role of
EU Special Representative Peter Sarensen, who has
put together a package of measures to drive reform
in the country. The United Kingdom endorses those
initiatives, such as the May conference on a compact
for growth. The EU Special Representative will play a
vital role in re-energizing the development of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We commend his continued close
and collaborative working relationship with High
Representative Inzko.

We are deeply concerned by the fragility of
the political and security situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The United Kingdom shares the High
Representative's assessment that the European
Union-led peacekeeping force Operation Althea
continues to play a central role in supporting Bosnia
and Herzegovina's own efforts to maintain a safe and
secure environment. We will therefore support the
retention of that vital asset when its mandate comes up
for renewal later in the year.

