Mr. Toure (Mali) (spoke in French): I should like
warmly to thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened this open meeting of the Security Council to
discuss the report of the Committee of Experts on
Afghanistan appointed pursuant to paragraph 15 (a) of
Security Council resolution 1333 (2000), regarding
monitoring of the arms embargo against the Taliban
and the closure of terrorist training camps in the
Taliban-held areas of Afghanistan.

I should like also to thank the Committee of
Experts on Afghanistan, chaired by Ambassador Haile
Menkerios, for the outstanding work it has done in
such a short space of time and in rather difficult
conditions. This is a perfect opportunity for my
delegation to state how pleased we are at the
conclusions reached by the Committee. We would also
like to thank Ambassador Valdivieso, Chairman of the
sanctions Committee on Afghanistan, for having given
us a detailed introduction to the report.

The principle underlying my delegation's view of
sanctions regimes is that the goal of sanctions should
not be to punish, but to modify behaviour. In order to
attain this goal of behaviour change, it is more than
ever necessary rigorously to apply sanctions imposed
against States. This can be done only through an
effective mechanism to monitor compliance with the
requirements set out in the relevant resolutions. That is
why we support the recommendations of the
Committee of Experts contained in the report before
us - recommendations that will make it possible to
improve the effectiveness of sanctions imposed, which
will lead to a change of behaviour.

We note the fact that Afghanistan's neighbours
realize that there can be no military solution to the
conflict that has bloodied Afghanistan for two decades.
Those who are fuelling this conflict must put an end to
their behaviour and understand that there is a link
between stability in Afghanistan and their own
security.

As indicated in paragraph 88 of the report, my
delegation supports the creation of a United Nations
Office for monitoring the sanctions imposed by the
Security Council against the Taliban authorities in
Kabul. Efficiency and cost-effectiveness should be
taken into account when deciding on the location of the
office. In any case, the location that is chosen should
be able to provide the necessary administrative and
logistical support to the Office. In this way the
groundwork can be laid for exemplary cooperation
between the United Nations and Afghanistan's
neighbours, in order to ensure total respect for the
international embargo on weapons destined for the
Taliban and to monitor activities in the terrorist
training camps.

To that end, we support the idea of sending small
teams of specialists, which would work closely with
the various border control services and anti-terrorist
teams in each of the six countries that are neighbours
of Afghanistan. Given the fact that the considerable
funds resulting from the opium and heroin trade are
being used to buy weapons and other war materiel and
to fund the training of terrorists, my delegation firmly
supports the recommendations of the Committee
contained in paragraph 61 of the report regarding the
interdiction of smuggled drugs from Afghanistan. The
international community should do everything in its
power to deprive the Taliban of the important funding
that it gets from the illicit drug trade.

Finally, I should like once again to congratulate
Ambassador Haile Menkerios and his team on the
excellent work done. We reiterate the fact that my
delegation is ready to take an active part in seeking a
consensus whereby this important document can be
followed up.

