Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): The convening of today's
debate is timely, particularly with the presence in New
York of the delegation of the African Union Peace
and Security Council. We had a fruitful discussion
yesterday and listened attentively to its members'
expert knowledge on the situation in Africa. The
comprehensive and detailed concept note (S/2016/428, annex) provides us with an insightful analysis, captures
the political dynamics and argues for greater synergies
between the African Union (AU) and the Council
in order to pursue our common endeavour in the
maintenance of peace and security in Africa.

I wish to thank all of the briefers for their
respective presentations, which as a whole further
augmented the need for closer collaboration between
the Security Council and the AU Peace and Security
Council. While we are encouraged by the significant
gains and successes achieved to date, it is obvious that
the common take from our regular deliberations on
African issues concludes with the glaring fact that both
sides would profit from a more effective and efficient
partnership. That calls for our active collaboration
on well-defined strategic objectives based on clearly
defined divisions of responsibility. Given our shared
assessments, calibrating appropriate responses together
would complement our collective efforts. In that regard,
comparative advantages, complementarity of mandates
and optimal use of resources and capacities must also
be taken into account.

Malaysia is pleased tojoin consensus on presidential
statement S/PRST/2016/8, which was just adopted.
The statement outlines measures in taking forward
the outcomes of the recently concluded peacebuilding
architecture review exercise, which is applicable to the
United Nations-AU relationship and the African Peace
and Security Architecture.

In aligning ourselves with the statement to be
delivered by the delegation of Iran on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement, I wish to add the following
points.
Managing conflict cannot prevail as a default
approach on the part of either the United Nations or
regional organizations, including the AU. The emphasis
on primacy of politics should compel us to move
towards a prevention-centred approach. To effect such
a shift, efforts should be directed towards preventing
conflicts from escalating into full-blown threats. In
that connection, United Nations and AU preventive
diplomacy measures and mechanisms should be more
coordinated and geared towards enabling the early
detection of potential crisis situations and by the early
sharing of information.

The review of the peacebuilding architecture
recognized the AU as a key partner of the
Peacebuilding Commission and provided further
impetus for collaboration between the PBC and the
AU on peacebuilding efforts. In that regard, a focused
engagement within the PBC and the AU Peace and
Security Council is welcome, and its outcome should
continue to fit into the broader United Nations-
AU dialogue. Events such as the recent high-level
meeting on the theme "Sustaining Peace: Mechanisms,
Partnerships and the Future of Peacebuilding in Africa",
provided an early opportunity to unpack Security
Council resolution 2282 (2016) and General Assembly
resolution 70/262. Further opportunities towards their
implementation should be pursued.

The foundation and pillars underpinning the
African Peace and Security Architecture are strong
and forward-looking. A significant constraint in
realizing its full potential is therefore the lack of
necessary resources, particularly flexible, sustainable
and predictable funding. In welcoming African efforts
in that regard, we also believe that the United Nations
could assist further. In doing its part, Malaysia recently
pledged a modest contribution of 400,000 Malaysian
ringgit to the Peacebuilding Fund. We hope that it will
go towards supporting programmes and initiatives on
sustaining peace and stability in Africa.

Last but not least, we are further encouraged
to note the direct funding allocated in May by the
Peacebuilding Fund to the AU Commission to support
peacebuilding activities in Burundi as the first step
of such progress. That is a groundbreaking step to
strengthen cooperation between the AU and the United
Nations in sustaining peace. The United Nations and
the AU have come a long way in their collective efforts
to build stronger cooperation. Lessons learned and best
practices on cooperation should be regularly shared
with a View to producing results oriented towards real
operational benefits on the ground. We stand ready to
contribute to that end.

