Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): I would like to
begin by thanking Special Representative Zahir Tanin
for his briefing today. I would also like to thank Deputy
Prime Minister Daeie and Ambassador Citaku for their
statements to the Security Council.

As others European Union (EU) members of the
Council have already stated, the situation in Kosovo
calls for a substantial reduction in the frequency of the
reporting cycle. We should also refocus the efforts of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) so that the means deployed by the
United Nations are better tailored to the situation on the
ground. To that end, we look forward to the strategic
review of the Mission.

Kosovo's European perspective was reconfirmed
in the European Commission's strategy for a credible
enlargement perspective for and enhanced European
Union engagement with the Western Balkans, which
was adopted in February. The EU-Western Balkans
summit, which will take place later this week in Sofia,
will offer another opportunity for both sides to reaffirm
their political commitment to advancing these efforts.

We welcome the progress made since our
previous meeting (see S/PV.8176), in particular the
ratification of the territorial delineation agreement
with Montenegro by the Assembly of Kosovo, which
represents an important breakthrough. We share the
Secretary-General's assessment that the ratification
is an indication of Kosovo's commitment to its
humanitarian perspective.

Moving forward, it is now important to resume
a dedicated reform agenda and to intensify the fight
against corruption and organized crime. To that end,
we encourage the Government and the opposition
to engage in constructive dialogue to overcome
political deadlocks and to enable the acceleration of
necessary reforms.

It is also crucial that Kosovo's political leadership
continue to respect the rule of law and human rights.
In that regard, we are concerned over the recent arrest
and expulsion of Turkish nationals without customary
court proceedings, and we are concerned about the
slow pace ofprogress in the investigation of the murder
of Oliver Ivanovic'.

The continued deadlock in the normalization
dialogue between Serbia and Kosovo must be overcome.
The future of both lies within the European Union,
and the normalization of relations is vital for a stable,
peaceful and prosperous Western Balkans. We call on
Pristina and Belgrade to implement their commitments
and to inject new impetus into the dialogue process.
As we have stated before, the status issue must not
hamper Kosovo's European perspective or membership
in international organizations.

Sweden welcomes the important work being
undertaken on women and peace and security in Kosovo.
That includes support to wartime survivors of conflict-
related sexual and gender-based violence, and women's
political participation. We reiterate the importance of
the role of women in the normalization process.

The United Nations and UNMIK have made
invaluable contributions to help bring Kosovo to
where it is today. However, the EU integration process,
including through the support of the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, now provides the
most appropriate framework to deal with remaining
challenges. By continuing to work towards Kosovo's
European perspective, with support from the EU and the
international community, Kosovo's leaders can deliver
on the expectations of their people for a better future.

