The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Peru.

At the outset, I should like to join other
delegations in thanking the High Representative for the
Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Mr. Christian Schwarz-Schilling, for his
detailed briefing on the situation in that country. We
would like also to welcome Mr. Adnan Terzie,
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

Peru would like to reiterate its satisfaction at the
progress that has been achieved in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The current situation shows that it has
made significant advances towards stabilization. We
welcome in particular the holding on 1 October last of
the first general elections in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
For the first time since the signing of the Dayton peace
agreements in 1995, those elections were organized
and carried out entirely by local authorities. This is a
fresh step towards the consolidation of democracy and
the rule of law, and it reaffirms the political
commitment and the positive efforts made by the
authorities and the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina
to finalize the building of their democratic institutions.

It is also clear that the general security situation
has remained stable, as stated in the most recent report
of the Secretary-General and High Representative for
the Common Foreign and Security Policy of the
European Union on the activities of the military
mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We understand
that, as the country has moved towards normalization,
EUFOR has likewise shifted from a role of deterrence
to one of confidence-building. Nonetheless, as pointed
out in the report of the High Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina, a EUFOR
presence is still deemed essential for the maintenance
of overall stability.

We expect that in the coming months further
progress will be made with respect to other issues so as
to pave the way for Bosnia and Herzegovina's full
normalization and Euro-Atlantic integration. Particular
attention should be devoted to questions related to
police restructuring and to full cooperation with the
International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia. By the same token, it is important to
continue with reform of the economy, which, in the
final analysis, is the basis of the country's viability.
Mr. Schwarz-Schilling noted in his report his concern
at the rise in public spending, which is having an
impact on the pace of reform efforts. He also
highlighted the lack of progress on education reform.

In conclusion, we call on the authorities of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to address these pending
issues, so as to stay on track with the very
commendable progress that they have made since the
signing of the Peace Agreements.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I call on the representative of Finland.

