Mr. Hamidon (Malaysia): I offer my sincere
congratulations to you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month, and
to the Permanent Representative of China for his
stewardship of the Council last month. I would also
like to acknowledge the presence in the Chamber of
His Excellency Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Timor-Leste. I welcome his valuable
contributions to the deliberations today.

My delegation is pleased to address the Security
Council on the situation in Timor-Leste at the end of
the mandate of the United Nations Office in Timor-
Leste (UNOTIL). We express our sincere appreciation
to the Secretary-General for his report (S/2006/251) on
the end of the mandate of UNOTIL. We also thank Mr.
Sukehiro Hasegawa, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his clear and comprehensive
presentation of the report. We commend the Special
Representative and all the men and women of UNOTIL
for their dedication in discharging the mandate
entrusted to the mission by the Security Council.

I am pleased to note that the activities carried out
by the United Nations and by the United Nations
system, as well as the contributions made by UNOTIL,
have continued to provide a window of opportunity for
progress in Timor-Leste, particularly with regard to the
transition to a sustainable development assistance
framework. The United Nations has played a
remarkable role in peacebuilding in Timor-Leste
through its various missions since 1999, initially by
providing security and facilitating the country's
emergence from conflict and subsequently by nurturing
the development of political, economic, social, legal
and judicial institutions. In the past year, the United
Nations has also supported Timor-Leste's development
needs through UNOTIL. The significant progress made
by Timor-Leste during the reporting period, from 14
January to 12 April 2006, demonstrates its firm
commitment towards the achievement of poverty
reduction and economic growth. That progress has also
strengthened the efforts made towards the attainment
of the Millennium Development Goals.

The specific activities undertaken by respective
agencies - the World Bank, the United Nations
Development Programme, the International Monetary
Fund, the Asian Development Bank, the United
Nations Development Fund for Women, the World
Food Programme, the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, the United Nations
Population Fund, UNICEF, UNESCO, the International
Labour Organization, the World Health Organization,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the International Organization for
Migration - with the close cooperation of the
Government, have helped Timor-Leste to achieve
impressive progress in many areas of governance,
institution-building and capacity-building, to meet its
social, economic and human development needs within
a sustainable development programme. Those advances
could not have been achieved without the full
commitment, the determination and the strong resolve
of the country's leadership and the support of the
Timorese in general, coupled with sustained assistance
and cooperation from the international community.

Nevertheless, many of the country's institutions
are still at a nascent stage, and will require the
continued assistance and support of the international
community. My delegation notes that, as UNOTIL's
mandate comes to an end, one of the main challenges
facing the country relates to the need to consolidate the
progress that has been made in laying the foundations
for a democratic system. The presidential and
parliamentary elections scheduled for 2007 will be a
significant step forward. Those elections will be a test
for the maturity of democracy in Timor-Leste. That is
indeed an important point for the international
community, including the Security Council, to note.
There is a need for the continued presence of the
United Nations not only to provide impartial support
for the conduct of free and fair elections, but also as a
stabilizing influence on all segments of society
throughout the period leading to the elections. In that
regard, Malaysia supports the recommendation of the
Secretary-General regarding the establishment of an
integrated United Nations office comprising civilian,
police and military elements, for a period of 12 months
commencing on 21 May 2006, to undertake the
challenges of the approaching elections.

My delegation is concerned about the troubling
developments related to the disgruntled portion of the
Timorese armed forces, as well as about how little
progress has been made towards resolving the issues.
Today it was reported that tens of thousands of
residents of Dili had fled the capital fearing new
clashes between the former soldiers and the police. We
are, however, encouraged by the steps already taken by
the Government to contain the disturbances. We hope
that it will continue to work towards an amicable
solution in order to end the impasse.

It is encouraging to note the growing relations
between Timor-Leste and Indonesia, as manifested in
the recent meeting in Bali between President Xanana
Gusmao and his Indonesian counterpart, President
Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono. The strengthening of
relations between the two neighbouring countries
augurs well for them, including in their continued
efforts to delineate the land borders between them. We
are confident that both countries will continue to be
able to resolve their bilateral issues in the spirit of
friendship and cooperation.

As a neighbour, Malaysia reiterates its
commitment to nation-building in, and the
development of, Timor-Leste. We have offered earlier
assistance bilaterally and will continue to explore new
areas of assistance with the Government of Timor-
Leste. We remain in full support of the United Nations
activities in post-UNOTIL assistance, especially
regarding the efforts of the Government and the people
of Timor-Leste as they prepare to meet the challenges
of their first presidential and parliamentary elections.
With their perseverance and their determination to
succeed, along with the support of the United Nations
and the international community, Malaysia is
convinced that Timor-Leste will continue to make
progress in its nation-building.
