Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. Mladenov, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, for his comprehensive
and objective briefing.

The Middle East is going through a difficult period
in its history, marked by many old and new crises.
The conflicts in Syria and Yemen still need to be
resolved. Political and diplomatic solutions are needed.
Further international efforts need to focus on resolving
the situation in Libya, helping to rebuild Iraq and
supporting stability in Lebanon.

Palestine remains at the centre of the chaos
that plagues the region and is the consequence of
geopolitical experiments directed from abroad. That
is a commonly agreed fact, despite the fact that some
actors seek to relegate the issue of a settlement in the
Middle East to the background. The developments in
the situation in the occupied Palestinian territories,
where destructive trends are increasingly evident, are
of grave concern. Owing to the lack of progress in
the political process, a vacuum has been created that
is being filled by unilateral measures and provocative
rhetoric. The abyss of misunderstanding and mistrust is
widening, undermining prospects for the resumption of
talks. It is clear that all long-standing issues, including
settlement activities, are far from being resolved.

We are concerned about the escalating tensions
around Gaza associated with the Palestinian protests in
the sector against the Israeli occupation since 30 March.
There were dozens of victims on the Palestinian side
and hundreds injured. We support the right to peaceful
protest and strongly condemn terrorist acts in any form
and the indiscriminate use of force against civilians.
We call on the parties to refrain from measures that are
likely to further exacerbate the situation.

It is not necessary to be an experienced analyst to
understand that it is highly likely that the situation will
further deteriorate. The plan announced by the United
States to hold a ceremony in Jerusalem on 14 May to
mark the beginning of the transfer of the United States
Embassy from Tel Aviv has a strong destabilizing
potential, the negative repercussions of which will be
seen not only in Palestinian-Israeli relations but also
throughout the region and the entire Muslim world.
That is not the only high-profile event related to the
Middle East that will take place in the coming months.
Given the current situation, it is necessary for the
international community to urgently step up its efforts
for the resumption of the political process between
the Palestinians and Israelis based on the principles of
international law and aimed at the implementation of a
two-State solution.

Unilateral approaches will not lead to a fair and
lasting peace, aimed at fulfilling the national aspirations
of Palestinians or strengthen Israel's security. To that
end, we are keeping on the table our proposal to convene
a summit between the leaders of Palestine and Israel in
the Russian Federation. We advocate the resumption of
active efforts on the part of the Middle East Quartet of
international mediators, which remains, regardless of
what some may say, the sole mediation format approved
by Security Council resolutions.

We believe that one of the obstacles to the
resumption of the peace process is the schism within
Palestinian ranks. We continue to deliver assistance
to the Palestinians in their efforts to restore their
national unity on the basis of the Palestinian Liberation
Organization's political platform and the Arab Peace
Initiative. It is important for all Palestinian stakeholders
to reaffirm their commitment to implementing the
agreements reached in Cairo in October 2017 and
to focus their efforts on the establishment of the
legitimate Palestinian National Authority in the Gaza
Strip. We support the relevant efforts undertaken by the
leadership of the Arab Republic of Egypt.

We support the delivery of international assistance
to Palestinians. It is not acceptable to divert attention
away from the humanitarian needs of the Palestinians or
to cut financing for the relevant programmes, including
throughthe United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, which could
lead to radicalization within the Palestinian ranks.

To summarize, we wish to stress that the Russian
Federation advocates crafting a positive and unifying
agenda for the international community as a whole
to work on the Middle East, including the question
of Palestine. We deem it necessary to conduct a joint
analysis of the genesis of the conflicts plaguing the
region and to seek alternative means for their settlement.
In that context, we believe that the initiatives advanced
in the past by Russia have not lost their relevance; on
the contrary, they are all the more relevant now. Recent
events within and around the Middle East confirm the
importance ofRussian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov's
proposal to convene a comprehensive review of the
situation in the Middle East in the Security Council.

It is also of critical importance to rebuild trust
between the Arab world and Iran, to which end it is
important to launch a process aimed at building a
regional architecture for security that is comprehensive
and indivisible. A key factor in that context is
safeguarding the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
on the Iranian nuclear programme. On all of these
and other issues, Russia stands ready to work together
with interested partners in a transparent and impartial
manner, without threats or undue pressure. Dialogue
remains a key mechanism for resolving the issues at
hand.

