Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria): I would like to express the
gratitude of my delegation for the very positive initiative of
the Bangladesh presidency to hold this open debate on
"Humanitarian aspects of issues before the Security
Council". Needless to say, and as previous speakers have
already stated, it is a very special privilege for a
Permanent Representative in New York to take the floor
under the presidency of the Foreign Minister of
Bangladesh.

On behalf of the Austrian delegation, I would like to
state that of course we fully align ourselves with the
statement made by the presidency of the European Union.
I would like to make a few additional remarks, however,
in Austria's capacity as Chairman-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE).

There is a consensus around this table that one of
the most acute challenges we are facing today is how to
act in humanitarian emergencies. There is also a
convergence of views that a broad approach, embracing
all policy instruments, is needed. This approach must
include early warning, preventive diplomacy and effective
means to address the root causes of conflicts. As has been
stated, the concept of peace and security has as a result
become more people-centred. The well-being of
individuals and communities must therefore be the focus
of our actions.

As a consequence, the effective conduct of
humanitarian activity has to be a top priority of Member
States. International organizations must be in a position to
bridge the gap between early warning and early action.
Last year's OSCE summit in Istanbul focused on the need
to address humanitarian challenges quickly and
effectively.

As Council members are aware, the OSCE plays an
important role in early warning, crisis management and
post-conflict rehabilitation. Its comprehensive strategy
addresses root causes of humanitarian crises, with a view
to developing creative, forward-looking solutions. Austria,
as Chairman-in-Office of the OSCE, has put a strong
emphasis on key issues such as the proliferation of small
arms, the impact of armed conflict on children and the
problems of internal displacement. The Guiding Principles
on Internal Displacement and their integration into the
work of the OSCE is one of our priorities.

A very important initiative to bridge the gap between
early warning and early action is the OSCE's Rapid
Expert Assistance and Cooperation Teams (REACT).
REACT is a mechanism to identify, select and quickly
deploy civilian experts to assist States in conflict
prevention, crisis management and post-conflict

 

rehabilitation. A task force has been set up to make the
programme operational by the end of this year.

The OSCE is becoming increasingly involved in
facilitating the delivery of humanitarian aid by international
organizations and non- governmental organizations to people
in need of assistance and protection and in providing
assistance for the return of refugees and displaced persons
to their homes. To enhance cooperation between
humanitarian agencies, the OSCE Chairperson-in-Office met
recently with the President of the International Committee
of the Red Cross and senior officials of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), with the aim of improving cooperation and swift
action in humanitarian emergencies in the OSCE region.
UNHCR participates in the work of the Permanent Council
of the OSCE in Vienna.

The OSCE also welcomes the important role of non-
governmental organizations as crucial partners of
Governments and the international community in the
humanitarian field. To give an example, the OSCE has just
opened a resource centre for the development of non-
governmental organizations in Kosovo. In addition, we
intend to strengthen and deepen the dialogue with civil
society on the occasion of the upcoming OSCE meetings
and seminars.

Permit me to address a further point: the cooperation
among international organizations in the field of
humanitarian action. Recent examples have demonstrated
that close cooperation between international organizations
can be mutually beneficial and enhance the impact of
initiatives. The current cooperation between the OSCE and
the United Nations in places such as Kosovo, Tajikistan,
Georgia and Bosnia is a good example. The multitude and
complex nature of the problems the international
community faces in Kosovo can hardly be solved by one
organization on its own.

The OSCE Chairperson-in-Office, our Foreign
Minister, Mrs. Benita Ferrero-Waldner, is undertaking
efforts to strengthen the close relationship between the
OSCE and the United Nations. She recently visited Kosovo
and will soon come to New York in order to identify
further possibilities of enhancing cooperation between the
organizations, especially in the field of humanitarian action
and assistance.

