Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): I would first like to thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this meeting. I also thank Mr. Geir
Pedersen, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria, for the updated and very useful information he
has given us.

The worsening humanitarian situation, exacerbated
by the renewed hostilities between the parties to the
conflict in north-west Syria, should serve to spur
the international community to join forces to make a
peaceful outcome to this crisis possible. As we have
said many times, we know that there is still much to be
done in Syria. As we search for ways to put an end to
the terrorist groups operating in Idlib and in the nearby
towns, on the basis of the Russian-Turkish agreement,
we must focus on fully stabilizing the situation on
the ground and promoting a political solution based
on resolution 2254 (2015). There can be no question
that we must be utterly determined in our efforts to
accelerate the establishment of the constitutional
committee if we are to truly launch the political
process that can put an end to this protracted conflict.
Equatorial Guinea welcomes all of the Special Envoy's
initiatives and efforts focused on supporting the five
priority objectives of his mandate, in accordance with
resolution 2254 (2015).

Apart from the discussions on the establishment
of a constitutional committee and the beginning
of its work, it is essential to ensure that none of the
parties undermines the efforts of the Special Envoy
to revitalize the political process or turn these efforts
into an obstacle. In that regard, we encourage the
parties to be resolute in prioritizing approaches with
a significant degree of convergence, and to ramp
up their diplomatic meetings and frank discussions.
We must be objective and recognize that there is no
longer room for eventualities or expectations. The
constitutional committee should be formed as soon as
possible. Moreover, Equatorial Guinea hopes that the
consultations on Syria to be held next month in Nur-
Sultan will serve to open the way decisively to the
beginning of the work of the committee.

I conclude by again encouraging the Special Envoy
to continue considering all opportunities to overcome
the obstacles hindering the establishment of the
committee and to stress that only a broad, inclusive
political solution that is led by the Syrian Arab Republic,
in conformity with resolution 2254 (2015), and meets
the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people can pave
the way to sustainable peace in Syria and put an end
to the unimaginable suffering that the Syrians have
endured for far too long.

