Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian delegation abstained in the
voting on resolution 2459 (2019), on the extension of the
mandate ofthe United Nations Mission in South Sudan.
However, we want to emphasize that we fully support
the activities of the Blue Helmets deployed there, as they
are significantly contributing to the country's stability.

During the briefing in the Security Council just a
week ago (see S/PV.8480), many who were present in
the Chamber noted the significance of the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan, signed in Khartoum in 2018.
It is important that the parties in South Sudan showed
a willingness to compromise and a desire to resolve
their differences. Significant progress has been made
in implementing the Agreement since it was concluded,
and the structures and mechanisms it envisages have
been set up and begun operating. The level of violence
and the number of cases of human rights violations
in South Sudan have also fallen significantly since
the signing. An increasing number of refugees and
internally displaced persons have expressed the
desire to return to their permanent homes. Opposition
politicians are already returned to the capital and have
freedom of movement there.

In that connection, we are disappointed by our
colleagues' obstinate reluctance to welcome the
Khartoum agreements, which have already essentially
shown themselves to be viable. In our view this
sends the wrong message both to the parties in South
Sudan and the leading regional Powers that put such
enormous effort into reaching the Agreement. We
are concerned about the fact that a document that is
supposed to outline the peacekeeping mandate clearly
and succinctly is overloaded with text on gender issues
and human rights. Incidentally, in its list of mandates
the resolution cites the latter task ahead of support for
the implementation of the peace Agreement.

We would like to remind the Council that general
peacebuilding issues that affect all United Nations
peacekeeping missions have to be discussed in the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations with
the participation of the troop-contributing countries.
The Secretariat's still unfinished strategy for improving
peacekeeping efficiency, the Integrated Performance
Policy Framework, which is mentioned in the resolution,
is one of those issues, and in our view circumventing
the Special Committee is completely unacceptable.

Lastly, we categorically reject the working
methods of the penholders, who once again abused
their prerogatives and refused to take into account the
justifiable concerns oftheir Council colleagues, thereby
preventing the Council from reaching consensus.

