Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): We
welcome you to the Council today, Madam, as well as
the Foreign Minister of Azerbaijan, and we thank you
both for your statements.

I would like to thank African Union (AU) Peace
and Security Commissioner Lamamra and Under-
Secretary-General Pascoe for their briefings. I would
also like to thank the Ministers of Kenya and Uganda
for their presentations and for the deep commitment
and valuable support their countries have shown to
Somalia. Working closely with the representatives of
the troop-contributing countries, the joint United
Nations-AU assessment mission has done excellent
work in providing the basis for the briefings we have
heard today.

Somalia continues to face Africa's most complex
challenges. Although famine conditions have eased in
some parts of the country, 3.7 million Somalis are still
in need of humanitarian assistance. Nearly 1 million
Somalis live in exile, and 1.5 million are displaced and
experiencing famine conditions. All parties must
ensure immediate and unfettered access to those in
need of emergency humanitarian assistance.

We should like to thank Member States for their
generous support of the United Nations 2011 Somalia
consolidated appeal, which was funded at 82 per cent.
Still, there are many gaps. For example, the protection
cluster was funded at only 17 per cent, thwarting
efforts to better protect vulnerable women and girls.
The recently launched 2012 consolidated appeal
requests $1.5 billion. The United States urges Member
States to support this appeal. Total United States
humanitarian assistance to the region since 1 October
2010 is $870 million, $250 million of which have been
used for Somalia.

Meanwhile, Al-Shabaab continues its despicable
acts, including suicide bombings, attacks on civilians
and humanitarian workers, and the expulsion of
humanitarian organizations at the height of the world's
gravest humanitarian catastrophe. At the same time, we
have a moment of opportunity to turn the tide of
violence, poverty and despair in Somalia. The
remarkable courage of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) and its Ugandan and Burundian
troops has helped to liberate Mogadishu from
Al-Shabaab's occupation. We welcome Djibouti's
deployment and urge the African Union and Djibouti
promptly to resolve any remaining questions about how
best to integrate Djiboutian troops into the Mission.
Kenya and Ethiopia have thrown their weight behind
the effort to defeat Al-Shabaab, and we welcome their
contributions as well.

The Kampala Accord, the road map and the
Garowe Conference outcome have all created
momentum for critical political reforms that must
complement early security gains. As difficult as it is for
all of us at a time of severe resource austerity, it is
imperative that the international community seize the
moment in Somalia. We must come together and rise to
meet these new challenges. It would be foolish to turn
our backs on our collective successes thus far. They are
our shared responsibility.

We have listened carefully to the African Union's
calls to increase AMISOM's troop ceiling beyond the
current mandated strength, and to the various proposals
to expand the use of United Nations-assessed funding
to support AMISOM. We await further details from the
AU, particularly concerning the command-and-control
architecture, as well as the Secretariat's report,
including its cost analysis of the AU's
recommendations, and the assessment made by the
United Nations Support Office for AMISOM. of support
needs for the AU's operations outside of Mogadishu.
We will give these proposals thorough and prompt
consideration, and call for a follow-on discussion as
soon as practical.

The United States intends to continue its strong
bilateral support to AMISOM. troop-contributing
countries (TCCs). To date, we have committed more
than $337 million worth of training, equipment and
logistic support to AMISOM. and its TCCs - in
addition to our assessment for the United Nations
Support Office for AMISOM. Furthermore, we have
committed more than $106 million worth of training,
equipment and other support to develop the capacity of
Somali security forces. We urge other Member States
to provide in-kind support or contributions to the Trust
Fund, without caveats, to fund urgently needed
projects, including reimbursement for contingent-
owned equipment. As AMISOM. expands its footprint,
it is imperative that it have predictable and uncaveated
funding to sustain its operations.

While AMISOM. plays a critical role, a coherent
and achievable political strategy must be in place. The
Kampala Accord and road map to end the transition are
key to achieving long-lasting peace and stability in
Somalia. We call upon all Transitional Federal
Institutions (TFIs), including Parliament as well as
other signatories, to meet their obligations and
responsibilities for the implementation of the road
map. Let me be absolutely clear on this point: we will
hold the road map signatories to account. They are
responsible for achieving the tasks outlined in the road
map, including an agreed upon constitution,
parliamentary reform and credible and transparent
elections. Any further support by the United States will
be contingent upon the successful completion of the
key tasks of the road map. We will stand by Somalia's
side, but we are prepared to walk away if the TFG and
the TFIs cannot show concrete, measurable progress in
2012.

There is some reason for optimism. While the
road map process is far from complete, the December
Garowe Conference, attended by the signatories of the
road map, represents a significant and positive step
forward on the completion of the key task of
constitutional and parliamentary reform and the
indirect election of a president and speaker of
Parliament by August 2012. The Garowe principles,
agreed to by the senior political leadership, now need
further discussion and consideration by a broader
cross-section of the Somali people, including civil
society, which we urge begin with the second phase of
the Garowe conference to be held later this month. We
welcome the initiative of United Kingdom Prime
Minister David Cameron to host the 23 February high-
level conference in London to maintain momentum for
the political and security success and to build
international consensus and support for the path
forward in Somalia.

Finally, let me reiterate our strong support of the
United Nations efforts in Somalia. The historic visit
last month by the Secretary-General and the President
of the General Assembly is evidence of their
commitment to restoring peace and stability in
Somalia. The United States commends and fully
supports the decision to move the headquarters of the
United Nations Political Office for Somalia to
Mogadishu this month. We thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Mahiga for his
efforts and urge him to remain focused on compliance
with the benchmarks and timelines set by the road map
signatories in accordance with the Kampala Accord.

