Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation welcomes the
decision to hold an open meeting of the Security Council
on the question of the peaceful settlement of the dispute in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. This formal meeting
not only provides an opportunity for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to be heard on an issue of vital
importance to it, which is its inherent right enshrined in the
Charter, but it also allows members of the Council - as
well as the larger membership of the Organization - to
express their views on the important issue of peace and
security in Africa. Indeed, the views and perspectives of the
larger membership of the Organization on this subject are
pertinent and should be heard, as nowhere is the need
greater or the significance for the future of Africa more
profound, than in the peaceful resolution of the conflict in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

If the third-largest nation in Africa were to be
allowed to languish in factional violence, this would have
grave implications for the peace, security and stability of
the entire region. In this regard, Malaysia notes with
dismay and concern the further deterioration of the
situation in Africa as a whole, less than a year since
Secretary-General Kofi Annan issued his report - on 13
April 1998 - on the causes of conflict and the promotion
of durable peace and sustainable development in Africa
(S/1998/318). Clearly, the African renaissance that South
Africa's Vice-President Thabo Mbeki eloquently talked
about cannot take place unless and until these conflicts
are resolved and a new structure of peace and security
and legitimate order emerges on the African continent.

The disintegration of the regime of the late President
Mobutu in May 1997 has been characterized by some as
the beginning of a new era in post-colonial Africa, amid
high expectations of positive change and renewal.
Unfortunately, the new Government in the Congo, headed
by President Laurent Kabila, inherited a country that was
deeply divided, demoralized and financially bankrupt.
Nevertheless, the promise of change and transformation
of the system that was left behind by President Mobutu
on the basis of democratic institutions and the
restructuring of the economy were welcomed and
applauded by the international community. However,
these hopes were dashed on the rocks of the inter-ethnic
conflict and rebellion that threatens the very survival of
the newly installed Government, which was compelled to
seek the support and assistance of friendly neighbouring
countries.

The involvement of a wide range of protagonists in
the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
indeed regrettable and has raised the prospect of a major
war on the African continent, with serious risks to the
stability and integrity of not only the Congo itself but also
all of its neighbours. The situation in the Congo is
particularly alarming given the fact that the war there
interlocks with other conflicts in the region, thereby
rendering any effort at mediation an extremely difficult
one.

Malaysia notes with concern the cross-border
character of the conflict in the Congo, which further
complicates what is already a very complex internal
situation. Clearly, there can be no lasting solution unless
both the internal and external factors of the conflict are
addressed and resolved. In this regard, we support fully
the efforts being made, notably by President Chiluba of
Zambia, to bring all those involved in the Congo conflict

 

to the negotiating table. That could result in an immediate
and unconditional ceasefire, thereby paving the way for a
negotiated settlement of the conflict and providing for the
orderly withdrawal of all foreign troops currently in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. That would have to be
followed by efforts at national reconciliation and
democratization, including the holding of free and fair
elections in the country. In this regard, Malaysia commends
the diplomatic efforts that have been made by African
leaders - namely, those of South Africa, Mozambique,
Namibia and Zambia - aimed at seeking a peaceful
solution to the conflict. We believe efforts at regional
diplomacy represent the most viable approach in resolving
the conflict and deserve the strong and sustained support of
the international community and this Council.

My delegation believes that the process of rebuilding
the Democratic Republic of the Congo can succeed only in
a climate of peace and stability which would allow the
Congolese people to enjoy their long-denied rights,
including the right to development. African leaders can help
by advocating a non-violent solution to the conflict and
promoting African models of cooperation, which have
worked in a number of conflict situations. The international
community can and must play a major and continuing role
in supporting these efforts by working with the countries
involved to promote reconciliation, broaden political
participation, lay the groundwork for economic recovery
and help build systems of justice that are fair, credible and
effective.
The worsening humanitarian situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is a stark reminder of
the destabilizing effects of war, with badly needed
resources, which could have been channelled to education,
health and other sectors, being drained to finance a
devastating war. Throughout the Great Lakes region, inter-
ethnic violence has resulted both in great human tragedy
and in new obstacles to political and social progress. There
cannot be a real future for the Great Lakes region unless
the cycle of violence is broken once and for all. This will
happen only if the people of the region can chart a new
course of inter-ethnic relations based on genuine
reconciliation and peaceful relations rather than on revenge
and the settling of old scores. It must, however, be
predicated on the need to mete out justice to the
perpetrators of the massacres and other crimes against
humanity, and on respect for the principles of the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States in their
external relations.

My delegation also believes that international efforts
to promote peace and stability in Africa should not ignore
the magnitude of the socio-economic problems
confronting the continent as a whole. The Secretary-
General himself has emphasized the importance of social
and economic equity and the imperatives of socio-
economic development in the quest for a durable peace.
Also stated in his much-acclaimed report was the need for
a holistic approach to the issue of peace and security in
Africa, encompassing not only peacekeeping but also
peacemaking and post-conflict peace-building. For the
international community, helping build a new, democratic
and prosperous Congo is both a challenge and an
opportunity to redress past failures and to contribute to
the building of a stable and peaceful State for the benefit
of Central Africa and the continent as a whole.

What has transpired in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is part of a long drawn out saga, one for which
the nations of the region and the international community
must share responsibility. We believe it is critical that
appropriate steps be taken to lay the foundation for long-
term stability and progress in that troubled country. We
encourage President Kabila to begin that process on the
basis of open dialogue.

Unfortunately, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo remains for now one of several theatres of conflict
in Africa in which the continuation of hostilities has
jeopardized efforts at finding solutions to the continent's
other critical problems, which demand the urgent attention
of its Governments. In this regard, we strongly urge the
Congolese people and all the concerned parties to
summon the political will to resolve their problems not
through military means, which will not bring a durable
solution, but through dialogue and negotiation. For its
part, the Security Council must make every effort, in
coordination with the Organization of African Unity and
subregional initiatives and mechanisms, specifically those
of the Southern African Development Community, to
secure an immediate and effective ceasefire in the Congo
and to continue to explore an appropriate role for the
United Nations in determining concrete, sustainable and
effective measures in the implementation of any ceasefire
agreement and subsequent efforts at post-conflict peace-
building in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In this
regard, my delegation considers the proposal of France
for an international conference on the Great Lakes region
at an appropriate stage, which has been supported by
others, to be a constructive approach, and we welcome it.

 

