Mr. Yaakobi (Israel): While most of the leaders of
the Middle East were meeting last month at the Summit of
Peacemakers at Sharm El Sheikh to pledge their support for
combatting terrorism, Hezbollah terrorists were carrying out
attacks on Israelis.

The representative of Lebanon began his comments
this evening by counting from 10 April. But since 1
February, eight Israelis have been killed and 29 more have
been wounded by Hezbollah Islamic fundamentalist
terrorists. Last week, 36 more Israeli civilians were injured
in several waves of Katyusha rocket attacks fired by the
Hezbollah into northern Israel. Since then more than 100
Katyusha rocket attacks have been fired by the Hezbollah,
hitting the city of Qiryat Shemona and 20 other towns and
villages in the northern part of Israel. Tens of thousands are
living in shelters or have left the northern part of the State
of Israel.

Several speakers have already described Israel's
actions as if there were no murderous Hezbollah
provocations against Israel and Israeli citizens. Such a
description is bogus and deceitful. The truth is that, after a
long period of restraint and the exhaustion of all political
and diplomatic means, the Israel Defence Force is hitting
back at Hezbollah strongholds with air, sea, and artillery
strikes.

Israel's primary obligation is to protect the security of
all of its citizens. We will not allow our civilian population
centres to be held hostage by Hezbollah. The Lebanese
Government does not have the ability - or the will - to
control Hezbollah activities. Therefore, Israel must defend
the security of its north by all necessary measures.

Israel has no territorial claim on Lebanon, and has no
intention of entering into battles with either the Syrian or
the Lebanese armies. But we have the right and the
obligation to defend our people.

The Lebanese Government was told time and again:
control the Hezbollah. If you are, as you claim, the
sovereign Government of Lebanon, then this is your
obligation. It is interesting that the Lebanese Government
disarmed all the militias which had operated within its
territory, but never Hezbollah.

It was very strange to hear from the Prime Minister
of Lebanon, just last night, "It is not within our ability to
do this". Please decide: either his is the sovereign
Government, or it is not within its ability.

The Syrian Government was told time and again,
"You control large portions of territory in Lebanon. Use
your influence to stop the terrorists". Israel waited for the
Governments to respond and allowed ample time for
diplomatic efforts, but to no avail. Hezbollah has
continued to carry out attacks against Israel with
impunity. Now, unfortunately, the time has come to take
action ourselves.
Who among you, members of the Council, would
agree to the existence of an armed militia operating from
within your territory, beyond the scope of your
Government's authority, carrying out attacks against other
States? Who among you would allow your citizens to be
attacked and killed by terrorists? Who among you would
choose not to exercise the right of self-defence?

Today, two trends are emerging in the Middle East:
one that seeks a peaceful resolution to the conflict, and
another, inspired and supported by Iran, that is trying to
kill the prospects for peace. While peacemakers meet and
sign treaties and create a new reality, Hezbollah, Hamas,
the Islamic Jihad and their Iranian master seek to pull us
back to the old Middle East, where violence and
bloodshed were the order of the day.

Make no mistake. The stated goal of Hezbollah is
not the removal of Israeli forces from southern Lebanon,
but the destruction of Israel. Last month, Hezbollah Vice-
Chairrnan Naeem Kassem stated,

"We oppose, and will continue to oppose, the
Zionist entity. Israel has no reason to exist, and will
not exist".

Hezbollah annually receives $70 million in financial
aid from Iran. Hezbollah terrorists are trained in Iranian
military installations and the so-called Iranian
Revolutionary Guards are very active in Lebanon, day

 

after day. I hope that the members of the Security Council
will not ignore this outrageous situation.

Allow me to quote from the decisions reached at this
week's cabinet meeting, as articulated by Israel's Prime
Minister, Shimon Peres.

"First, Hezbollah has broken all previous
understandings achieved in the wake of Operation
Accountability in 1993, and has deliberately created
this escalation. The United States, which brokered the
understandings between us, has established that the
Hezbollah has not been honoring its commitments.

"Secondly, Israel will not permit Hezbollah to
conceal itself among the civilian population. We will
not permit the launching of Katyusha rockets from
within Lebanese villages into northern Israel.

"Thirdly, Hezbollah terrorists and facilities in
Lebanon, including those in Beirut, will not enjoy
immunity.
"Fourthly, if civilian facilities in Israel are hit,
there will be no immunity from strikes on
corresponding facilities in Lebanon.

"Fifthly, if the Hezbollah ceases its attacks on a
permanent basis, Israel will cease too." I will say it
again: "If the Hezbollah ceases its attacks on a
permanent basis, Israel will cease too.

"Sixthly, the Government of Israel will not
accept the freedom that the Lebanese Government
grants to terrorist groups to operate from its territory
without interference."

I should like to reiterate to the members of the
Security Council: please understand that Israel has no
interest in or intention of escalating this into a war, but we
are forced to act in order to defend our people. As a
sovereign and democratic State, we are committed to
achieving peace and security. Our security must be ensured
in order to enhance the peace process. Operations are being
conducted solely against Hezbollah terrorist targets. But
Hezbollah positions are situated throughout Lebanon, and
are usually located in the midst of civilian population
centres.

Unfortunately, innocent civilians, on both sides of the
border, are suffering as a result of this confrontation. For
this we are sorry. But this escalation was initiated by the
murderous acts of Hezbollah, without any intervention by
the so-called sovereign Government of the State of
Lebanon. We hope that this unnecessary suffering will
soon be over permanently - on a permanent basis. This
must be based on the understanding that all parties are
committed to maintaining peace and security for all
people in the area. This is our intention. This is our hope.

We call upon Council members to understand and
support this policy, this expectation, this hope.

