Judge Meron: It is my privilege to brief the
Council once again on the progress of the work of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals over the past six months, and to do so under
the presidency of Japan, a steadfast proponent of
international justice. I would also like to express my
appreciation to Egypt, Italy, Ukraine, Uruguay and
Senegal - the other outgoing members of the Security
Council - whose support for the Mechanism and
for international justice during their terms has been
tremendously important.

In this respect, I wish to acknowledge in particular
Ambassador Elbio Rosselli Frieri of Uruguay for his
excellent leadership of the Council's Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals over the past two
years, and to thank all the members of the Group for
their support for the work and effective operation of the
Mechanism. Likewise, I again express my appreciation
for the guidance of the Office of Legal Affairs on a
number of complex and sensitive issues, under the
leadership of the Under Secretary-General for Legal
Affairs and United Nations Legal Counsel, Mr. Miguel
de Serpa Soares, and the Assistant Secretary-General for
Legal Affairs, Mr. Stephen Mathias. It is also an honour
to appear here today together with my colleagues and
friends, President Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz, for
their final reports to the Council delivered on behalf of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.

Today, we mark a truly extraordinary milestone
in international justice. Just under 25 years ago today,
the Council embarked upon a bold experiment - the
creation of an international criminal tribunal to try
cases involving some of the worst crimes the world
has ever seen. At the time of the Tribunal's founding,
many observers and even, perhaps, some members of
the Council had doubts as to what this new court could
or would achieve - whether there would be arrests;
whether there would be trials and whether the court
that had been created on paper could become a viable
institution, translating into practice what was, at the
time, still a new and somewhat radical ideal: ensuring
individual accountability for international crimes.

As we all know today, the ICTY has more than
put to rest those doubts, instead meeting and, indeed,
surpassing its most optimistic supporters' aspirations.
In the hundreds upon hundreds of judicial decisions
and judgments issued over the past quarter-century, the
ICTY has clarified and strengthened the fundamental
principles of international humanitarian and human
rights law, and led to a resurgence of attention to
customary international law. In case after case, the
Tribunal has made plain that even the most complex
of trials can and must be conducted in full accordance
with the panoply of due process guarantees, setting
the standard that all other trials for serious violations
of international law must meet. Moreover, through
its practices and procedures, which reflect a singular
harmonization of different legal traditions into a
coherent whole, the Tribunal has set valuable precedents
for other courts around the world.

It is not too much to say that, today, we stand in
a world transformed by all that the Tribunal, together
with the rising tide of other international courts and
national accountability initiatives founded since 1993,
has accomplished. Thanks to the brave experiment upon
which the Council embarked in 1993, and thanks to all
that the ICTY has achieved and made possible since
that time, the principles of justice and international law
proclaimed in the Charter of the United Nations are all
the stronger, the voices of victims of gross violations
of international law are better heard and accountability
for grave crimes is increasingly the expectation rather
than the exception.

The ICTY's legacy is a proud one. As a former four-
term President and long-serving Judge of the ICTY
myself, I am particularly honoured to act, together with
my colleagues at the Mechanism, as a guardian of that
legacy as we carry out and bring to their conclusion the
essential residual functions of both the ICTY and its
sister tribunal, the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR).

It is proper, indeed, that the focus of this meeting
today should be on the ICTY, its achievements and the
lessons to be learned from its work. I will therefore keep
my remaining remarks brief and touch on only a few of
the matters discussed more extensively in my written
report, submitted to the Council on 17 November
(S/2017/97l, annex).

The Mechanism, as the members of the Council are
aware, is in a period of heightened judicial activity at
present, with two major ongoing appeals in the cases
of Prosecutor v. Radovan Karadeic' and Prosecutor v.
Vojtslav Seselj, the continuing retrial that commenced
last June in the Prosecutor v. Jovica Stanisie and
Franko Simatovie case, and a host of additional ad hoc
judicial matters addressing everything from requests
for review of judgments to applications for access to
confidential information.

I am pleased to report that a hearing of the
Prosecutor's appeal in the case of Prosecutor v.
Vojislav Seselj will be held next week in The Hague, on
13 December, and ajudgment in that case is expected in
the first part of 2018. An appeal hearing in the case of
Prosecutor v. Radovan Karadeie is expected by the end
of the second quarter of 2018, with ajudgment expected
in that case by late 2019. The advanced stage of
appellate proceedings in both of those cases reflects the
efficient working methods followed in the Mechanism's
Chambers. I would also recall that any appeal that is
filed from the ICTY's recent trial judgment, delivered a
fortnight ago against Ratko Mladie, would today come
within the jurisdiction of the Mechanism.

As members of the Council may recall, the
Mechanism's Appeals Chamber granted a request
for review in the Ngirabatware case last June, and
following considerable interim litigation a hearing on
that matter has been scheduled for 8 to 16 February
2018 in Arusha, although a pending motion for the
withdrawal of Mr. Ngirabatware's counsel may impact
that hearing schedule. The hearing in that case is
expected to mark the first judicial proceedings to be
conducted in the courtroom at the Mechanism's new
premises in Arusha, representing another important
milestone for the Mechanism.

In the meantime, the Judges of the Mechanism
continue to adjudicate a range of requests addressing
everything from allegations of contempt to the variation
of protective measures. In that context, I note President
Agius's order issued last week, which provided for the
transfer of the ICTY's remaining contempt case to the
Mechanism. That matter has already been assigned by
the President of the Mechanism to a single Judge of
the Mechanism.
The Mechanism continues to make excellent
progress in other areas as well, serving as a new,
effective and efficient model of an international court
as it carries out its myriad duties, from preparing to take
on essential administrative and other key functions that
have been carried out by the ICTY to date, to actively
assisting the Tribunal in its disposition of records and
transfer of materials to the archives, and from further
developing its legal and regulatory framework, to
carrying out a range of responsibilities in relation to
the provision of assistance to national jurisdictions.

The supervision of the enforcement of sentences
imposed by the ICTR, the ICTY and the Mechanism
is one of the crucial residual functions that the Council
has entrusted to us. In previous meetings, I have
kept the Council apprised of an ongoing engagement
between the Mechanism and the Government of Senegal
concerning the possible enforcement of sentences in
that State. It is therefore a great privilege for me to
announce that we are expecting four prisoners to be
transferred from the United Nations Detention Facility
in Arusha to the custody of the authorities of Senegal
this very day. That step almost halves the population of
prisoners remaining in Arusha awaiting transfer. I very
much wish to acknowledge in that regard the particular
commitment of the Permanent Representative of
Senegal, His Excellency Mr. Fode' Seek, to achieving
that outcome, which further confirms the extraordinary
leadership role that Senegal has played and will continue
to play in the field of international criminal justice.

Alongside that impressive development,
negotiations with several Member States are now at
an advanced stage concerning the enforcement of the
sentences of the remaining six prisoners at the United
Nations Detention Facility in Arusha. I believe and
expect that, within the coming year, all prisoners at
the United Nations Detention Facility in Arusha will
have been transferred to enforcement States, which
would represent a major step towards completion of our
mandate in that area.

More broadly, I must once more express my
gratitude for the invaluable support the Mechanism
receives from States Members of the United Nations.
Just as the extraordinary achievements of the ICTY
would not have been possible without the cooperation
and assistance of Member States over the past quarter-
century, so too does the timely and efficient fulfilment
of the Mechanism's mandate depend upon the ongoing
support given by the Council, its members and the
international community and on the commitment of all
concerned to preserving the invaluable legacies of both
the ICTY and the ICTR.

For that ongoing commitment and for the sustained
and sustaining support that the members of the Council
continue to provide, I thank everyone present.

