Mr. Al Bayati (Iraq): At the outset, I would like
to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month
and to express my delegation's appreciation for what
was mentioned in the annual report of the Secretary-
General (S/2012/261) on children and armed conflict
presented to the Security Council, covering the period
from January to December 2011. I would like also to
congratulate Ms. Leila Zerrougui on her appointment
as the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for children and armed conflict, and I wish to express
our willingness to cooperate with her within the scope
of her new mandate.

I would like to thank Ms. Zerrougui; Mr. Herve
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations; Mr. Anthony Lake, Executive Director
of UNICEF; and Mr. David Tolbert, President of the
International Center for Transitional Justice, for their
presentations. I would like to express our View that
they all mentioned the situation of children and armed
conflict in many countries in our region and the world
without mentioning the situation in Iraq. That means
that the situation in Iraq is not as bad as in all the
countries that were mentioned this morning in the
Security Council, although we continue to say that we
still have difficulties, challenges and problems because
of the violence perpetrated by terrorist groups such as
Al-Qaida and its affiliated groups, such the Islamic
State of Iraq.
In addition, Mr. Ladsous spoke about United
Nations peacekeeping forces in many countries in our
region and the world, but we have had no such forces
in Iraq since 2003, which is a good indication of the
fact that we do not have armed conflict in Iraq. In
fact, in her letter responding to my question about the
definition of armed conflict, Patricia O'Brien, Under-
Secretary-General for Legal Affairs, wrote:

"Common Article 3 of the 1949 Geneva

Conventions and Additional Protocol II to the

Geneva Conventions of 1977 address situations

of non-international armed conflict. Article I of
Protocol II sets forth certain additional criteria

in respect of non-international armed conflicts. It

states that Protocol II applies in respect of armed

conflicts 'which take place in the territory of a

High Contracting Party between its armed forces

and dissident armed forces or other organized

armed groups which, under responsible command,

exercise such control over a part of its territory as

to enable them to carry out sustained and concerted

military operations and to implement this Protocol.'

It also specifies that it does 'not apply to situations

of internal disturbances and tensions, such as riots,

isolated and sporadic acts of violence and other acts

of a similar nature, as not being armed conflicts.'

Thus, under international humanitarian law, an
"armed conflict' of a non-international character is
more than a sporadic act of violence, and 'a party
to an armed conflict' must be (i) organized, with
a responsible command structure; (ii) exercise
control over a part of a territory; and (iii) be able
to carry out sustained and concerted military
operations, which criteria are cumulative in nature.
We trust that the foregoing will be of assistance to
your authorities in determining whether the concept
of armed conflict applies in the circumstances of
Iraq."

It is obvious that the concept of armed conflict set
forth in the Geneva Conventions does not apply to Iraq
because in Iraq we are no longer experiencing more
than sporadic acts of violence and terrorist attacks.
My Government believes that there are terrorist groups
who are attacking Iraqi civilians, including children,
but that we do not have armed conflict in Iraq.

With regard to the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2012/261), we would like to make the
following observations. In paragraph 41 and many
other paragraphs, the report describes Al-Qaida and
its affiliated groups, such as the Islamic State of Iraq,
as armed groups. Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon has
condemned the attacks perpetrated by those groups
as terrorist attacks, for example in his statements on
11 March 2010 and 3 November 2010. In addition, the
Security Council has condemned the attacks carried
out in Iraq by those organizations and described them
as terrorist attacks in each of its statements, the most
recent being SC/10757, issued on 11 September 2012.
It is therefore important to characterize those groups
as terrorist organizations and their attacks as terrorist
attacks in order to be consistent with the language of
the Secretary-General and the Security Council.

Paragraph 41 also states that there were 341
incidents in which children were victims during the
reporting period, 117 of which were verified by the
country monitoring and reporting task force. We
believe that the report should include only verified
incidents, as that leads to greater accuracy, given that
reported numbers could sometimes be exaggerated.
Official statistics issued by the Iraqi Ministry of
Health show that only 96 children were the victims of
terrorist attacks in 2011. The report also mentions that
children were reportedly seen manning checkpoints
of the Awakening Council checkpoints. However, the
Awakening Councils have been officially merged with
the Iraqi Armed Forces, and children are prohibited to
serve in the Armed Forces pursuant to Iraqi law and the
Iraqi Constitution.

In paragraph 42, the report mentions that armed
groups such as Al-Qaida and the Islamic State of
Iraq are continuing to recruit children. In the same
paragraph, the report points out that children are
being used to carry out espionage, reconnaissance,
transport of military equipment, videotaping attacks
for propaganda purposes, planting of explosives and
actual participation in attacks against civilians and
security forces, which suggests that children are doing
almost everything for Al-Qaida terrorist groups. That
is an obvious exaggeration of the role of children. The
report also states in paragraph 42:

"It should be noted that the Al-Qaida in Iraq's youth
wing 'Birds of Paradise', listed in my previous
report for recruitment and use of children, was no
longer active in the current reporting period."

In paragraph 43, the report states that a number of
children were indicted or convicted of terrorism-related
charges under the Iraqi anti-terrorism law. We would
like to point out that if those children were being used
by Al-Qaida for terrorist attacks, as is mentioned in
the previous paragraph in the report, then they could
be indicted and convicted. Legislation from all over
the world permits the indictment and conviction of
children who commit crimes. In the same paragraph,
the report also mentions that in the last three months
of 2011 there was an increase in the number of child
detainees awaiting trial who had been accused of being
associated with armed groups and committing crimes
related to terrorism. We would point out that those
trials are handled by independent judicial authorities
in application of relevant Iraqi laws designed to counter
terrorism perpetrated against civilians and other
innocent people, whose deaths and injuries have been
witnessed throughout the world thanks to television
coverage of brutal terrorist attacks in Iraq.

Paragraph 44 of the report mentions a number
of deaths and injuries among children caused by the
continuation of Violence in 2011. It further mentions
that the ability to investigate those incidents remains
limited due to security concerns related to monitoring
and observation activities. We would like to point out
that United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq has
staff stationed all over Iraq which could, together with
the country team monitoring and reporting task force
associated with the Office of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, investigate those incidents
mentioned in paragraph 41 of the report, in which the
verification of 117 incidents is noted.

Paragraph 47 of the report mentions that the
kidnapping of children is used to finance the
operations of armed groups that are not part of the Iraqi
Government. In the same paragraph, the report states
that "an 11-year-old boy was abducted near his house
in June 2011 by perpetrators claiming to be members of
ISI". That shows that kidnappings are used to finance
terrorist groups.

Paragraph 48 points to 54 incidents affecting
schools and hospitals during 2011. We would note that
those numbers of incidents have not been confirmed.
We also believe that the numbers are very small given
the hundreds of thousands of schools, hospitals and
health centres all over Iraq. Children attend school in
a normal fashion throughout the country; this small
number of incidents does not affect them.

In paragraph 48, the report also states that

"[t]wenty-seven education personnel and 17 medical
workers were killed or injured in different incidents
that included direct shooting and improvised
explosive devices".

We hereby express the need for full respect and
observance of the children and armed conflict mandate.
Situations that do not fall within the terms of the
mandate should not be included in the reports of the
Secretary-General, in order to preserve the integrity of
the mandate. The report also states in paragraph 48 that
"[a]rmed groups, including Al-Qaida in Iraq and ISI,
were responsible in all reported cases".

In conclusion, I would like to stress an important
fact of which the Security Council is aware. As the
Secretary-General said in one of his reports, Iraq
today is not the Iraq of prior to 2003. Iraq today is a
constitutional, parliamentary and federal democracy
ruled by a Government, elected by the people of Iraq,
that is protecting the rule of law and human rights,
especially the rights of the Iraqi children.

We once again thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict and her Office for their efforts and we express,
as a priority of the Iraqi Government, our readiness and
happiness to cooperate with them within the framework
of the new mandate and with all bodies of the United
Nations in order to guarantee the rights of Iraqi children.

