Mr. Tiirk (Slovenia): Mr. President, I wish to begin
by expressing our sincere appreciation of the fact that this
meeting of the Security Council is taking place under the
presidency of Costa Rica. The role of your country in
international peace is exemplary, and we believe that it is
most fitting and symbolic that the discussion and the
search for durable peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina is
taking place under your presidency. We are sure that this
month of December will be successful for the Security
Council.

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina continues
to be a matter of international concern. While some
progress has been made in the implementation of
Dayton/Paris Peace Agreement, as noted in the Secretary-
General's report on the United Nations Mission in Bosnia

 

and Herzegovina, it is obvious that further sustained efforts
of the international community are indispensable to stabilize
the situation and to make the peace process irreversible.

There have been some developments that should
encourage our common effort for peace. The Peace
Agreement concluded two years ago has been an important
achievement in itself. It stopped the war and opened the
path towards preservation of the independence, sovereignty,
legal continuity and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The implementation of the Peace Agreement
has established the lasting cessation of hostilities and
represents important progress in the domain of arms
reduction. The efforts of the High Representative have
gained wide international recognition and support. A
plethora of international organizations, financial institutions
and non-governmental organizations have contributed to
various aspects of the efforts to achieve economic
reconstruction and a durable peace.

Slovenia has actively joined these efforts. Recently, it
assumed further responsibility by becoming member of the
Stabilization Force (SFOR), and we are cooperating closely
with the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) in
contributing to various options for the post-SFOR operation.
In addition, Slovenia is in the process of establishing an
international fund for demining and for assistance to mine
victims.

The international concern for the peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina has been most clearly expressed at the meeting
of the Peace Implementation Council held in Bonn on 9 and
10 December 1997. The Peace Implementation Council
reaffirmed that there is no alternative to the Peace
Agreement as the foundation for political and economic
reconstruction in Bosnia. The vital contribution of the
multinational Stabilization Force in providing a secure
environment for the implementation of the Peace
Agreement has been widely recognized. The Peace
Implementation Council confirmed an emerging consensus
on the need for an international military presence to
continue beyond June 1998. This remains indispensable for
any progress in the peace process in the future, and we
welcome the recent decisions in that connection.

The message of the Peace implementation Council is
clear: The responsibility for consolidating the peace rests
primarily with the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The immediate neighbours of Bosnia and Herzegovina are
expected to take a constructive approach to achieving this
end and must assist in the endeavours for peace. Finally,
the international community has to take a robust stance

towards all the major problems impeding the peace
process.

These messages were echoed and strengthened in
resolution 52/150 on the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, adopted by the General Assembly earlier
this week on 15 December. Slovenia is gratified that the
resolution was adopted by consensus, which clearly
reflects the unity and resolve of the entire international
community to work together for a just and durable peace
in Bosnia and Herzegovina and for the removal of all
obstacles that still impede that process.

Among the impediments to peace, some are obvious,
as are the measures to expedite their removal. Stricter
measures are needed to remove the war criminals from
their positions of influence over decision-making and to
transfer them for trial to the international war crimes
Tribunal. The efforts to secure compliance with the orders
of the Tribunal have to be supported and the courage of
those involved in such efforts, including the most recent,
have to be commended. The Security Council should
encourage further efforts to bring the criminals to justice
and enhance the effectiveness of the Tribunal, which the
Security Council established in 1993. This would not only
strengthen justice as a value in itself and safeguard the
credibility of the Security Council, but would also create
important conditions for the success of the peace efforts
in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The Security Council should also render its political
support for the voluntary repatriation of refugees and for
the removal of obstacles which hinder the process of
repatriation. Harassment of the returnees, intimidation and
killings designed to discourage the voluntary return of
refugees must be stopped and, if that becomes necessary,
the Security Council should consider specific measures
against those responsible for such acts.

The return of refugees is also vital for the proper
functioning of the elected institutions in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and for the restoration of the ethnic diversity
that has always represented the essence of the identity of
the country. Therefore, it is essential for the very
existence of Bosnia and Herzegovina as an independent
and united country. The need to prevent attempts to
undermine the sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina or
to achieve domination by a single group over the common
institutions will be best met by ensuring the restoration,
to the largest extent possible, of the ethnic balance in the
country. The basic guarantee to achieving this is to ensure
the necessary level of security of the population in Bosnia

 

and Herzegovina. This is a requirement which could
gradually lose its centrality in the peace process, in
accordance with the overall progress. However, it is of
central importance now and every effort must be made to
strengthen it. A continued international military presence
and the strengthening of the police component are the main
pillars of a secure environment in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

We support the suggestions of the Secretary-General
concerning the strengthening of the International Police
Task Force (IPTF) monitoring of police activities with a
view to effectively dealing with problems like corruption,
smuggling and financial crime. One important area of these
activities is also the functioning of the border-control police
units.

In addition to providing a secure environment, the
multinational Force should also take an even more active
role in supporting the Peace Agreement and those who
implement it. On the other hand, the Force should take
active steps against those who oppose the Peace Agreement
or refuse to comply with its provisions. The multinational
military and police forces need to play a role in
apprehending the indicted war criminals and in clearing the
obstacles to the safe and voluntary return of refugees and
displaced persons.

The success of other aspects of the peace process will,
to a large extent, depend on the completion of these tasks.
In this area, we see the primary challenge for the High
Representative. We therefore welcome and support the
strengthening of his mandate, in accordance with the
conclusions of the Bonn Peace Implementation Conference.

Let me conclude by saying the following: The efforts
of the international community so far have brought some
important progress in the peace process in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We should renew and reinforce our
commitment to pursuing this process further and rendering
it irreversible.

