Mr. Ikouebe (Congo) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to take the floor before the Council on
behalf of the following 11 member States of the
Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS), namely Angola, Burundi, Cameroon,
Republic of the Congo, Gabon, Equatorial Guinea,
Central African Republic, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda, Sao Tome and Principe and Chad.
Earlier, the representative of Cameroon announced that
he joined in the statement I am now making. In turn, I
wish to say it is rather I who am pleased to join in the
brilliant statement that he made, not only on behalf of
Cameroon, but on behalf of our subregion.

First I would like to say how proud we are to see
you, Sir, presiding over the Council during this month
of November, during which important debates will be
devoted to the Central African subregion. Last
Thursday, 20 November, there was a public meeting
devoted to preparations for the international conference
on the Great Lakes. Today we have this well-attended
debate on the review of the interim report of the United
Nations multidisciplinary assessment mission to the
Central African subregion in June 2003.

We are grateful to the Council for the interest it
has taken in our region. You will recall that following
the debate in the Council of 22 October 2002, on
cooperation between Central Africa and the United
Nations, the decision was taken to send to the
subregion an assessment mission. The aim was, and is,
the adoption of a global, integrated, resolute, concerted
approach to the problems of peace, security and
development in Central Africa, as correctly recalled by
the Secretary-General in his letter to the Security
Council of 10 November 2003. We wish to thank the
Secretary-General for having sent this mission and for
presenting to us today the report that our Governments
have been looking forward to with great interest.

We also wish to commend the members of the
mission, especially Mr. Kalomoh, Assistant Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, for the high calibre of
work done, which broadly takes into account the
concerns expressed by our Governments. We wish to
assure him of our determination to continue working
with his team in a dialogue aimed at establishing a true
and strengthened partnership between our subregion
and the United Nations system.
The level of talks held between members of the
United Nations delegation and people in each of our
countries that were visited, and the high calibre of
those exchanges, clearly express the interest taken by
leaders of our subregion in strengthening cooperation
with the United Nations, especially at a time when
solid prospects are emerging from the crisis in most of
the countries that have been beset by armed conflicts.

The message we wish to send is one of a Central
Africa that wants to emerge from the infernal circle of
Violence and poverty to firmly commit itself along the
path of dispute settlement, consolidated peace-building
and reconstruction. But our countries are also aware
that despite the determination of their leaders, positive
developments now under way will remain fragile if
they do not have substantial support from the
international community, particularly from the United
Nations.

The Secretary-General recently had occasion to
commend the satisfactory progress of the situation in
the subregion. We would confirm that trend by pointing
to the following developments which occurred since
the mission's visit, and which reveal a true
determination to move ahead with the settlement of
conflicts and the strengthening of subregional
integration. I refer, in particular, to the peaceful
settlement of the political crisis in Sao Tome and
Principe; the organization of the national dialogue in
the Central African Republic; the establishment of
transitional institutions in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo; the adoption in New York on 25 September
2003, of the declaration of Principles on Good-
Neighbourly Relations and Cooperation, between the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Burundi, Rwanda
and Uganda; the recent agreement arrived at in Burundi
between the Government and the Forces for the
Defense of Democracy, which led, yesterday, to the
formation of a new inclusive Government; the entry
into force of the protocol pertaining to the Council for
Peace and Security in Central Africa; the organization
in Libreville in July of a peacekeeping operations
exercise, and the meeting in Brazzaville in October
2003 of the military chiefs of the subregion with a View
to creating a subregional peacekeeping brigade. Those
examples clearly indicate that the subregion does not
consider war and destablization to be its inexorable
fate, but is, on the contrary, more than ever determined
to face up to its responsibilities. Still, the challenges
remain enormous - as the report clearly
underscores- particularly in regard to the
maintenance and strengthening of peace. Efforts must
be made to strengthen subregional capacities, support
subregional initiatives, implement disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes, promote
national reconciliation, protect human rights,
reintegrate refugees and displaced persons and control
the illegal movement of small arms within the region.
For all of those problems the nagging issue remains
one of financing, which I shall revert to later.

Another aspect of that challenge concerns
reconstruction and sustainable development, where
focus should be placed on the introduction of post-
conflict programmes that allow for the transition from
policies geared towards emergency humanitarian aid to
ones centred on structural development, good
governance, poverty reduction, combating HIV/AIDS
and malaria, rehabilitation of ecosystems devastated by
war, strengthening of mechanisms of community
integration and so forth. Here, again, there is a need to
stress the mobilization of external resources.

With regard to those challenges, and the many
others we face, we feel that it is absolutely imperative
to have a subregional, coordinated approach. We must
find a way to coordinate our activities and our efforts,
to mobilize all of the key actors involved in the
process - Governments, parliaments, non-
governmental organizations, civil society, subregional
integration organizations, business sectors and so
forth- around a coherent vision so that we may
address our external partners as a united entity. In that
connection, we have to be able to deal with United
Nations interlocutors who are willing to see our
problems from a perspective that takes into account
that common identity that we wish to forge.

Particular interest needs to be shown for
programmes that have a multinational dimension, like
that led by the World Bank for the financing of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
activities in some of our countries.

The new partnership with the United Nations that
we aspire to is a function of that concern, and it is to
further that objective that we make the following
comments, which are far from being exhaustive given
the breadth and complexity of the problems under
discussion.

In the first place, we reaffirm our determination
to strengthen subregional integration by revitalizing the
Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS), which is slated to play the primary role in
coordinating all the activities that at present it shares
with other institutions such as the Central African
Economic and Monetary Community (CAEMC). In any
case, such a situation - which is not specific to
Central Africa - is destined to evolve as the subregion
achieves an advanced degree of integration, and
eventually do away with all structures that have lost
their raison d'etre. Today, the coexistence of those
institutions is not an obstacle. To the contrary, it can
help to speed up the integration process for ECCAS,
which can benefit from the experience of institutions
with proven track records.

Now, as you can see I am entering the debate over
competing institutions in Central Africa. But, more
than that, we are dealing with historic processes. The
Economic Community of Central African States, which
comprises 11 member countries, is only 20 years old,
while the Central African Economic Monetary
Community has a 40-year history. That institution
corresponds to a historic solidarity that is destined to
change.

Let me give some specific examples so that we
can assess to what degree those institutions have
intervened. We have the Central African Economic and
Monetary Community, which is essentially a customs
union that has not yet been incorporated within the
Economic Community of Central African States. We
have a regional integration body with community
programmes that do not yet exist within ECCAS. We
have a common currency, which is already a great step
forward - we take Europe as our model and, as we all
know, it took many years to launch the euro. We have,
therefore, a group of six countries with a common
currency, an achievement from which ECCAS can take
inspiration. We have, in regard to the free movement of
people and goods, a plan for a common passport that
will soon be circulated. Those many steps forward can
serve as an inspiration to ECCAS as it pursues its own
evolution.

Further to those reflections, I should like to note
that at one point the persistence of conflicts - which
caused many countries to give their full attention to the
day-to-day management of those crises - may have
left the impression that the communal spirit was
breathing its last. We are sure that, today, with those
conflicts now at an end, the subregional integration
plan will find its second wind.

A second aspect is the question as to whether the
structure we have before us will enable us to have a
partner with a political presence in our region. I
followed the debate on the question with great interest.
Let me recall the following. The Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General and the
United Nations offices and agencies in our countries
play an essential role. But, in keeping with the vision
of a global, integrated and determined approach to the
problems of the subregion - as defined by the
Security Council - a coordination mechanism or
guidelines for coordination, harmonization and
consistency is a necessity. That is why it is important to
recall that, in light of that concern, when the
assessment mission visited Central Africa, a request
was made by our heads of State for the creation of a
subregional United Nations office in Central Africa
that would constitute a kind of political presence, not
just one more office. The representative of Cameroon
quite rightly alluded to that request.

The request, first addressed to the assessment
mission, was recently repeated in Malabo last month,
when the ministers of the 11 member countries of
ECCAS met for the twentieth Ministerial Meeting of
the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on
Security Questions in Central Africa.

That, then, is where the debate stands with us at
this stage. It is a debate on the question of what
constitutes a coherent, integrated approach. We do not
want to simply add a new form of bureaucracy; we are
seeking a solution that takes into account our shared
Vision of our problems.

As a third issue, we note with great interest the
suggestions made by the Secretary-General in his letter
of transmission. At the same time we wonder about the
purpose of yet another study on the causes of conflict
in Africa. Here, again, the representative of Cameroon
has been very eloquent. We have enough studies on the
issue and we therefore wonder why an additional study
is necessary. In any event, we welcome the positive
will to strengthen the effectiveness and coherence of
United Nations programmes in Central Africa. We are
ready, therefore, to continue working with the
Secretary-General to examine ways to strengthen the
essential partnership between the United Nations and
our subregion.

Central Africa agrees with the Secretary-General
that we must move from a culture of reaction to a
culture of prevention with regard to peace and security.
Central Africa also considers that it is important to
develop a logic for follow-up to peace-building and
stabilization processes.

In that regard, I would like to emphasize two
points by giving two examples. Concerning financing
problems and mobilization of external resources, many
statements and declarations have been made and many
conferences have been held, but in reality we can say
that there is many a slip from the cup to the lip. First of
all, there are inter-agency consolidated appeals for
some of countries of the region, such as Angola,
Burundi, the Central African Republic and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We have noted
pledges of aid and financial support, but when it comes
to taking action we note that things often move very
slowly to the detriment of the goals to be achieved.
Secondly, we also have other selected peacekeeping
operations as we have seen over the course of the year
in the Central African Republic. The Central African
Economic and Monetary Community organized a
mission, which was led by the Gabonese head of State.
A contingent involving forces from a number of
countries was dispatched, but it was faced with the
eternal problem of logistics. Naturally, our heads of
State turned to the United Nations, and you received
them here, some months ago, a delegation sent by the
head of State of Gabon, including the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and the Minister for Defence, pleading
their cause, saying that we have a contingent but need
the United Nations to take the contingent under its
responsibility because we do not have the resources.

The answer was that, given the nature of the
intervention and in the absence of a Security Council
resolution, it was not possible for the United Nations to
fulfil that request. You will, of course, understand that
our leaders then wonder, when they are told that the
maintenance of international peace and security is the
responsibility of the Security Council and the United
Nations. They are told to organize in the proper manner
and report to the United Nations and await an
appropriate response. Then, when the response is not
along the lines that they would wish, they may well
question the true determination of the international
community to assist them in their efforts.

This is just to show that in our countries, we do
not always stand idly by when a crisis arises. I would
indeed say that, with regard to the Central African
Republic and other countries, we do not necessarily
merely send out a contingent. When we see the causes
of destabilization of a country, such as accumulation of
salary arrears, our heads of State organize. They collect
money to liquidate part of the debts owed to civil
servants in order to calm social unrest.

A real will to intervene exists, but it is
constrained by the lack of resources. Now what can we
say today? We have taken due note of the report and its
recommendations, and we say that the time has come,
of course, to take action, correctly and without delay,
to address all of the problems raised by the assessment
mission. We shall do so ourselves in the spirit of the
approach formulated by the Council. We shall do so
with determination in order to make irreversible the
positive steps that we can all observe and to avoid any
backsliding or any renewed challenges.

Central Africa is aware that it can achieve its
goals only by strengthening its capacities. We promise
to do so, especially through a firmer approach to
revitalization of the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS) in the areas of peace, security,
economic development and human development. In
order to preserve that determination and unity and in
order to remain consistent to that global, resolute and
integrated approach, our subregion has always wished
all its members to be involved in the international
conference on peace and security, democracy and
development in the Great Lakes region, and, we would
add, in Central Africa.

In that regard, the member States of ECCAS
welcome the statement of the President of the Security
Council of 20 November 2003, and welcome the
inclusive approach adopted by the Council that is an
eloquent illustration of the way in which we wish
henceforth to address the problems of our subregion.

