Mr. Khalilzad (United States of America): I
would like first to pay tribute to my friend,
Ambassador Dan Gillerman, as he prepares to leave
New York after nearly six years as Israel's Permanent
Representative. Ambassador Gillerman has
distinguished himself by his diplomacy, his eloquence,
his warmth and his wit. We wish him well. We also
welcome the participation of the representative of
Palestine.

We last met in a public setting to discuss the
Middle East at the end of March, nearly four months
ago, and much has happened since that time to raise
hopes for progress in that troubled region. In this
debate today, I believe it is important to outline the
progress that has been achieved, identify the challenges
that remain and focus on how the international
community can help the parties to achieve the goal of a
just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the Middle
East.

In terms of the positive developments of the past
few months, we welcome the progress that the Israelis
and Palestinians continue to make in their bilateral
negotiations, addressing all the core issues between
them. Achieving a peaceful two-State solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict is a key priority for the
United States, and we remain committed to achieving a
peace agreement before the end of the year.

Since the parties have rightly maintained the
confidentiality of their discussions, progress towards
that goal may not always be visible, but we must not
mistake that for lack of progress. We welcome our
European partners' strong support for the process, as
demonstrated at the recent Paris Summit for the

08-4326]
Mediterranean, and look forward to continued
international cooperation, working through the Quartet
in support of dialogue between the parties.

We are also working hard to support the parties'
efforts to improve security for Palestinians and Israelis
and humanitarian conditions for the Palestinians.
United States-trained police officers have deployed to
Jenin, in coordination with Israeli authorities, and are
working to uphold law and order and crack down on
terrorism. We applaud their efforts to restore order and
confiscate illicit weapons in difficult circumstances.
We also support the Egyptian efforts to restore calm to
Gaza and southern Israel, and call on all parties to
adhere to the period of calm that began on 19 June.

Like our partners in the Quartet, we welcome the
announcement of indirect talks between Israel and
Syria, under the auspices of Turkey, and hope that
progress is made in that direction.

Turning to the situation in Lebanon, we welcome
the Doha agreement, which led to the election of
Michel Sleiman as President, and the recent formation
of a national unity Government. We also welcome the
recent announcement in Paris that Syria and Lebanon
have agreed to exchange diplomatic missions.

Despite the progress of the past few months, we
continue to confront significant challenges on the path
to peace. The security situation remains tense. Today,
several civilians were injured in Jerusalem when a
Palestinian construction worker rammed his truck into
a bus and three passenger cars in a reminder of the
deadly attack that took place earlier in July. We
condemn all attacks targeting civilians and call for
them to end permanently. We also call for a restoration
of the lawful Palestinian Authority in Gaza.

The Palestinian Authority is in a dire situation
financially and will face a budget deficit of over $750
million in 2008 if additional budget support is not
provided, which could impair its ability to deliver
much-needed services to the Palestinian people.

We also reiterate our deep concern at continuing
Israeli settlement activity. We call on Israel to freeze
settlement activity and to dismantle outposts erected
since March 2001, consistent with its road map
obligations. Settlement activity is having a negative
effect on the atmosphere for negotiations and has the
potential to harm those negotiations going forward.

With regard to the challenges in Lebanon, events
in early May demonstrated yet again the serious threat
posed by armed militias outside the control of the
State. We remain concerned about persistent reports of
breaches of the arms embargo, and we are particularly
disturbed by statements by Hizbollah that it has rebuilt
its military capacity since the 2006 war.

The international community has a role in
supporting the efforts of the parties to reach a
comprehensive peace in the Middle East. For example,
when the Quartet meets again in September at the
General Assembly, it will consider, after further
consultation with the parties, the timing and agenda of
an international meeting in Moscow to lend support to
the process launched in Annapolis. The Quartet is
playing a key role in supporting the efforts of the
parties through coordinated international engagement
and should continue its work in that regard.

On the financial front, we urge the international
community, especially regional partners, to increase
their efforts to support the Palestinian Authority. The
United States has delivered on much of our $555
million pledge made in Paris last December to help
meet Palestinian humanitarian needs, including $150
million in direct budgetary support.

We commend the assistance provided to the
Palestinian Authority by many European partners, as
well as by Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates,
Algeria and Kuwait, and urge others to increase their
commitments. We also support efforts to meet the
humanitarian needs of Gazans, including a steady and
sufficient supply of fuel to Gaza, and the immediate
resumption of United Nations and other donor projects
there.

Turning to Lebanon, the international community
must continue to work towards the full implementation
of resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006) and the
Doha agreement in order to safeguard Lebanon's
independence and security. We must also continue to
strongly support the efforts of the Lebanese Armed
Forces and Internal Security Forces to restore calm and
support the legitimate Government of Lebanon. We
also call on outside parties to cease arming illegal
militias in Lebanon.

As part of the full implementation of resolution
1701 (2006), we welcome the Secretary-General's
intention to strengthen the diplomatic process aimed at
dealing with the issue of the Shaba'a farms, and urge
him to engage directly with Israel, Lebanon and Syria
on that issue. We also strongly support the work of the
United Nations International Independent Investigation
Commission and look forward to the establishment of
the Special Tribunal for Lebanon.

In conclusion, although much remains to be done
to achieve our common goal of a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East, one can take
heart that we are moving in the right direction. With
responsible, coordinated and effective support from the
international community, we can help the parties secure
the peace that has eluded them for so long. The United
States stands ready to do its part towards that goal.

