Mr. Amieyeofori (Nigeria): Nigeria voted in
favour of resolution 2003 (2011) because we believe in
the indispensable role of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) in the
efforts to bring lasting peace and stability to Darfur
and overall peace to the Sudan. We remain resolute in
our conviction that the enduring partnership between
the United Nations and the African Union (AU) in
Darfur remains a solid foundation for preserving
international peace and security.

In the spirit of this partnership, we had hoped that
the decision of the seventeenth AU Summit and the
11-43737
communique of the AU Peace and Security Council of
19 Judy 2011, stressing that the Darfur political
process should constitute a priority in the new road
map for Darfur and should be fully launched upon the
positive outcome of the Doha process, would have
been given due consideration.

We are convinced that paragraph 7 of the
resolution, specifying complicated enabling conditions
that must be met, will constrain the inauguration of the
Darfur political process. Indeed, making the launching
of the Darfur political process contingent on the
fulfilment of certain preconditions would be
counterproductive. It could equip spoilers with the
means to undermine the search for a comprehensive
peace. It could also undermine the national ownership
of the process.

Nigeria's view has consistently been that an
internal political process is vital to inclusiveness and
consensus-building in intercommunal relations in
Darfur. As the Secretary- General notes in his latest
report on UNAMID (S/2011/422), a Darfur peace
process could also benefit from a Darfur-based internal
dialogue and consultations that build popular support
for local ownership and enhance the outcome of the
Doha negotiation in the new road map.

The elements that are enumerated in paragraph 7
are goals and not prerequisites. In our View, if we are
serious about taking the critical first steps towards
creating an enabling environment for the Darfur
political process, then we should call for actions that
are clearly feasible and can be easily implemented.
That would be a more appropriate focus for the
Council and the international community.

We believe that the lifting of the emergency law
in Darfur will greatly enhance the Darfur political
process, as observed by the Joint Special
Representative. It will serve as a critical confidence-
building measure and be sufficient to kick-start the
process.

Finally, we believe that UNAMID has a critical
role to play in ensuring a successful Darfur political
process and in working closely with the Government of
the Sudan to lift the state of emergency. We therefore
discourage efforts to minimize its role or indeed to
exclude UNAMID from the Darfur political process.

