Mr. Wang Yi (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, allow me to thank Ethiopia for initiating today's
debate. I also thank Secretary-General Guterres,
Chairperson Faki Mahamat and Chair Ramos-Horta for
their briefings.

The Chinese delegation welcomes the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2378 (2017). United Nations
peacekeeping operations are facing many new
challenges and problems. China supports reasonable
and necessary reform to make peacekeeping operations
better able to fulfil their mandates. In that connection,
we would like to make the following points.

First, the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations are the cornerstone ofpeacekeeping.
Basic norms governing international relations, such as
sovereign equality, non-intervention in the internal
affairs of other countries and the peaceful settlement
of disputes, together with the guiding principles for
peacekeeping operations arising therefrom, must
always be strictly observed.

Secondly, the pursuit of a political settlement
should remain central to peacekeeping. The political
and peaceful settlement of disputes is enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations. Peacekeeping operations
should always serve that objective and follow sound
planning in the light of the actual circumstances of
host countries.

Thirdly, the establishment of a solid partnership
is fundamental to peacekeeping. It is necessary
to motivate host countries and troop- and fund-
contributing countries, fully leverage the role of
regional and subregional organizations, and forge
closer partnerships.

Fourthly, the reform should facilitate sustainable
development, which is vital to peacekeeping. It is
important that peacekeeping reform help foster a
safe and stable environment in host countries that
is conducive to sustainable development and the
elimination ofpoverty and other root causes of conflict.

In recent years, some African countries have
encountered challenges in their efforts to maintain
national peace and security. The international
community, and the United Nations in particular, should
comprehensively enhance peacekeeping cooperation
with the African Union (AU). We believe that efforts
must be focused on the following aspects.

First, we must enhance political support. We must
support African countries in resolving African problems
independently and in an African way. We must also
intensify cooperation between the United Nations and

the AU in conflict prevention, crisis management and
post-conflict reconstruction.

Secondly, we must strengthen support for capacity-
building. In response to the African Union's aspirations
and needs, the United Nations must help with
capacity-building and assist the AU in establishing
permanent forces, rapid response forces and an early-
warning mechanism.

Thirdly, we need to scale up financial support.
China supports the African Union's proposal on
financing for peacekeeping and calls upon the Security
Council to come up with a concrete method, as soon
as possible, to support independent AU peacekeeping
operations in accordance with resolutions 2320 (2016)
and 2378 (2017).

China has always firmly supported, and actively
participated in, United Nations peacekeeping
operations. China is a major troop-contributor and
the second-largest financial contributor. We have
deployed approximately 35,000 troops and 2,700
police to peacekeeping operations. At the 2015 leaders'
summit on United Nations peacekeeping, President
Xi Jinping put forth new proposals to strengthen
peacekeeping operations and announced a host of
important measures that China would take to support
peacekeeping operations. We Chinese always honour
our promises. China has formed an 8,000-strong standby
peacekeeping force and a permanent peacekeeping
police unit, provided training to over 800 peacekeepers
from the United Nations and relevant countries, and
has deployed its first helicopter unit for United Nations
peacekeeping operations in Africa. China is actively
disbursing $100 million in military assistance to the
AU. We have identified support for peacekeeping
operations as a priority for the China-United Nations
Peace and Development Fund.

Peace is hard to achieve and even harder to keep.
As a permanent member of the Security Council and
the largest developing country, China knows full-well
the value of peace. We will continue to work with
other peace-loving nations to give concrete support to
United Nations peacekeeping operations and to African
countries. Together let us strive for lasting peace on
our planet.

