The Secretary-General: The situation in the
Middle East is in chaos to such an extent it has become
a threat to international peace and security. The region
is facing a true Gordian knot - different fault lines
crossing each other and creating a highly volatile
situation with risks of escalation, fragmentation
and division as far as the eye can see, with profound
regional and global ramifications. We see a multiplicity
of divides.

The first is the memory of the Cold War. But, to be
precise, it is more than a simple memory: the Cold War
is back with a vengeance - but with a difference. The
mechanisms and the safeguards to manage the risks of
escalation that existed in the past no longer seem to
be present.

Secondly, there is the Palestinian-Israeli divide.

Thirdly, there is the Sunni-Shia divide, evident
from the Gulf to the Mediterranean. It is important to
note that apparent religious divides are normally the
result of political or geostrategic manipulation.

Finally, there is a wide range of different
factors - from opposing attitudes in relation to the role
of the Muslim Brotherhood or the status of the Kurds,
to the dramatic threats to communities that have been
living in the region for millenniums and are part of the
rich diversity of Middle Eastern societies.

Those numerous divisions are reflected in a
multiplicity of conflicts with different degrees of
interconnection, several of which are clearly linked to
the threat of global terrorism. Many forms of escalation
are possible.

We see the wounds of the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict continuing to fester. The recent violence in
Gaza resulted in many needless deaths and injuries.
I repeat my call for an independent and transparent
investigation into those incidents. I also appeal to those
concerned to refrain from any act that could lead to
further casualties, in particular any measures that could
place civilians in harm's way. That tragedy underlines
the urgency of revitalizing the peace process for a two-
State solution that will allow Palestinians and Israelis
to live side by side in peace in two democratic States
within secure and recognized borders. I reaffirm the
readiness ofthe United Nations to support those efforts.

In Yemen, we are witnessing the worst humanitarian
disaster in today's world. There is only one pathway
to ending the Yemeni conflict and to addressing the
humanitarian crisis: a negotiated political settlement
through inclusive intra-Yemeni dialogue. My Special
Envoy, Martin Griffiths, is doing everything possible
to facilitate that political settlement. He will brief the
Council next week.

In Libya, I encourage all parties to continue to
work with my Special Representative, Ghassan Salame',
as he engages in the political process with a broad range
of Libyan interlocutors across the country in order to
implement the United Nations action plan. It is high
time to end the Libyan conflict.

The case of Iraq demonstrates that progress is
possible with concerted local, regional and global
commitment. With the defeat of the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant, having overcome the risk of
fragmentation, the Government of Iraq must now
focus on reconstruction, reforms and reconciliation.
I hope that the upcoming elections will consolidate
that progress.

At the recent Paris and Rome conferences, the
international community reaffirmed its support for
Lebanon's sovereignty, stability and State security
institutions. It is absolutely essential to prevent a new
Israel-Hizbullah conflict, which could inevitably result
in many more victims and much greater destruction
than the last war. I reiterate the critical importance to
act on key principles and commitments on Lebanon,
including the Security Council resolutions, such as
resolution 1701 (2006), and the policy of disassociation.
The dangers of the links to the Syrian conflict are
evident in the recent confrontations between Iran and
Israel in Syria.
Syria today indeed represents the most serious
threat to international peace and security. We see
there confrontations and proxy wars, involving several
national armies, a number of armed opposition groups,
many national and international militia, foreign fighters
from everywhere in the world and various terrorist
organizations. From the beginning, we have witnessed
systematic violations of international humanitarian law,
international human rights law and international law, in
general, in utter disregard for the letter and spirit of the
Charter of the United Nations.

For eight long years, the people of Syria have
endured suffering upon suffering. I reiterate that there
is no military solution to the conflict. The solution must
be political through the Geneva intra-Syrian talks, as
stipulated in resolution 2254 (2015), and in line with
the consistent efforts of my Special Envoy, Staffan de
Mistura. Syrians have lived through a litany of horrors:
atrocity crimes, sieges, starvation, indiscriminate
attacks against civilians and civilian infrastructure,
the use of chemical weapons, forced displacement,
sexual violence, torture, detention and enforced
disappearances. The list goes on.

In a moment of hope, the Security Council adopted
resolution 2401 (2018), demanding that all parties cease
hostilities without delay for a durable humanitarian
pause. Unfortunately, no such cessation of hostilities
ever really took place. That is the bleak panorama of
Syria today.

In that panorama, I am outraged by the continued
reports of the use of chemical weapons in Syria.
I reiterate my strong condemnation of the use of
chemical weapons by any party to the conflict under
any circumstances. Their use is abhorrent and a clear
violation of international law. The seriousness of the
recent allegations requires a thorough investigation,
using impartial, independent and professional expertise.

In that regard, I reaffirm my full support for the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) and its Fact-finding Mission in undertaking
the required investigation into those allegations. The
mission should be granted full access, without any
restrictions or impediments, to perform its activities.
I take note that the Syrian Government has requested
that and is committed to facilitating it. The first OPCW
team is already in Syria; a second team is expected
today or tomorrow.

However, we need to go further. In a letter to the
Council two days ago, I expressed, following the end
of the mandate of the OPCW-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism,

"my deep disappointment that the Security Council
was unable to agree upon a dedicated mechanism
to attribute responsibility for the use of chemical
weapons in Syria".

I want to repeat today that the norms against
chemical weapons must be upheld. As I wrote in the
same letter:

"[e]nsuring accountability for a confirmed use of
chemical weapons is our responsibility, not least to
the victims of such attacks. A lack of accountability
emboldens those who would use such weapons by
providing them with the reassurance of impunity.
This, in turn, further weakens the norm proscribing
the use of chemical weapons and the international
disarmament and non-proliferation architecture as
a whole. I urge all Member States to act responsibly
in these dangerous circumstances;

"I appeal to the Security Council to fulfil its
duties and not to give up on efforts to agree upon
a dedicated, impartial, objective and independent
mechanism for attributing responsibility with
regard to the use of chemical weapons. I stand
ready to support such efforts."

The increasing tensions and the inability to reach a
compromise in the establishment of an accountability
mechanism threaten to lead to a full-blown military
escalation. In my contacts with the members of the
Security Council, particularly the permanent members,
I have reiterated my deep concerns about the risks of
the current impasse and stressed the need to prevent the
situation from spiralling out of control.

That is exactly the risk that we face today - that
things spiral out of control. It is our common duty to
stop it.

