Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We welcome the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2347 (2017) on the protection of
cultural heritage in the event of armed conflicts and we
appreciate the efforts of France and Italy in facilitating
the negotiations on the resolution as co-pen holders.
I also wish to thank the presidency for making all
this possible.

In light of the increasing intentional attacks on
cultural heritage by armed groups and terrorists, the
adoption of this resolution represents a very important
step in addressing a problem, which calls for a far more
strengthened international cooperation. The resolution
indeed has clear added value for it complements existing
international legal instruments in the protection of
cultural heritage.

We express appreciation to all the briefers: Under-
Secretary-General Feltman, Director-General Bokova,
Executive Director Fedotov and Brigadier General
Parrulli for sharing their perspectives on the topic
of our discussion. I want in particular to take this
opportunity to express our appreciation to Director-
General Bokova for the major and critical contribution
she has been making to ensure that UNESCO succeeds
in carrying out its mandate. We are indeed grateful for
this is a historical period when so much is going on to
undermine our common humankind.

UNESCO is the custodian of that shared heritage.
We have all witnessed in recent years armed groups and
terrorists actively engaging in the looting, theft, pillage
and destruction of cultural heritage as a war tactic and
means of terrorizing the civilian population. They have
also been involved in the illicit trade of cultural property
to finance and support their activities and fuel conflict.
International law makes it an obligation to safeguard
and respect cultural heritage in the context of armed
conflict. That includes taking all necessary preventive
measures to protect cultural heritage in peacetime,
refraining from attacking it and prohibiting any form
of its pillage or destruction. It is in that context that the
role of the Security Council could be both important
and relevant. The primary responsibility of the Security
Council in ensuring international peace and security
demands that it not remain indifferent when armed
groups and terrorists target the collective heritage of
humankind that is symbolic of our common humanity.

International law provides special protection for
cultural heritage, as well as civilian property. As such,
States are required to take all the necessary measures

within the framework of their criminal legislation

to prosecute and criminalize individuals, groups or

entities responsible for such crimes. Special care must

be taken in military operations, including by United

Nations peacekeeping missions, to avoid damaging

cultural heritage. The Security Council should further

strengthen its work to ensure compliance with the

obligation on the part of States to prohibit, prevent and

stop to any form of theft, pillage or misappropriation
of cultural property in the context of armed conflict by
armed groups and terrorists. In that regard, the role of
Security Council Committees on counter-terrorism will
be critical. Though they are narrow in scope compared
to the resolution that we have adopted today, ensuring
the full implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions, particularly 2199 (2015), 2253 (2015) and
2322 (2016), will also be significant.

Such efforts could be complemented by initiatives
and cooperation among Member States in various
United Nations forums. For instance, Ethiopia, in
collaboration with other countries, joined an initiative
to bring the issue of cultural heritage to the attention
of the Human Rights Council, which resulted in the
adoption of the action-oriented resolution 33/20, which
we will continue to follow closely. Such efforts could
be further complemented by bilateral, regional and
international cooperation among States, including
in the context of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime, UNESCO, INTERPOL and other relevant
international and regional frameworks. The Council
might also consider mandating United Nations
peacekeeping missions so as to protect cultural heritage
from being attacked by armed groups and terrorists,
based on the experience gleaned from the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali and where such mandates are deemed
necessary and feasible.

Finally, as home to eight cultural World Heritage
Sites, Ethiopia attaches great importance to the
protection and preservation of cultural heritage. We have
indeed been shocked and dismayed by the destruction
of cultural heritage in Syria, Iraq, Afghanistan, Mali
and other parts of the world by armed groups and
terrorists, which is an affront to all humankind. Our
briefers have highlighted that last point in a very vivid
and palpable manner. We therefore earnestly hope that
the resolution that we have unanimously adopted today
will contribute to safeguarding cultural heritage and
countering the illicit trafficking of cultural property in
the context of armed conflict.
It was a great opportunity for us to be able to
co-sponsor resolution 2347 (2017).

