Mr. Bishnoi (India): I would first like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on Chile's assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this month.

The topic for today's debate is an important one.
We have no difficulty with the concept note (S/2015/6, annex) circulated by the presidency when it states that
inclusion and inclusive development are factors relevant
to the preservation of peace and peacebuilding. Indeed,
it has been our consistent position that there can be no
peace without development. No society or nation has
so far managed to achieve peace and stability without
eradicating poverty and providing its people with basic
human development and economic opportunities.

The grievances that often lead to conflict,
whether within or among countries, are driven largely
by a sense of deprivation linked to an absence of
development. Behind almost every conflict in the world
is a background of poverty, hunger and deprivation and
a lack of economic opportunity and social inclusion.
When people do not have the means to shape their own
destiny, when they cannot aspire to a better future for
themselves and their children, they are susceptible to
being caught in a vicious cycle of violence and conflict.
Inclusive economic growth and development, especially
when they make opportunities available to individuals
and communities, are crucial buffers to conflict. Thus,
by focusing on holistic development and addressing
the root causes of instability and conflict, particularly
poverty, exclusion and lack of development, we can
create an environment more favourable to peaceful and
stable societies and, indeed, a more stable international
order.

At the same time, peace and stability within
societies cannot be considered in isolation from their
international context: they are directly connected to,
and affected by, conditions of instability and insecurity
at the international level. As far as the issue of political
inclusion is concerned, it is equally important to
remember the oft-repeated maxim that there is no
one size that fits all. In other words, efforts to ensure
broader political inclusion within national contexts
must reflect national circumstances and realities,
and avoid repeating and reinforcing the existing
paradigm of foisting externally formulated policies and
programmes on countries transitioning out of conflict.
The imperative of political inclusion should not become
an imposition of prescriptions by the Security Council
on affected populations.

A holistic vision of international security based
on the interdependence of the three pillars of the
United Nations system - namely, peace and security,
development and human rights - does not mean ipso
facto that the Security Council should arrogate all those
functions to itself. Security does indeed have a broader
context. However, just because it has many dimensions
does not mean that the Security Council must occupy
all of them. There are separate organs within the United
Nations system tasked with managing those three
pillars. It is synergy and complementarity that should
be our watchwords, not duplication and co-option.
Where issues of inclusive development are concerned,
the Security Council should not encroach on the
mandates of the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council. The fact that there are as many as
79 speakers on the list for today's meeting does not
legitimize bringing the subject to the Security Council.
South Africa, as Chair of the Group of 77, and many
others, including us, will be saying this. In any case,
while the mandate of the Security Council is to act on
behalf of the wider membership, its non-representative
character renders it uniquely lacking in the legitimacy
necessary to counsel States on the merits of political
inclusiveness.

The question therefore is not so much how the
Security Council should embrace the notion of the
interdependence of the three pillars in order to
safeguard international security, but how the United
Nations system as a whole should do so. The system's
development pillar has traditionally been its most
underfunded, and even in cases where the system does
focus on development, it is increasingly distracted from
the central premises of eradicating poverty and hunger
and forging international cooperation to help developing
countries find a path to sustainable development. We
talk of development in the Security Council and then
want the development agenda to focus on peace and
security. Such an approach can lead only to confusion
rather than results.

What is therefore needed is for us to seize the
momentous opportunity provided by the post-2015
development agenda to craft and implement policies
for genuine international collaboration on eradicating
poverty and promoting sustainable development. In his
recent synthesis report, entitled "The road to dignity
by 2030: ending poverty, transforming all lives and
protecting the planet", the Secretary-General puts it
well when he says "The stars are aligned for the world
to take historic action to transform lives and protect
the planet." (A/69/700, para. 25) That would in turn
generate the conditions necessary for the Security
Council to fulfil its mandate of ensuring international
peace and security.

