Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
should like to thank Mr. Robert Serry, the United
Nations Special Coordinator of the Middle East Peace
Process, for his very comprehensive briefing, as well as
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Observer State
of Palestine and the Permanent Representative of Israel
for their respective statements.

Luxembourg fully endorses the statement to be
made by the observer of the European Union.

I will begin with the peace process in the Middle
East, before moving on to Syria.

The situation is troubling. Recent developments in
the Middle East have given rise to great uncertainty.
That is evident in the continuing increase in the number
of settlements, in violation of international law; the
repeated withholding of the transfer of Palestinian
tax revenues; and the proliferation of provocative
statements made by extremists from all sides.

Luxembourg is very concerned about the decisions
taken by the Israeli authorities following the granting
to Palestine by the General Assembly, on 29 November
last, of the status of non-member observer State. Like its
partners in the European Union, Luxembourg is deeply
troubled by Israeli plans to expand settlements in the
West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and particularly
by the projects in the E-l area. We are firmly opposed
to this. Implementing those projects would seriously
undermine the prospects for a negotiated settlement of
the conflict by jeopardizing the chances for a viable,
contiguous Palestinian State, with Jerusalem as the
future capital of two States.

Against that backdrop, tensions have increased
alarmingly in the West Bank. The extremists on both
sides mutually feed off their reciprocal and provocative
acts. What can be said about the situation, except that
such radicalization is a godsend for those seeking to
prevent the dying peace process from reviving? What
can be said about the statements that refuse to grant
Israel the right to security, or even the right to exist,
except that they are a way of preventing peace - as if
after almost 65 years of conflict, against all odds, there
is any kind of hope of resolving the conflict by avoiding
genuine dialogue?

How do we relaunch the peace process? The basis
for ajust and lasting peace in the Middle East has been
laid out many times. We are all familiar with the terms
of that equation. The time has come to take bold and
concrete measures to achieve peace. The negotiations

between the parties must finally be resumed. Only
negotiations will make it possible to deal with the root
causes of the conflict between Israel and Palestine.

Whatever Government is formed after yesterday's
elections in Israel, we hope that Israelis and Palestinians
will act promptly and agree on the modalities for the
immediate resumption of direct talks. On the basis of
such an agreement, and in the context of a credible
framework that is structured around clear parameters
that lays out the basis for negotiations and that is
itself based on a precise timetable, the negotiators can
then agree on new and significant efforts to achieve
peace. For such a resumption of negotiations to occur,
appropriate international support will be necessary, as
will decisive commitment from all key participants,
including the United States.

In the Council, and as a member of the European
Union, Luxembourg will do all it can to provide both
parties with all the support they need to identify and
accept a compromise that, when all is said and done,
will necessarily be painful but necessary. The countries
of the region have a crucial role to play in that respect.

We believe that an important part of the equation
leading to a peaceful settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict will also involve reconciliation between the
Palestinians, under the leadership of President Abbas.
In that context, we welcome the mediation efforts
undertaken by Egypt.

Allow me to add a few words on the subject of
the unprecedented financial crisis that the Palestinian
Authority is experiencing currently. Luxembourg
appeals to Israel to promptly unblock, in keeping with
the Paris Protocol, the transfer of fiscal revenues that
it receives on behalf the Palestinian Authority. On
a bilateral basis, Luxembourg contributes €500,000
annually to the Palestinian Authority. That contribution
is in addition to the significant contributions of the
European Union, to which Luxembourg, as a member
of the European Union, also contributes. The European
Union announced just last week the disbursement of
€60 million to help the Palestinian Authority pay wages
and pensions during the first quarter of 2013. We call on
other donors, in particular the countries of the region,
to show their solidarity. Otherwise, the viability of the
Palestinian Authority and the process of establishing
State infrastructure will be seriously jeopardized.

All the necessary support must also be given to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) for its activities in
the West Bank, the Gaza Strip, Jordan, the Syrian Arab
Republic and Lebanon. According to UNRWA reports,
the 525,000 Palestinian refugees in Syria are among
the minorities most affected by the current conflict
in Syria, with 80 per cent of them are dependent upon
UNRWA for access to basic social services.

I now turn to the situation in Syria. During the
Council's consultations on 18 January 2013, the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Ms. Navanethem
Pillay, and the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Valerie Amos, described
the tragic situation in Syria, where human rights
are trampled and humanitarian distress has reached
unbelievable levels. The figures speak for themselves.
After almost two years of conflict, over 60,000 people
have died in the fighting. Over 4 million people are
directly affected by the crisis and need humanitarian
aid, while the continued hostilities and the current
winter conditions compound the situation further.
Now more than ever, humanitarian access must be
ensured. We hope that Ms. Amos' visit to Syria will
enable progress to be made in this respect, including
with regard to essential assistance from neighbouring
countries.

The international community, for its part, must
do all it can to alleviate the suffering of the affected
populations and to provide support to the neighbouring
countries of Syria - Turkey, Lebanon, Jordan and
Iraq 4 which are generously and selflessly hosting
the displaced Syrian population. The extent of the
crisis is such that substantial financial resources will
be necessary to meet the needs identified in the United
Nations humanitarian aid plan for Syria and the region.
The donor conference to be held on 30 January in Kuwait
City must mobilize those resources. Luxembourg has,
to date, made humanitarian contributions of €2 million
to assist persons impacted by the Syrian crisis and
is planning on announcing a substantial additional
contribution on 30 January.

It is, however, as much a political emergency
as a humanitarian one. In the end, the humanitarian
challenges will only be resolved through a negotiated
political outcome to the crisis. Syria must undertake a
political transition process that meets the aspirations of
all Syrians. That is the only way to restore peace in
Syria and protect the security of the region. Otherwise,
the list of atrocities will, alas, continue to grow.

We reiterate our full support to Mr. Brahimi's
efforts to achieve a political outcome to the conflict as
soon as possible. We must give him all the necessary
support to allow him to make progress along that path.
We owe that to the people of Syria, who are the victims,
above all, of the intransigence of the authorities who
are clinging to power. Luxembourg stands shoulder to
shoulder with the Syrian people in their courageous
fight for freedom, dignity and democracy.

As Ms. Pillay emphasized last week, and as already
stated by the independent international commission of
inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic, human rights
violations are increasingly prevalent in Syria. An
increasing number of such actions could be qualified
as war crimes or crimes against humanity. Those
crimes cannot go unpunished. Those responsible for the
atrocities committed in Syria must be held accountable
for their acts, without distinction of any kind. This
accountability applies first and foremost to the national
authorities.

The international justice system has a
complementary role to play in intervening where there
is a refusal or inability to act at the national level.
Syria clearly has not responded to the appeals of the
international community in that regard. Luxembourg
believes that, in the absence of a credible, fair and
independent system of accountability, the International
Criminal Court (ICC) must be seized of the situation.
Luxembourg therefore supports the Swiss initiative to
send a letter to the President of the Security Council
calling on the Council to refer to the ICC the situation
that has prevailed in Syria since March 2011, without
exception and without distinction as regards the alleged
perpetrators of those crimes (S/2013/19, annex). That
request has been supported by 58 States from every
region of the world. We will remain committed to
ensuring that that appeal for accountability does not go
unheard.

