Mr. Cardi (Italy): At the outset, I would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, for your excellent
leadership during the month of June. It has been a very
busy month and a very productive presidency. We look
forward to China's presidency in July.

We thank the Bolivian presidency for promoting
the adoption of resolution 2365 (2017) under the
very relevant topic of mine action. We think that the
Security Council should underpin and reinforce mine
action as an activity that makes a difference on the
ground, thereby mitigating and eventually eliminating
the threat that mines, explosive remnants of war and
other unexploded ordnance pose to civilians.

Peace without mine action is incomplete peace.
That is a quote from the statement made by Secretary-
General Antonio Guterres on the occasion of the
International Day for Mine Awareness and Assistance
in Mine Action. We agree with that statement and
consider mine action to be a multifaceted activity that
requires a comprehensive approach. The disarmament,
humanitarian and development aspects of mine action
need to be reinforced. Bringing stability to areas of
crisis, providing humanitarian assistance to affected
populations and contributing to the attainment of the
relevant Sustainable Development Goals should all
serve as the central goals of our common effort in mine
action activities. We believe that the text we adopted
today meets most of those requirements.

As Chair of the Mine Action Support Group for
the period 2016-2017 and as an active member of the
Ottawa and Oslo Conventions, Italy is committed
to their full implementation and attaches the utmost
importance to their universalization. Advocacy for the
universalization of the Ottawa and Oslo Conventions
is a key activity in making a difference on the ground.
In that regard, we would have liked to see more ground
covered by the Council in the resolution, including
references to cluster munitions, which are ammunition
that, if they fail to explode on impact, lie silent in the
ground and remain a threat for generations to come.

Lastly, a stronger reference to international
humanitarian law and to humanitarian principles
would have reinforced the document. However, we
are thankful for What emerged, and we commend the
Bolivian presidency for bringing that very important
topic to the Council for the very first time. We also
thank you, Mr. President, for your flexibility, which
enabled the adoption of today's important resolution.

