Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): 1
would like to thank you, Madam President, for convening
this debate, and the Presidents and Prosecutors for
their thorough reports. Spain, of course, would like to
commend the Tribunals, their Presidents, Prosecutors
and all their staff for their work in combating impunity.

I would like to begin with the work of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.
We are pleased to see that it is still committed to
completing its work by December 2017. With regard to
the four cases outstanding, we understand that there are
reasons for the recent delays, particularly the Tribunal's
staffing reductions and the health problems of the
accused. However, we agree with the Prosecutor that as
time goes on, the risk increases that delays in bringing
justice will eventually become a denial of justice. We
urge the Tribunal and its staff to spare no effort to
conclude the four proceedings as quickly as possible.

Concerning the 525er case, we note the recent
decision of the Appeal Chamber, on 30 March, to revoke
the accused's provisional release in view of his conduct,
and we condemn the expression of any revisionist
views that would offend the memory of the victims
and undermine the foundations for reconciliation. With
regard to the appeals proceedings, we welcome the two
judgements handed down in January and April. There
are now three cases outstanding and we once again
urge the Tribunal to minimize delays and expedite their
conclusion. We are worried about the slow pace of the
activities of the national authorities, particularly in the
referrals of mid-level and high-profile cases, and about
the politicization ofthe proceedings. We call for respect
for judicial independence as an essential foundation for
the rule of law, and for intensifying efforts to exercise
true national justice in the wake of conflict.

However, we welcome the progress that has been
made in regional cooperation, including the arrest
of eight people suspected of participating in crimes
related to the genocide in Srebrenica, whose twentieth
anniversary is next month, in July. For the Tribunal to
carry on with its work and complete it successfully, it is
essential that all of us - every State in the international
community as well as international organizations,
including the United Nations and particularly the
Security Council - continue to support it to the
very end. The support of regional organizations is
also vital, especially the European Union, NATO, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and the Council of Europe. Finally, we call on the
Tribunal to continue to transfer its responsibilities to
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals in order to ensure a smooth, problem-free
transition.

Turning to the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda, we are pleased with the information provided
and hope that the conclusion of the work on first-
instance judgements for the last remaining case on
appeal, Nyiramasuhuko et al. (Butare), will continue to
make progress, as it has done in the past few months,
and that it can be concluded by the fourth quarter of this
year, which will make it possible to close the Tribunal's
doors in December.

It is worrying that nine of the accused indicted by
the Tribunal for their participation in the genocide in
Rwanda - three of them senior officials - remain at
large. We call on the Rwandan authorities and those
responsible for the Residual Mechanism to ensure that
they locate them and bring them to justice, whether
before the Mechanism, for the three aforementioned
officials, or before the Rwandan judicial authorities for
the remaining six. We also call for the cooperation of
those States where they may be found.

We commend the staff of the Tribunal and the
Mechanism for the exemplary manner in which the
transfer of the Tribunal's functions is being carried out
and for the information on the progress of the transfer
in every area: administrative, judicial and archival. We
are aware that there continue to be humanitarian issues
for people who have been acquitted by the Tribunal or
who have completed their sentences, and we would like
solutions to be found as soon as possible in order to
enable them to find somewhere to live in safety and
dignity.

Finally, I should like to comment about the
importance of publicizing the work of the Tribunals. As
their work comes to an end, it will be more important than
ever to ensure that their work is adequately publicized
in order to raise people's awareness of such situations,
especially young people, and to help to increase the
effectiveness of the work of other international courts
and tribunals, including the International Criminal
Court (ICC) and national courts, which I am sure can
benefit from the lessons learned and best practices that
both Tribunals have developed over more than two
decades. We cannot underestimate the value of such
experience in raising awareness, among young people,
as well as professionals in other courts and the ICC,
through, for example, the workshops organized by the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda to explain
gender-related crimes and the use of multidisciplinary
expert teams and lessons learned in locating fugitives,
which, along with the work of the current Prosecutor of
the International Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia,
are very valuable and deserve our support.

In conclusion, although we are convinced that
the conclusion of the process will be in everyone's
interest, especially that of the victims and above
all that of justice, we must agree with Judge Meron
that the delays in the completion of the completion
strategy must in no way impede the overall work of the
Tribunals. All those who, in one way or another, have
served the Tribunals should be rightly proud; they have
participated in an admirable, very difficult endeavour
that has finally reached a successful conclusion that
is important for international criminal law and for the
hopes of the victims who merely wish to obtain justice.
That work has contributed in a decisive manner to the
re-establishment ofthe rule of law in Rwanda and in the
States of the former Yugoslavia.

In one month, we shall commemorate the twentieth
anniversary of the Srebrenica massacre - an
appropriate time to remember the victims and to entrench
reconciliation, supported by an understanding of
the facts and the need to hold those responsible
accountable. In 1993 and 1994, the Council adopted
resolutions 827 (1993) and 955 (1994), establishing the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, and
demonstrated the strength of its commitment to the
fight against impunity.

We must recognize that this is not sufficient. New
atrocities are being committed every day in Syria,
Libya, South Sudan and elsewhere in the world. Our
work is therefore far from over. We must reaffirm our
commitment and ensure that those who are responsible
for the most serious violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights receive the clear
and unequivocal message that their acts will not go
unpunished. It is our duty to do this, and it will be the
best tribute that we can pay to victims and to the men
and women who work every day to provide justice in
bodies such as those bodies represented here today.

