Mr. van Walsum (Netherlands): We too would like
to thank Mrs. Ogata for her briefing, which was true to
her style in its directness and precision. My delegation
greatly appreciates Mrs. Ogata's virtual inability to
express herself in the vague terms we so often hear in this
Chamber and her unwillingness to cover unacceptable
situations with the cloak of charity.

We also endorse Mrs. Ogata's right to speak about
purely political issues such as the need to revitalize and
strengthen the Arusha peace process in Burundi, the
frightful repercussions she foresees for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo if the Lusaka Agreement should
not be implemented and the need for the Security Council
to strengthen its support for the Organization of African

 

Unity (OAU) initiative towards the solution of the
Ethiopian-Eritrean conflict. All this corresponds with my
delegation's view on the desirability of an integrated
approach.

As a result of this direct style, Mrs. Ogata's statements
never fail to contain elements that may be less than
pleasant for certain delegations to hear, but the redeeming
factor here is that the spread of her critical comments is
always so global that every delegation gets its turn when
Mrs. Ogata takes the floor. We can only commend her for
this. This is the way it should be, and I believe, Mr.
President, that it corresponds with the format you have in
mind for the open meetings during the American
presidency.

We have listened with great attention to Mrs. Ogata's
comments on the absence of an established mechanism for
the assistance and particularly the protection of the
internally displaced. We are aware of the shift that is taking
place in the ratio of refugees in the classical sense to
internally displaced persons. We are also aware of the
complexity, which was already referred to by Ambassador
Greenstock, of assisting civilians in their own countries
where their own Government may well be the cause of
their predicament. It is clear that this category is bound to
grow in a world where the majority of armed conflicts are
of an internal nature.

Several aspects, such as humanitarian access, which
has been mentioned by several speakers, for which practical
arrangements exist in classical refugee situations, often
require entirely new solutions in a situation involving
internally displaced persons. Another instance of this
phenomenon may be the question of voluntary repatriation.
If I am not mistaken, this is an issue that has also become
more complex due to the shift to which I have just referred.

In the classical refugee situation, the problem was
relatively simple. Voluntary repatriation was always the
best solution, but if there was the slightest flaw in the
voluntary nature of the return, it became the worst solution
and was then called refoulement. We would like to hear
from Mrs. Ogata if we are right in assuming that this issue
has become less straightforward in a situation involving
internally displaced persons.

It is probably not a field where the Security Council
can be of help, apart from calling attention to the problem,
but my question to Mrs. Ogata is whether she feels the
Security Council can contribute to the search for
comprehensive solutions for assisting and protecting all
people who leave their homes fleeing war and
persecution.

The natural and obvious focus of the Security
Council will, of course, continue to be on preventing,
containing and resolving conflicts. Mrs. Ogata correctly
observed that human action cannot substitute for
Governments and the Security Council, which have a
clear responsibility in these fields. In that respect, we
have taken due note of what Mrs. Ogata said about the
need for us to move from issuing statements to taking
action.

