Mr. Ikiara (Kenya): I thank the President for
organizing this important open debate. I also thank
His Excellency Secretary-General Antonio Guterres,
Mr. Peter Mauer, President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, and Mr. Federico Borello,
Executive Director of the Center for Civilians in
Conflict, for their informative briefings earlier. We
take note of the Secretary-General's report on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2019/373)
and the concept note (S/2019/385, annex) that you,
Mr. President, provided to guide this debate, which
marks the seventieth anniversary of the 1949 Geneva
Conventions and the twentieth anniversary of the
Security Council seizing the protection of civilians in
armed conflict as an agenda item.

The Security Council's continued consideration
of this agenda item is an indication of its commitment
to protecting civilians in conflict situations. Civilians
continue to account for most casualties in armed
conflicts today. According to successive reports of the
Secretary-General, it has become a constant problem
in many conflict-affected regions, especially in
Africa, such as the Central African Republic, Mali, the
Democratic Republic of Congo, Somalia, South Sudan
and Yemen, as well as Syria, among others, where
hundreds of thousands of civilians have been uprooted
from their normal daily lives by the effects of conflict.

We must continue to make concrete and specific
efforts to ensure the dignity of those distressed by
war. The protection of civilians in armed conflict is
a humanitarian as well as a human rights issue and
is in conformity with international humanitarian law.
Although there have been some achievements in that area
in the past few years, including increased engagement
by the Council through the adoption of resolutions 1738
(2006), 2175 (2014) and 2286 (2016) and prioritizing the
protection of civilians in peacekeeping mandates, much
remains to be done.

My delegation notes with concern that today's
conflicts are increasingly non-conventional and are
characterized by armed insurgencies where civilians are
used by armed groups and terrorist organizations both
as human shields and as potential recruits as fighters,
including child soldiers. The protection of civilians
is put at risk, as national and international responses
require anti-insurgent and counter-terrorist measures
that are in strict conformity to obligations under
international humanitarian law. That is a challenge that
we believe all Member States need to address boldly
and sustainably.

I would like to address a few areas that are of
concern to my delegation. They include the issue of
gender-based violence and sexual exploitation and
abuse by peacekeepers, a lack of clarity of mandates
of peacekeeping missions and their scope, the absence
of common applicable doctrine, resource gaps and
difficulties in the integration of the diverse set of
military, police and civilian actors required for effective
protection of civilians. All such factors affect the overall
capability of missions to effectively protect civilians.

Historically, gender-based violence has been used
as a calculated tactic of war. Extremism and terrorism
are prominent features of conflict situations often
posing new forms ofthreats to women's rights and lives.
Women who are, or are assumed to be, family members
of fighters are often targeted by security actors and
experience harassment within their communities,
affecting their ability to live freely. In areas where
civilians affected by conflict receive aid and other
humanitarian support, women and girls have been
forced to provide sexual favours and bribes in order to
receive their portion of support. In many cases, women
have been faced with the impossible choice of either
putting themselves at risk of violence or saving their
husbands, brothers and sons, who, as men, are often
targeted to be killed or kidnapped.

Kenya condemns sexual exploitation and abuse by
those entrusted to protect civilians. We need to prevent
and combat those violations of women's and girls'
fundamental human rights. As a troop-contributing
country, we are committed to the implementation of
resolution 2272 (2016), which seeks to hold accountable
troop-contributing countries that fail to credibly deal
with allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse. Kenya
is already implementing the resolution by strengthening
sexual exploitation and abuse predeployment training.

Kenya fully endorses the Vancouver communique,
which specifies that United Nations peacekeeping
missions must have clear and achievable mandates,
as well as the resources and capability to carry them
out. Peacekeepers have been faced with more complex
environments with ever-increasing security risks and
peacekeeper casualties are more now than they have
ever been before.

The Security Council's mandates must be explicit,
practical and with an unambiguous focus, taking full
note of the fundamental tasks of the peacekeepers
and the situation on the ground. Troop-contributing
countries must be involved in the deliberations on those
mandates as they are developed and adjusted for their
on-the-ground expertise and point of view.

Accordingly, commanders tasked to execute such
mandates should be allowed the necessary latitude
devoid of unrealistic caveats. That is the only way
to ensure effective country-specific strategies in
peacekeeping. We must ensure that all components
receive the proper training, skills and equipment
to be able to protect civilians as well as themselves
and to deliver on such mandates in accordance with
applicable law.

In conclusion, Kenya fully affirms its commitment
to enhancing its performance with regard to the
protection of civilians and encourages all Member
States to do the same by supporting the Kigali
Principles on the Protection of Civilians, which seek
to assist peacekeepers in effectively implementing
their protection of civilian mandates. Their full
implementation would make peacekeeping missions
more effective, improve civilian security and save lives.

