Mr. Burleigh (United States of America): It is an
honour, Sir, to have you preside over our meeting today,
and I thank you for doing so. I also wish to thank the
Deputy Secretary-General for her opening statement.

The past few years of United Nations peacekeeping
have repeatedly reminded us of the brutal and complex
nature of today's conflicts. Internal struggles are often
coupled with a profusion of legal and illegal arms, thus
fuelling ever-greater levels of violence. In the event that a
peace agreement is reached between warring factions, the
Security Council can and must take active steps to help
stem further violence.

For this reason, we applaud the efforts of Malaysia, as
President of the Council, to highlight the important role that
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of former
combatants play in the prevention of further violence and
the reconstruction of civil society.

The political will of the parties in conflict to abide by
a peace agreement and disarm cannot be overemphasized.
Without such will, there is little the United Nations can
effectively do. Angola is but one glaring and unfortunate
example of a potential success that has turned into failure.
Despite the United Nations having successfully disarmed
and demobilized more than 50,000 ex-combatants of the
Uniao Nacional para a Independencia Total de Angola
(UNITA), their hard fought gains were quickly lost due to
a lack of commitment by UNITA to abide by the peace
accords.

In Sierra Leone, the United States is encouraged by
the peace agreement that was signed yesterday in Lome.
Securing lasting peace in that war-tom country, however,
will not be easy. The Department of Peacekeeping
Operations anticipates, I believe, that more than 33,000
combatants will have to be disarmed and reintegrated into
Sierra Leonean society before peace can be assured. This
is a formidable task.

In order to succeed in our future endeavours, we
must learn from past experiences and seek innovative
ways to make disarmament and demobilization more
effective. To this end, we are encouraged by the excellent
work of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
Lessons Learned Unit which is planning to finalize a
report on disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
later this year.

Similarly, the United States is encouraged by the
work of the Department for Disarmament Affairs, which
held a workshop in Guatemala City in November 1998 on
weapons collection and the integration of former
combatants into civil society - the experiences of
Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua and
Colombia. All of these efforts, along with the recent
United Nations Disarmament Commission's working
paper on practical disarmament, will significantly add to
the international community's understanding of this
important topic.

One creative and innovative idea in the area of
disarmament of small arms and light weapons came from
a trip last year by Under-Secretary-General Dhanapala -
who I am happy to see with us today - when he visited
Albania, where the Secretariat helped develop an idea to
empower local Albanian leaders to collect and exchange
arms for local community civil construction projects. In
the past, cash-for-arrns programmes have done little to
help improve local economies or keep arms from
ex-combatants. This new approach of trading local
infrastructure for arms may offer an alternative to
previous efforts in the field of disarmament.

Despite the success of these new initiatives, it is not
sufficient merely to collect arms. The international
community must also take steps to control the flow of
legal and illicit arms to areas of conflict. All of our
nations which sell small arms and light weapons, or
which are involved in the traffic flow of these weapons,
bear responsibility for turning a blind eye to the
destruction they cause. We should act together now to
curb arms transfers to zones of conflict.

 

To this end I would like to highlight some of the ideas
Secretary of State Madeleine Albright advanced during the
United Nations ministerial meeting on Africa last year, as
well as arms-control initiatives the United States has
undertaken at the international and national levels. Secretary
Albright has proposed pursuit of a global convention based
on the path-breaking Organization of American States
convention against illicit trafficking. We should conclude
negotiations on the global convention as soon as possible.
The United States also supports the United Nations Crime
Commission's work on illicit arms trafficking, as well as
the European Union's Code of Conduct on Arms Transfers.
We will seek to ensure better coordination with the
European Union in our respective arms-transfers policies.
On the national level the United States has enacted
legislation tightening gun-brokering by companies involved
in international arms transfers.

My delegation would like to draw a distinction
between disarmament and demobilization, which we
generally view to be under the purview of the Security
Council, and reintegration, which we generally view to be
a post-conflict peace-building, or development, activity. The
reintegration of former combatants into their societies falls
into a grey area between the two areas of international
assistance: relief and development. In order for combatants
to be successfully reintegrated, they must be able to find
work in other areas of their country's economy. To this
end, the United States is pleased to see that the
humanitarian segment of the Economic and Social Council
in Geneva, which will begin in a few days, will be taking
up the subject of international cooperation and coordination
in the response to humanitarian emergencies, particularly
the transition from relief to rehabilitation, reconstruction
and development.

The fact that two major organs of the United
Nations - the Security Council and the Economic and
Social Council - are looking into this matter is an
indication of the importance that demobilization and
reintegration of soldiers has on civil society in countries
racked by internal conflict. It is also a reflection and
recognition of the complexity of the challenge faced in such
an effort, whether in Central America, in Africa or in
Kosovo.

Finally, the existence of child soldiers is an
unfortunate reality in many of today's conflicts. Such
children are subjected to horrors that often have a
brutalizing effect on young, fragile psyches. Not only must
children be given productive activities to prevent them from
turning to violence, but they must be taught that there is
another way of life besides that of guns, destruction and
mayhem.

In my previous assignment I was able, in Sri Lanka,
to observe at first hand the complex challenge and
difficulty involved in stopping the use of child soldiers
once such a practice has begun. In that context especially,
the work of the Secretary-General's Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflicts should
be supported and commended.
We look forward to the statements of non-members
of the Council, especially those who have had experience
in taking practical and effective steps to implement and to
sustain, in the context of their own societies and their
own histories, the theoretical concepts we are discussing
today. And again, I would like to thank you, Sir, and your
delegation for holding an open debate on this most
important topic. And thank you again for your presence
here today.

