Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): In recent years United Nations peace-keeping
operations have made great efforts and achieved positive
results in promoting the peaceful settlement of conflicts
under different mandates of the Security Council. However,
they are also confronted with many grave challenges,
among which is the arduous task of demining in the
theatres of operation of United Nations peace-keeping
personnel. We therefore welcome the open debate on this
question by the Council today and believe that it will
contribute to more effective demining in the context of
United Nations peace-keeping operations.

One of the important factors contributing to the
success or failure of United Nations peace-keeping
operations is whether or not the parties concerned can
cooperate closely with the United Nations and ensure the
safety and freedom of movement of United Nations peace-
keeping personnel.

From the hinterland of Bosnia and Herzegovina to the
Inguri River of Georgia, from the rugged mountain paths of
Angola to the Djeletovci oil field in Eastern Slavonia in
Croatia, large numbers of mines have not only severely
hampered United Nations peace-keeping operations, but
also posed a serious threat to the safety of United Nations
peace-keeping personnel and the local people, as well as to
economic reconstruction in these areas. This situation has
already drawn widespread attention from the international
community, and demining has become an important
component of many peace-keeping operations.

Demining is a time-consuming undertaking that calls,
first, for close cooperation by the parties concerned, as well
as for adequate expertise and funds. The international
community and Member States should therefore provide the
necessary human, financial and material support for
demining in the context of United Nations peace-keeping
operations. At the same time, training for local demining
personnel should be accelerated. We hope that, with the
joint efforts of the international community and the close
cooperation of the parties concerned, demining will be
accomplished as successfully as other aspects of the
mandates of United Nations peace-keeping operations.

We also wish to point out that the discussion we are
having today deals only with demining in the context of
peace-keeping operations. Other issues relating to land-
mines fall in the category of disarmament and should
therefore be discussed and considered by other United
Nations bodies.

