Mr. Granovsky (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We associate ourselves with the warm words
expressed to you, Mr. President, by previous speakers.
It is a great honour for us that at today's exceptionally
important meeting of the Security Council the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Bangladesh is presiding over our
work. Bangladesh is a State which is friendly with
Russia, and which plays an important role in the efforts
of the United Nations in maintaining international
peace and security. We also express gratitude to the
Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Louise Frechette, for
having introduced the report of the Secretary-General
and for her important comments.

Our meeting has ushered in an important
discussion which will take place in the United Nations
about the report of the Secretary-General on the
prevention of armed conflict. We are very grateful to
him for having prepared this important document,
which sets forth a well-considered strategy for an
approach which should be followed by the principal
international organization in the search for answers to
the many and varied challenges of our day.

Russia agrees with the main thrust of the report
and supports most of its recommendations.
Furthermore, we believe that the Secretary-General has
drawn important conclusions which should be the basis
of the overall approach to settling crises, including
humanitarian ones. We refer primarily to the
conclusions about the key role of the United Nations in
strengthening national capacities for reacting to crises
and about the need for the consent and support of each
interested government and its internal political actors
with regard to efforts to prevent conflicts, and also
with regard to the desirability of political will being
demonstrated by neighbouring States, regional actors
and other countries.

Before setting specific considerations on the
substance of the recommendations of the report, I
should like to make it clear that we deem it advisable
to confine ourselves now simply to those issues which
relate directly to the Security Council. As you know,
the President of the General Assembly has planned to
hold a general discussion on the 12th and 13th of July,
at which time our delegation will speak on the
remaining aspects of this problem.

We support the proposal of the Secretary-General
about the search for new forms of interaction between
the Security Council and the General Assembly in the
interests of a more effective, more timely ability to
prevent armed conflicts. We believe that periodic
formal meetings of the Security Council, at which there
could be a frank exchange of views about hot spots and
the situation around them, is one such channel for a
useful and, we hope, productive dialogue on this
question.

We also support the ideas of the Secretary-
General with respect to his preparation of periodic
reports on situations in so-called areas at risk. We
believe that this initiative is exceptionally important.
Russia also agrees with the Secretary-General's
approach with regard to the dispatch by the Security
Council of fact-finding missions. We are convinced
that these missions have already and repeatedly proven
their necessity and played an important role in the
search for necessary solutions.

At the same time, we have some doubts about the
advisability of creating certain subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council to discuss conflict prevention. We see
no need to institutionalize our discussions.
In conclusion, I would express the hope that the
discussion in various United Nations formats of the
Secretary-General's comprehensive report will truly
help to enhance the effectiveness of the international
community's work in the prevention of armed conflicts.

