Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): We listened very attentively to the briefing by
Mr. Ibrahim Gambari, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, on the longest-running conflict on the
United Nations agenda: the Israeli-Arab conflict, which
is as old as this international Organization. We also
listened carefully to the statements made by our
colleagues, the representatives of States members and
non-members of the Security Council, who were
unanimous in emphasizing the central importance of
establishing a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in
the Middle East region on the basis of resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973) and the principle of land for
peace. They were also unanimous in stating that the
Palestinian question is the core of the Israeli-Arab
conflict, not one of its details, as the Israeli
representative tried in vain to suggest.

We are gravely concerned that the issue of the
Israeli occupation of Arab territories continues to be on
the United Nations agenda month after month and year
after year without the implementation of the
resolutions of international legitimacy aimed at putting
an end to that blood-drenched occupation, which has
continued for decades. That makes the United Nations,
including the Security Council, responsible and
accountable in the eyes of the peoples of peace-loving
States, who find it difficult to understand the total lack
of recourse to the effective mechanisms of the Charter
and the inability to fully implement the will of the
international community as represented in resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973), adopted 39 and 33 years
ago, respectively. In fact, those resolutions have not
been implemented on the ground because of a super-
Power's blind support for the continued Israeli
occupation and aggression. As all members are aware,
that support is expressed in the United States
delegation's use of the right of veto 43 times in the
Security Council to protect Israel in its refusal to
shoulder its responsibility to implement resolutions of
international legitimacy.
In the unanimous view of the international
community, Israel's continued occupation of Lebanese,
Syrian and Palestinian territories is the real reason for
the instability, lack of peace and escalating tensions in
our region. The suffering of our peoples caused by the
continued Israeli occupation and by a super-Power's
support for that occupation - including providing it
with the most sophisticated means of military
murder - has become intolerable.

World public opinion has become aware of the
magnitude of the Israeli State terrorism that for
decades has targeted the Lebanese and the Palestinians.
World public opinion has also become aware of a
strenuous efforts made by a super-Power's politicians
to obstruct the adoption of a draft resolution that would
have achieved a ceasefire early in the Israeli aggression
against Lebanon, and of the fact that, prior to that, the
Permanent Mission of that State exercised the right of
veto against a draft resolution condemning the Israeli
aggression against the Gaza Strip.

The Israeli-Arab conflict, which is an issue that
threatens international peace and security, goes to the
heart of the responsibilities of the Security Council.
Israel's aggression against the peoples of the region
and its occupation of our territories in Palestine, Syria
and Lebanon cannot be concealed by the Israeli
representative's efforts to transform that aggression
and occupation into a 19505 Hollywood epic. Within
the past two months, the Human Rights Council in
Geneva, by an overwhelming majority, adopted two
resolutions condemning the human rights violations
committed by Israel, the occupying Power, in Palestine
and Lebanon. The Human Rights Council adopted
those resolutions in the first two special sessions it has
held since its inception.

The report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006)
(S/2006/670), which comprises 65 paragraphs in 13
pages, mentions my country only twice, and then in
positive contexts: first, when the Secretary-General
states that 107,000 Lebanese displaced persons who
sought refuge in Syria because of the recent Israeli
aggression have returned to Lebanon; and secondly,
when he refers to the assistance provided by Syrian
authorities to Lebanese refugees in Syria. However, the
Secretary-General's report mentions Israel by name
dozens of times and indicates that it has violated
resolution 1701 (2006), which the Security Council
adopted only a few days ago. Indeed, the Secretary-
General points out that Israel violated resolution 1701
(2006) several times only hours after its adoption.

The fact that the United Nations has adopted
more than 1,000 resolutions condemning Israel by
name and calling on it to put an end to its occupation
of Arab territories in Syria, Palestine and Lebanon; to
halt the building of its illegal settlements on Arab
territories; to put an end to the continued Judaization of
Arab Jerusalem, the burial of nuclear wastes in the
occupied Syrian Golan and its continued disregard for
the July 2004 advisory opinion of International Court
of Justice and for General Assembly resolution
ES-10/15 regarding the building of the separation wall
in the occupied Palestinian territory: all of that shows
that Israel and its politicians are demons of
international terrorism and hotbeds of falsehood and
hypocrisy.

In that regard, it will suffice to state that, as
everyone knows, the terrorism committed in 1996 by
Israel in the first Qana massacre claimed the lives of
104 Lebanese civilians who had taken refuge in the
headquarters of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL). That act of Israeli terrorism
permanently disabled 25 Lebanese children. However,
Israeli terrorism did not end there. In the second Qana
massacre, earlier this month, Israeli terrorism was
responsible for the deaths of those 25 handicapped
children. Is that terrorism not demonic?

Those who provide the requisite support for
Israeli terrorism - including absolute support for
colonial settlement, occupation, aggression, the
construction of the wall, the abduction of the members
of a Palestinian Government elected through Western
democratic standards and the arrest of the Speaker of
the Palestinian parliament to try him before an
occupying authority without legitimacy - bear the
brunt of responsibility for the escalation and tension in
our region. Our people, along with peace-loving people
throughout the world, will not permit the
transformation of our suffering and pain resulting from
Israel's occupation, aggression and terrorism to
become Hollywood spectacle from time to time.
Although our option to choose peace is a strategic one,
if it does not produce results, resistance will be the
alternate option, as President Bashar al-Assad recently
announced.

The peoples of our countries are not responsible
for the failure of the policies of certain States that
consider themselves "super" in our region. We are
surprised at the insistence of the capitals of those
States on antagonizing our peoples and our peace-
loving and open cultures. Fascism, Nazism, apartheid,
Zionism and colonialism are neither Arab nor Islamic
products. We as Arabs and as Muslims have
participated in the writing of the most beautiful pages
of human civilization. We have even invented some of
the most important means for developing this
civilization, in the service of all of humankind.
Therefore, in our history we have never known the
blind hatred exercised by some against our peoples and
cultures. We regret that, for such hatred only serves to
deepen conflict between peoples, rather than to
promote dialogue and cooperation.

Israel's building and deploying of eight nuclear
reactors - which produce plutonium for the
manufacture of nuclear weapons - in an area no larger
than 20,000 square kilometres is a terrorist act that the
Council must address decisively and promptly. Certain
major Powers have been breaching their international
non-proliferation obligations for decades by providing
Israel with nuclear reactors, heavy water, scientists and
nuclear technology. Those Powers should ask
themselves about their reckless and irresponsible
policies, and oblige Israel to adhere to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and place its
nuclear facilities under international supervision, with
a view to putting an end to Israel's policy of nuclear
terrorism in the region.

At their recent conference in Cairo, Arab foreign
ministers emphasized the central role of the United
Nations in finding a just, comprehensive and lasting
solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict, in accordance with
the terms of reference of the peace process and the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council, especially
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), and the
principle of land for peace. The Arab foreign ministers
also decided to call upon the Security Council to meet
at the ministerial level in September 2006 to consider a
settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict by the Security
Council. They did so based on their belief in the need
for the Council to assume the responsibilities entrusted
to it vis-a-vis the protection and maintenance of
international peace and security.

The Arab-Israeli conflict did not begin two
months ago with the capture of an Israeli soldier in
Gaza and two other soldiers in south Lebanon. It began
decades ago and is, alas, as old as this international
Organization. It is futile for the representative of Israel,
or others, to obfuscate that point. The Arab-Israeli
conflict began before Hamas assumed power through
democratic elections in Palestine. The Arab-Israeli
conflict began before the emergence of Hizbollah in
Lebanon as a force resisting Israeli occupation, which
has continued on Lebanese territory for 25 years
despite the fact that the Council adopted resolution 425
(1978) in 1978.

Why has Israel failed for decades to accept the
Arab hand extended to it in peace? What we know in
that regard is that every time the Arabs have extended a
hand in peace to Israel, the Israeli response has been
negative, violent and terroristic. As we know, in the
wake of the first Arab peace initiative, in Fez, in 1982,
the Israeli response was to send Sharon to attack
Lebanon and occupy Beirut. When the Arabs once
again extended their hand in peace, in 1996, the result
was that Israel once again attacked Lebanon and
occupied parts of it. When at the Beirut summit in
2002 Arabs again launched a peace initiative, Israel's
response, which came while Arab leaders were still in
Beirut, was to carry out the Jenin and Nablus
massacres.

Those have been Israel's responses to Arab peace
initiatives. That is why we call upon the Council to
address the Arab-Israeli conflict decisively and
seriously at its upcoming meeting in September, when
Arab ministers will be here to discuss the issue with
the members of the Council to find a solution in
accordance with binding international resolutions.

