Ms. Millicay (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to state that my delegation
supported this being an open debate because the
subject merits this, in particular given the twentieth
anniversary of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), and also because my
country is working constructively towards enhancing
and ensuring the transparency and openness of the
Council Vis-a-vis the broader membership. I would like
to thank Presidents Meron and Joensen and Prosecutors
J allow and Brammertz for their presence in the Council
and welcome the presentation of the reports of both
Tribunals, including that on the activities of the Residual
Mechanism (S/2013/308, S/2013/309, S/2013/310).

Argentina welcomes the progress reported for the
ICTY, in particular given that since the November 2012
report (S/2012/847) the Tribunal has finalized five
trials, two of which were concluded after the formal
presentation of the report of the Tribunal on 23 May,
and only four trials are still pending. My country
acknowledges the efforts of the Tribunal to comply with
deadlines and time projections in a situation involving
staff reduction, including for translation services. I
would also like to recognize progress made in regard
to appeals.

Regarding the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR), we would also like to express our
satisfaction at the progress made towards a mechanism
for the expedited election of an additional appealsjudge,
in keeping with Judge Meron's request. Argentina
supports the Council putting that Mechanism into
practice immediately.

We also welcome the information regarding
compliance by the ICTR with the deadlines and time
projections for trials and appeals, and the fact that the
transition to the Residual Mechanism continues to
accord with such projections, including the handover
of archives by the end of 2014. I would also like
to underscore the importance of the Ngirabatware
appeal, the first appeals case that will be resolved by
the Mechanism. Finally, I would like to highlight the
importance of arresting those individuals still at large.
We recall that resolution 955 (1994) of the Security
Council establishes the obligation of all States to fully
cooperate with the Tribunal.

As regards the Residual Mechanism, Argentina
recognizes the progress made towards its being fully
functional and the fact that the Arusha branch has
been operational since July 2012. We are also pleased
by the opening on 1 July of the Hague branch, which
will assume the same responsibilities with regard to
the ICTY as those already undertaken by the Arusha
branch with regard to the ICTR.

Argentina would like to commend the work of
the Mechanism in monitoring cases referred by the
Tribunal to Rwandan national courts. We also welcome
the attention given to the normative continuity between
the Tribunals and the Mechanism, which is necessary
to ensure due process at this transitional stage.

Resolution 827 (1993) marked a milestone, because
50 years after Nuremberg, it shows that impunity for the
most serious crimes is unacceptable. On this twentieth
anniversary of the ICTY, it is pertinent that the
international community recognize the progress made
by the ICTR and the ICTR in fighting impunity and
its important doctrinal contributions to international
law, in particular international humanitarian law. It
is also relevant to recognize the role and importance
of international criminal justice. The legacy of both
ad hoc Tribunals regarding the reaffirmation of the
international community's awareness that no sustainable
peace can emerge without justice is undeniable. That
legacy was consolidated in a definitive manner with the
establishment of a permanent international tribunal,
the International Criminal Court, that today is central
to the international criminal justice system of the
international community.
It is not de jure or de facto amnesties that provide
relief to victims of atrocities, but, rather, it is when
justice is seen to be done through impartial and
independent courts. Argentina reiterates its support for
the work of the ICTR and the ICTY and pays tribute, on
this twentieth anniversary of the ICTY, to both of them
for their significant contribution to the fight against
impunity.

