Mr. Ouedraogo (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
During this month of April 2000, Canada is presiding over
the Security Council. You, Mr. Minister, have taken the
opportunity to give the international community a month
devoted to the subject of human security. The end of April
will find you in Accra, Ghana, for the conference on
children affected by war. This programme eloquently
reflects your concern, Sir, and that of Canada, to promote
human security.

Burkina Faso is gratified by your presence, Sir, and by
your commitment, and we welcome the good relations
between our two countries. We would also like to reaffirm
that we hold all the States members of the Security Council
and their representatives in high esteem.

I pay tribute to Ambassador Fowler, who is presiding
over the Security Council this month. Allow me also to pay
tribute to Ambassador Chowdhury of Bangladesh for the
effective and professional way in which he presided over
the Council during the month of March.

Today, the Security Council is continuing its
consideration of the situation in Angola. I should like to
take this opportunity to welcome the presence here today
of the Minister for External Relations of Angola.

The agony and torment of the Angolan people has
lasted for more than 25 years. From the struggle for
decolonization and the intrigues of the cold war to the
current struggle for power, there has been no respite for
our Angolan brothers. They have experienced heroism,
extreme weariness and every form of suffering and pain,
both physical and mental.

Given these conditions, the Security Council's
involvement in the search for peace in Angola is urgently
required. The creation of a Panel of Experts entrusted
with the task of examining the violation of sanctions
imposed by the Security Council against UNITA is part
of that requirement.

The Government of Burkina Faso thus understands
the situation and offers its support. That is why our
current aim is not to demolish or downgrade the report,
but merely to highlight its weaknesses and shortcomings
in order to better serve the cause of peace through a
rigorous, impartial, transparent, reliable, fair and just
investigation.

In our statement to the Security Council on 15
March 2000, we made our position clear. We do not,
therefore, intend today to reopen the debate on the report
of the Panel of Experts; rather, we wish to reaffirm that
Burkina Faso, in support of the measures decided on by
the Security Council against UNITA, repudiates and
rejects the conclusions in the report of the Panel of
Experts that named the President of Burkina Faso as well
as those implicating Burkina Faso in violations of the
sanctions imposed against UNITA.

Furthermore, we intend to bring before the members
of the Council and the international community the fact
that, in a spirit of straightforward cooperation with the
United Nations on this specific matter, my Government
decided to set up, on 22 March 2000, a inter-ministerial
committee entrusted with the task of following up the
implementation of sanctions against UNITA. The
committee is composed of representatives from the
Departments of Foreign Affairs, Defence, Territorial

 

Administration, Security, Economic and Financial Affairs,
Trade, Transport and Tourism, Justice and Communication.

The committee's mission is clear: it must see to the
strict implementation of the sanctions, and in particular
ensure that all necessary measures are taken by the
ministerial departments concerned, and it must carry out a
periodic evaluation of the implementation of the measures
adopted.

Within the framework of its mandate and its mission,
that committee will remain in contact with the United
Nations sanctions Committee. It will also be responsible for
carrying out investigations at the national level to determine
the validity of the evidence provided by the sanctions
Committee. If necessary, it will submit reports to the
Government of Burkina Faso and to the United Nations
sanctions Committee.

My Government has also issued instructions to the
security service to take appropriate measures to strengthen
existing provisions, particularly those prohibiting the entry
into the territory of Burkina Faso of any person targeted by
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council relating to
sanctions against UNITA. The committee has already begun
work and has prepared a memorandum that will be
presented to the Angola sanctions Committee tomorrow.
All of these decisions reflect the determination of the
Government of Burkina Faso to demonstrate once again its
firm resolve to support unreservedly the efforts being made
by the Organization of African Unity, the United Nations
and the international community to effectively implement
the Lusaka Protocol and the relevant Security Council
resolutions on Angola.

The Council will shortly adopt a draft resolution on
the subject under consideration. My delegation is in favour
of the Council's proposal to create a monitoring body to
pursue investigations and to look into allegations of
sanctions busting in Angola, provided, of course, that the
Panel of Experts works in an atmosphere of transparency
and fairness. Given those conditions, my country would be
prepared to cooperate with that body, because the
Government of Burkina Faso remains open to any honest,
transparent and objective initiative aimed at restoring peace
in Angola.

The way to a solution is not always clear, neither to
the protagonists nor to the observers. Allow me to say,
humbly but firmly, without indulging in hypocrisy or
subterfuge, that it is the conviction of the Government of
Burkina Faso today, as in the past, that only a political
solution can bring about a durable peace in Angola. The
Government of Burkina Faso invites the Security Council
to keep this reality constantly in mind and reaffirms its
full support to the Council in this connection.

