Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): Let me join others in
welcoming President Silva to the Council and thanking
him for his statement. The Nigerian delegation is
grateful to Portugal for bringing us together to address
an important and integral component of our common
efforts to maintain international peace and security.
Increasingly, the effectiveness of the United Nations,
and of the Security Council in particular, is measured
against its ability to protect civilians. We thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, High Commissioner
for Human Rights Navanethem Pillay, Assistant-
Secretary-General Catherine Bragg and Mr. Philip
Spoerri of the International Committee of the Red
Cross for their insightful statements, which have
broadened our understanding of the achievements and
the continued challenges we face in our collective
efforts to protect civilians.

In the last 10 months, the ability of the Council to
adequately protect civilians in conflict situations has
been severely tested over and over again. The
Council's scorecard shows mixed results. Through
carefully calibrated interventions in Cote d'Ivoire and
Libya, full-scale civil wars have been averted, relative
stability restored and many lives saved. However, for
civilians in the Democratic Republic of Congo, Gaza,
Syria and Western Sahara - to name but a few
situations - whose lives have been overturned by
conflict, our response has been small.

In such circumstances, we welcome the
invaluable preventive diplomacy efforts of actors such
as the Department of Political Affairs, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and other interlocutors, who have
unquestionably provided alternative routes to conflict
resolution. Our valiant peacekeepers, who act as
beacons for peace, have also played an important role
in civilian protection. Those remarkable efforts in the
field can be buttressed by a renewed commitment on
the part of the Security Council to ensuring
accountability for violations of humanitarian law.

We focus on the accountability issue because we
in Nigeria have witnessed at first hand what can be lost
when wrongs go undetected and unpunished. Nothing
spreads fear like impunity. Where there is an
accountability mechanism gap, there can be no
recourse for the father whose crop has been razed to
the ground, for the grandmother whose compound has
been destroyed, or for the child whose school has been
occupied by rebel forces. Worse still, where there is
impunity the physical integrity of civilians is no longer
inviolable. The lesson we draw from such situations is
that systematic monitoring of and reporting on the
situation of conflict-affected civilians, in accordance
with resolution 1894 (2009), is still necessary in
numerous conflict and post-conflict situations on the
Council's agenda.

In the last open debate on this subject, in May of
this year (see S/PV.653I), we observed that unless a
coordinated, comprehensive approach, implemented
system-wide, is adopted, our understanding of threats
to civilians will remain unclear, and civilians will
continue to suffer. Resolution 1998 (2011) on children
and armed conflict presents an opportunity for us to
make good on our pledge to develop and apply listing
criteria that target parties to armed conflicts who
violate international law. Monitoring in that way will
not only help all stakeholders to understand the
dangers that civilians face, such as the use of
explosives and heavy weaponry in populated areas, and
sexual violence as a weapon of war; it will also help us
better target our investigative resources.

We can also assist national authorities in the area
of accountability. Through security sector reform
efforts in Guinea, the Government is progressively
creating a security environment in which disciplinary
measures and human rights standards are upheld. Our
role in such contexts is to empower Governments to
take the lead in demonstrating genuine accountability
to civilians. Not only do these acts have a deterrent

effect on other potential wrongdoers, thereby
protecting civilians, they can also restore a nation's
faith in its leadership. Effective accountability
mechanisms can create space for examining the root
causes of conflict, leading to long-term solutions. The
role of the Human Rights Council's Commission of
Inquiry on Libya should not be understated. The
Commission's work was central to decisions taken here
in the Council, leading ultimately to the emergence of
a new, free Libya.

Even so, our credibility depends on our
commitment to applying the principles of
accountability consistently and with all due vigilance.
No argument in favour of standing by while civilians
are attacked can be sustained. Indeed, we are facing
numerous delicate situations where levels of violence
risk tipping into civil war, and we are duty-bound to
speak out. We must recognize that material challenges
remain in Southern Kordofan and the Blue Nile, as
well as in Syria. We take this opportunity to encourage
the Government of Syria to abide by the peace plan
proposed by the Arab League. Once swords are
sheathed, genuine dialogue for peace can begin.

In championing the protection of civilians, we
deliver a message of hope and a signal of the strength
of our collective will. It is within our capabilities to
shield the vulnerable from the ravages of conflict and
other breaches of peace and security. If we continue to
act in concert, over time, our responsibility to protect
will surely be met.

