Mr. Baja (Philippines): We wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting on the
question concerning Haiti, with the added impact of the
presence of the Secretary-General.

Yesterday we had a briefing from the Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs about the grim
situation on the ground in Haiti. This afternoon, the
Foreign Ministers of Jamaica and Bahamas and the
Permanent Representative of Haiti had an even more
grim and bleak picture of the situation.

The urgent priority now is to restore order on the
ground, avoid further loss of life and property, pre-
empt further human rights abuses and allow safe
delivery of humanitarian assistance. That has been
strongly advocated by the Foreign Ministers of Jamaica
and Bahamas. There is no military force in Haiti, and
the civilian police are incapable of doing all that.
Therefore, there is an urgent need for an international
civilian police presence to do the job. We are aware
that there are calls from powerful nations and large
organizations - also from nations not so powerful, and
organizations not so large - for rebels to cease and
desist from further violence. But such calls, no matter
in how strong a voice, must be accompanied by strong
action on the ground. Otherwise, they may remain
hollow and empty and go unheeded.

We are also aware that there are ongoing
diplomatic and political initiatives to secure a peaceful
solution to the crisis. But those laudable initiatives will
have a greater chance of success only when the guns
are silent. By their pronouncements both sides have
hardened their positions and are on a collision course.
Given the volatility of the situation in Haiti, if an
international force in support of a political settlement is
envisaged, it must be done now, before the situation
further deteriorates, before a blood bath occurs.
Time is of the essence, and we must bite the
bullet now. We therefore see merit in the statement of
the Foreign Minister of France, circulated as a Security
Council document, which calls for, inter alia, the
immediate establishment of a civilian peacekeeping
force under a mandate mentioned therein. A number of
countries have said that they may be ready to
contribute to that force. There are also a number of
countries that have sent troops to Haiti to protect their
citizens. We could thus readily have a new coalition of
the willing to arrest continued violence and the
breakdown of law and order in Haiti.

Although the circumstances are different,
INTERFET - the international force in East Timor -
which was authorized by the Security Council, was
instrumental in arresting violence and restoring law
and order in that country. Australia and other countries
in the region restored law and order in the Solomon
Islands last year.

Of course, a peaceful and constitutional solution
to the current crisis in Haiti will have to be evolved.

We are gratified to note that the Organization of
American States (OAS), the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM) and other countries with particular
interest are engaged in Haiti to persuade Haitians to
resolve their differences peacefully, democratically and
constitutionally. That will obviate the spectre of
refugees: boat people from Haiti spilling into the
neighbouring countries. South-East Asia had that sad
experience during the Viet Nam war.

Yesterday, the Council President, on behalf of the
Council, issued a press statement (press release SC/8009) that called upon the Government and the
armed rebels to cease the use of violence to advance
political goals. It remains unclear whether that message
ever really reached the parties concerned, or whether
they heard even a bit of what we were saying. If, after
this meeting, the Council decides to renew yesterday's
call, it must also decide to do something beyond that
call and address the situation on the ground. Otherwise,
we may find ourselves addressing our own statement
and, as an unintended consequence, only embarrass
ourselves.

The international community and the United
Nations system should not abrogate its responsibility to
treat the current structural dysfunction in Haiti now to
a robust presence in order to address security and
humanitarian aspects. The surest way to allow a bad
situation to worsen and to spread is to do nothing or to
do something too late. I believe the Security Council
should avoid that. We therefore welcome the
appointment by the Secretary-General of the Special
Adviser on Haiti for that purpose.

