I thank you, Sir, for using your presidency once again to bring the issue of climate change to the Security Council's attention. Although climate change was discussed by the Council as recently as July (see S/2020/751), we must urgently address it again. Indeed, given the perilous situation in which we find ourselves, Liechtenstein must highlight the dire need for the Council to take drastic action on the key systemic security issue of our time. The General Assembly first considered a report by the Secretary-General on the security impacts of climate change 11 years ago (A/64/350). The concept note for today's debate (S/2020/882, annex) also points out that the link between climate and security was first raised by the Council two years before that. Yet, according to this year's United in Science report, States have not heeded the warnings. The five years since the Paris Agreement on Climate Change have been the hottest on record, and it is increasingly possible that the world will warm by 1.5°C over the next five years, at least temporarily - a threshold deemed the point of no return during the Paris negotiations. Some may remember the call in Paris from our colleagues from the Republic of the Marshall Islands: "1.5 to stay alive". The Council - with a small number of its members collectively responsible for more than half of the world's carbon dioxide emissions - is confronted with the fact that, without urgent action, those emissions will directly create mass insecurity on a hitherto unforeseen scale. Entire populations will die, and States will become uninhabitable - a crime against our planet and against those must vulnerable to climate change. The violent and armed conflicts discussed in the concept note are portents of that death and destruction. We know that desertification, dwindling water resources and food and water insecurity have already led to violent conflict - both in situations where the Council has addressed the issue, such as in the Lake Chad basin and Somalia, and in those where it has not, notably in Syria and Yemen. Certain secondary impacts of climate change, such as increased involuntary migration, poverty, the loss of livelihoods and social tensions between farmers and herders, have themselves led to conflict, a fact that the Council readily accepts in some instances. But while it is important that the Council recognize those proximate factors, it must also trace them back to their root causes. To fail to do so is to fail to exercise effective prevention and sustain peace, and to disregard human security in favour of a paradigm that recognizes the salience of conflicts only in terms of armed origins and solutions. The Council is not short of recommendations for how to better engage with climate-related security risks. Fundamental to those is areckoning that climate change is a root cause of insecurity and, relatedly, the need to develop an understanding of human insecurity as worthy of addressing before those affected resort to armed violence. The Council can already tap into a wide range of expertise across the United Nations system, such as in the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs- United Nations Development Programme-United Nations Environment Programme Climate Security Mechanism, and in other specialized agencies. It should pursue a resolution on climate and security as a stand-alone topic - one that establishes a reporting mechanism that makes use of that considerable expertise. It may also wish to consider whether a task force of relevant United Nations agencies could strengthen the Council's engagement on the climate-security nexus through regular briefings and otherwise supplying relevant expertise and information. In the interim, more systematic references to the impact of global warming on situations on the Council's agenda, particularly those outside of the African continent, are necessary and long overdue. Most important, Council members must take urgent actions to reduce their emissions and spare vulnerable populations the brunt of the needless destruction that climate change is wreaking. It is not enough to more effectively address the nexus between climate change and security only when the policy decisions of Council members determine the scale of the security threat. The lives of billions around the world depend on decisions to avert climate disaster today.
