Mr. Laloniu (Tuvalu): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the 12 Pacific small island
developing States (SIDS). At the outset, I would like to
thank the delegation of Japan for holding this important
debate on addressing complex contemporary challenges
to international peace and security.

The Pacific SIDS firmly believe that climate
change is the most pressing contemporary security
challenge facing the world today. In 2009, our group
led a campaign in the General Assembly to address
the security implications of climate change, which
culminated in the unanimous adoption of General
Assembly resolution 63/281. That resolution called on
all relevant organs of the United Nations to intensify
their efforts in that area.

That was followed by a landmark report (A/64/350)
by former Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon in 2009,
entitled, "Climate change and its possible security
implications", in which he labelled climate change as
a threat multiplier and identified numerous channels,
such as food and water insecurity, natural resource
scarcity, exposure to extreme events and human
migration, through which climate change has the
potential to destabilize societies.

The Pacific SIDS are encouraged that this once
highly sensitive issue has been taken up on many
occasions in this Chamber. It is now well understood
that the impacts of climate change are happening faster
and are more severe than most scientists had previously
projected, which has profound implications for human
societies. The threat from climate change is facing us
now. We are already seeing dangerous impacts on our
countries and communities, with the most vulnerable
among us bearing the largest burden.

With new statistical methods at their disposal,
scientists are finding the finger prints of climate change
on many extreme events. In the Pacific, Nauru and our
Micronesian neighbours have been hit with historic
droughts in recent years. Record-breaking cyclones
have become an annual occurrence, even in places
where they were previously quite rare. And let us never
forget the three hurricanes this year that devastated
the homes of so many of our small island brothers and
sisters in the Caribbean.

In 2016, more than 24 million people were displaced
owing to storms, extreme heat and floods. That is three
times more than the number ofpeople fleeing conflicts,
as reported by the United Nations Development

Programme. In fact, the 10 largest displacement events
in 2016 were climate-related. Moreover, with the
sea level rising, many millions more will be forced
to migrate.

The actions agreed to under the Paris Agreement
on Climate Change notwithstanding, climate change is
not going away. There will be no return to a normal
climate in our lifetimes. In fact, the situation will
continue to deteriorate, even if we achieve our global
goals. We are operating in the context ofa progressively
worsening baseline, with extreme events projected
to occur at a frequency and magnitude that is well
outside the historical experience of our countries and
communities. We must also take seriously the potential
for abrupt climate change - a rapid and irreversible
state change caused by the crossing of climate tipping
points. The spectacular collapse of Arctic sea ice over
the past decade and a half will probably not be the last
example of that phenomenon.

However, it is the response of human systems to
those impacts that is potentially the most dangerous
and least understood. Industrial production, transport,
food and water distribution, and finance are complex
and interrelated systems, which, as we saw during the
global economic crisis, are often quite fragile. It is
not just environmental tipping points that we need to
worry about.

The Japanese presidency has asked for proposals
on how the United Nations system can better address
complex contemporary challenges to international
peace and security. The Pacific SIDS are calling for the
Secretary-General to appoint a special representative
on climate and security. We think that such a special
representative, supported by a well-resourced office,
could help us manage climate risks more effectively.

Such a post should have three initial responsibilities:
first, to provide an update on the former Secretary-
General's 2009 report on the security implications of
climate change, based on our latest understanding,
including an assessment of the capacity of the United
Nations system to respond to the security implications
of climate change; secondly, to produce a new report,
in cooperation with the relevant scientific bodies, that
identifies and analyses potentially dangerous tipping
points at the nexus of climate and security, along with
recommendations for improving our monitoring and
response; and lastly, to help interested vulnerable
countries develop preliminary climate- and security-
risk assessments.

That mandate should grow over time to include
facilitating regional and cross-border cooperation on
issues that mightbe affected by climate change, engaging
in preventive diplomacy, as appropriate, and supporting
post-conflict situations in which climate change is
a risk factor that could undermine stability. Such a
special representative of the Secretary-General should
help to coordinate the efforts of the relevant United
Nations bodies in that area, such as the Department
of Political Affairs, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, the International Strategy for
Disaster Reduction, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, and the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.

In closing, I would like to address two common
concerns that are often expressed with regard to our
proposal. Some countries do not support any expansion
of the Security Council's mandate. The Pacific SIDS
are sympathetic to that concern, as the Security
Council is not a representative body. The appointment
of a special representative of the Secretary-General
would not affect the mandate of the Security Council.
Instead, that individual would serve the Secretary-
General as the title implies. However, we do see value
in keeping the Security Council informed about the
security implications of climate change, since it is
a growing factor in the conflict situations that the
Council already addresses.

Some countries also have concerns about the
securitization of climate change, fearing that it will
lead to greater militarization. That is precisely the
dynamic that we think a special representative could
help us to avoid. If we do not proactively address the
security implications of climate change, then the onset
of climate crises will make it more and not less likely
that some will opt for reactive military responses.

The military branches of many Governments
with global reach have been analysing that issue
for more than a decade, mostly behind closed doors.
Bringing the issue before the United Nations through
a special representative of the Secretary-General
would provide the opportunity for all to engage in that
critical discussion.

I thank you again, Mr. President, for organizing
this important debate. The Pacific SIDS look forward
to working with you and all Member States to further
improve and refine our proposal.
