Mr. Kubis: The days of the the so-called caliphate
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) in Iraq
are numbered, thanks to the bravery and patriotism
of the Iraqi security forces, including the Popular
Mobilization Forces, the Peshmerga and the tribal
volunteers, as well as the endurance of the Iraqi people.
The liberation of Mosul is imminent. Operations are
shifting to remaining areas and pockets of Da'esh
presence, including along the borders with Syria.

The 22 March meeting of the international
counter-ISIL coalition in Washington, DC, was a
clear reminder that we must maintain a dual focus
on both the challenge of defeating Da'esh and on
the post-liberation stabilization and rehabilitation
phase in Iraq. Support and assistance for Iraq from
the international community, including its regional
partners, are indispensable.

I am encouraged by the continuous commitment
of the Iraqi National Alliance to achieving a national
settlement. I also acknowledge the long-awaited
submission of the Iraqi forces coalition's vision
of the historic national settlement, along with a
confidence-restoration initiative. On 17 May, in
Baghdad, the broadly inclusive Turkmen forum
adopted a common Turkmen vision for a national
settlement based on mutual respect of equal rights and
responsibilities within a united Iraq. Other groups,
civil society and tribal elements continue to share their
respective visions on how and on What principles to
rebuild post-Da'esh Iraq.

The United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI) is committed to helping Iraqi parties achieve
an inclusive national settlement based on several
guiding principles: respect for the Iraqi Constitution
and the unity of Iraq, citizenship with equal rights
and responsibilities, equal participation in the political
process, the rejection of and fighting against terrorism,
and the rejection of sectarianism, inter alia.

National reconciliation can succeed only if it reflects
the needs and expectations of the people, not only the
politicians. Women and youth, who make up more
than half of Iraq's population, are a key constituency.
Under the title "Iraq: Youth and Coexistence", UNAMI
convened seven separate forums across the country
bringing together more than 750 young participants
from all Iraqi provinces.

The project concluded in a national conference in
Baghdad on 20 May that called for separating religion
from politics, enforcing the secular character of the
State, putting an end to the sectarian quota system
through legislation, reforming educational curriculums
for the promotion of the Iraqi identity, patriotism
and the spirit of tolerance, and empowering women,
especially young women.

The imminent defeat of Da'esh must provide an
urgent impetus to address the concerns of minorities
and enable their safe return to their homes. Minorities
in Iraq continue to face existential challenges and need
special attention.

The return of all displaced persons to liberated
areas must be at the top of the list of priorities of
the Government of Iraq. I would like to express my
continuing concern over the delay in the return of
displaced persons to areas liberated long ago, such
as Jurf Al-Sakher or places in Diyala governorate. In
addition, many hundreds of alleged disappearances
that reportedly took place last year in Al-Sejar and
Saglawiya in Anbar and at the Razzaza checkpoint,
or this year in Taremia, remain unresolved. Moreover,
there are instances of disappearances as a result
of vetting processes in the liberated areas. Lack of
progress on the issue of return could affect demographic
composition and would undermine efforts towards
national settlement.

I urge Baghdad and Erbil to leverage the reservoir
of goodwill accumulated in their joint battle against
Da'esh and urgently engage in high-level political
dialogue and negotiations on the key outstanding
issues in the political, economic and administrative
fields. Lack of dialogue and progress on issues such
as a functional federation based on partnership or
the implementation of article 140 of the Constitution,
concerning disputed boundaries and territories, will
increasingly create problems and tensions.

Senior officials in the Kurdistan region ofIraq have
declared their intention to hold in 2017 a referendum on
the future status of the region. They stressed that the
objective of the plebiscite would be to show the world
the will of the people, rather than to immediately declare
independence. Also, the authorities in Kirkuk have
indicated their willingness to take part in the planned
referendum on the future status of the Kurdistan region
of Iraq.

The Turkish armed forces have relentlessly
continued to conduct air strikes on suspected positions
of the Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) in Iraq. For the
first time, on 25 April, they conducted an air attack
on PKK targets in the Sinjar area, Ninewa governorate.
Turkish leaders declared that the strikes would continue
in order to deny the PKK another sanctuary and to
push back threats to Turkey's national security. Prime
Minister Al Abadi condemned the attack, warning that
these types of activities undermined regional efforts
against Da'esh.

Respect for the rule of law in Iraq remains weak.
Kidnapping and hostage-taking, irrespective of
criminal or other motives, have increasingly become
a problem. A prominent Shia cleric, Muqtada al-Sadr,
warned that the number of kidnappings would increase
in future after, as he said, "shameless militias" take
control of liberated areas. On 11 May, the national
intelligence cell headed by Prime Minister Al Abadi
discussed the issues of kidnappings and organized
crime, acknowledged the interconnection between
terrorism and organized crime, and took additional
measures to prevent and resolve such acts.

Ensuring justice and accountability remains
crucial if community and national reconciliation is to
succeed in the post-ISIL period. While the international
community needs to vigorously pursue initiatives that
aim to promote accountability for international crimes
committed in Iraq by Da'esh and hopes to get support
from the Iraqi Government, the United Nations in Iraq
has been undertaking work with a range of partners to
promote accountability at the national level.

A complex electoral calendar looms in Iraq,
including in the Kurdistan region, for 2017 and 2018.
Of primary importance is the holding of elections for
the new Iraqi Parliament within its constitutional term
in April 2018, as a precursor of the creation of the new
Government that will steer the country in the post-
Da'esh period.

Delays and uncertainties as regards the electoral,
legal and institutional framework and preparations are
increasingly of concern and cast doubt on whether it
will be possible to hold provincial council elections in
September 2017 in a way that would ensure credibility
and inclusiveness as well as wide participation.

Since military operations to retake Mosul began,
in mid-October, 700,000 people have fled their homes,
approximately one fifth of whom have been able to
return home. An estimated 200,000 people are still
in ISIL-controlled parts of the city, where they are
reportedly suffering extreme shortages of food and
water, and are at risk from bombardment and being
caught in the crossfire.

The United Nations Development Programme's
Funding Facility for Stabilization continues to expand
also, in Ninewa. More than 230 projects are under way
in eastern Mosul, including the rehabilitation of water-
treatment plants, electrical substations, schools and
health-care facilities. One hundred and thirty projects
are under way in the Ninewa plains, including in hard-
hit minority communities.

Allow me to now turn to the fourteenth report ofthe
Secretary-General on the issue of missing Kuwaiti and
third-country nationals and missing Kuwaiti property,
including the national archives (S/2017/37l).

On 3 May, I travelled to Kuwait. While
acknowledging the reinvigoration of the file, my
interlocutors reiterated their regret at the lack of
tangible results. They also voiced pragmatic ideas on
the way forward.

In two days, Iraq will be hosting, for the first time
in 14 years, the forty-fourth session of the Tripartite
Commission. Echoing the press statement issued by
the Council in July 2016, I would urge the Government
of Iraq to fulfil its international obligations under this
file. I also wish to commend Kuwait for the support and
understanding that it has consistently shown towards
the challenges faced by the Government of Iraq over
the years.

