Mr. Pleuger (Germany): Let me first of all, Sir,
join you in thanking Ambassador Traore for his skilful
handling of the presidency during the month of March
and assure you of our trust and support for your own
presidency.

Germany remains fully committed to the fight
against terrorism and to maintaining and strengthening
the broadest possible international coalition against
terrorism. Minister Fischer reaffirmed this commitment
in his intervention on 20 January before the Council.

Terrorist networks must be destroyed; its
perpetrators must be persecuted by all legal means. Our
efforts so far have already yielded first results. Six
weeks ago, a German criminal court sentenced an
active supporter of international terrorism to a harsh
prison term. In fact, this sentence by a Hamburg court
was the very first criminal procedure ever brought
against a member of the 11 September terrorist
network.

We commend the Counter-Terrorism Committee
for the increased attention it is devoting to the risk of
terrorists' gaining access to weapons of mass
destruction. Close cooperation with all relevant
international institutions is imperative in this context.
International instruments of arms control, disarmament
and non-proliferation provide important tools for this
end and must be strengthened accordingly.

At the same time, we attach particular importance
to the dialogue with other civilizations, in particular
with the Islamic world, with the aim of broadening
common understanding for, and dealing with, the
underlying causes of terrorism.

Our common fight must respect national and
international law, human rights and the United Nations
Charter. The rule of law must always prevail.

Strengthening the rule of law and efficient
judicial and law enforcement structures worldwide is
one of the main objectives of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee. This Committee has been a landmark in the
fight against terrorism.

Under the able leadership of its first Chairman,
Sir Jeremy Greenstock, it has carried out its tasks with
determination, dedication and transparency. We would
like to pay tribute to Sir Jeremy for the excellent job he
and his devoted team have done during the last 18
months.

Allow me a personal word: Ambassador
Greenstock has shown that policy is driven not only by
events, but also by a personality that combines vision
with energy, creativity and professional skill. His name
will remain connected to the CTC. If the CTC were a
piece of art, there would be a little mark in the corner:
"JF" - Jeremy fecit. The United Nations can build on
what he has achieved, and he can be proud of his
achievement. For that, he has our admiration and our
gratitude.

We are confident that Ambassador Arias will
continue to maintain the CTC's high profile by
successfully responding to the challenges laid down in
resolution 1373 (2001), and we will actively support
him in this effort.

Germany will continue to assist third States in
developing suitable measures to combat terrorism and
to coordinate this assistance with the Committee. We
will spare no effort in order to enhance and invigorate
the international coalition against terrorism, within the
CTC and all other relevant organs of the United
Nations.

To conclude, I would like to underline that this
statement is complementary to the statement to be
made later today by the Greek Presidency of the
European Union, to which Germany fully subscribes.

