The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and with the consent of the Council, I
shall take it that the Council agrees to extend
invitations to the representatives of Cote d'Ivoire,
Ghana, Nigeria and Senegal to participate in the
meeting without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to His Excellency Mr. Nana Akufo-Addo,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ghana and current
Chairman of the Economic Community of West
African States.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Akufo-Addo
(Ghana) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Arabic): On behalf of
the Council, I extend a warm welcome to His
Excellency Mr. Mamadou Bamba, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Cote d'Ivoire.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Bamba
(Cote d'Ivoire) took a seat at the Council table.


The President (spoke in Arabic): On behalf of
the Council, I extend a warm welcome to His
Excellency Mr. Oluyemi Adeniji, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Nigeria.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Adeniji
(Nigeria) took a seat at the Council table.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Fall
(Senegal) took a seat at the Council table.


The President (spoke in Arabic): I wish to
acknowledge the presence of our former colleague
from Guinea, who is now the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Guinea, His Excellency Mr. Francois Fall, at
this meeting. On behalf of the Security Council, I
extend a warm welcome to him.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
Excellency Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, Executive
Secretary of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS).

It is so decided.

On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to the Executive Secretary of the Economic
Community of West African States, Mr. Mohamed Ibn
Chambas, and invite him to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

This meeting is indeed an extraordinary one. The
presence of five ministers and of the Executive
Secretary of ECOWAS is in itself an event. It truly
represents an exceptional and extraordinary moment in
the lives of the people of Liberia, who have suffered
for so long and deserve all the due attention of our
Council in order to put an end to their distress and to
chart the course of their development and progress.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by the current Chairman and Executive
Secretary of ECOWAS, respectively. Thereafter, the
Security Council will hold a private meeting with the
ECOWAS delegation, at which Council members may
ask questions.

I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Ghana and current Chairman of ECOWAS,
Mr. Nana Akufo-Addo.


