Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): I would like
to begin by thanking the Permanent Representative of
Costa Rica for calling today's debate, as well as you,
Mr. President, for convening the meeting. I should also
like to thank the Secretary-General for the interest that
he has shown in the meeting.

Continually improving the way we work is a
practice relevant to all international organizations. Its
basic objective is at the heart of my Prime Minister's
initiative on international institutional reform. All
organs of the United Nations, including the Security
Council, have a responsibility to ensure that they work
effectively and transparently. The views expressed
here, including by non-members of the Council, will
inform the ongoing work of the Council on its working
methods.

The United Kingdom played a full and active part
in the drafting of the 2006 note (5/2006/507) by the
President and fully supports its implementation. There
is much being done already. Individual Council
members have an obligation to do all they can to
promote and implement the measures we have agreed.
For example, during the United Kingdom's
presidencies of the Council we made it a priority to
notify Council members in advance of a meeting of the
main themes under consideration, to help focus the
discussion. We also briefed non-members of the
Council at the beginning and end of our presidencies,
as well as immediately following each discussion of
the Council.

Beyond those times during which we held the
presidency, we have sought the View of a wide range of
interlocutors on issues under discussion by the
Council- for example, through the use of Arria
Formula meetings. A case in point is our work on
Somalia, where an Arria Formula meeting in March
provided an opportunity to hear views from outside
organizations involved in Somalia. That fed directly
into the Council's work. We also hosted an Arria
Formula discussion on sexual violence in conflict,
followed by the open debate under the United States
presidency later in June.

There are some welcome trends towards greater
transparency in the Security Council. The Council now
meets more in formal meetings and has fewer informal
consultations in proportion to the year 2000, for
instance. The Council's discussions on Timor-Leste last
week illustrated our flexibility with regard to the
format of meetings. We had both formal debate and
private consultations, allowing for participation by
interested parties and interactive discussion between
Council members and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General. There will always be a need to
balance transparency with the need for the Council to
be able to work effectively. It is right that the Council
continue to look for ways to open up its work to
non-members.

The Council has also shown a greater willingness
to consult and take advice from expert bodies. Expert
panels assist with the monitoring of sanctions and
assist the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004). In the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate the Council has institutionalized a standing
body of expertise designed to monitor global standards
mandated by the Council. The Peacebuilding
Commission is well-placed to create a new centre of
expertise.

The Council is working harder. Twenty-four
substantive subjects were discussed in the period
1996-1997. Ten years later, from 2006-2007, the
number had doubled to 49. Ad hoc committees that
deal with a range of thematic issues, such as children
in armed conflict, sanctions and peacekeeping
operations, have been created. That thematic approach
feeds directly into country-specific issues, broadening
the debate and highlighting linkages between different
issues on the Council's agenda. All of that helps us in
our primary role of maintaining international peace and
security.

The Council has also increased its interaction
with regional organizations. We have responded to
requests from African countries to enhance our
relationship with the African Union and its peace and
security machinery. That led to meetings of the Council
and the African Union Peace and Security Council in
2007 and 2008.

Those are all positive trends, but this is an
ongoing process. I would like to identify the following
areas where the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions, which
is under Ambassador Arias's able chairmanship, could
do further work.

First, we could consider our practice on the use of
rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure for parties
to a conflict who are not Member States to take
advantage of the scope offered by that rule.

Secondly, we can look at further ways of keeping
the Security Council agenda up to date and self-
explanatory. The title of today's debate is a classic
example of using bureaucratic language rather than
something that can be readily understood by all.

Thirdly, we could take up the responsibility of the
Council presidency to guide the Council without
constraining it and ensure that the standards of
effectiveness and transparency set out in the 2006
presidential note are implemented and upheld.

Those areas, as well as others that emerge today,
will play a crucial part in informing the discussions of
the Working Group. We look forward to taking that
forward in the Group in due course. In closing, I would
like to reaffirm the United Kingdom's commitment to
ensuring that the Council is as transparent and as
effective as possible.

