Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): First of all, I would like to express my thanks
for the briefings given by Under-Secretary-General
Pascoe and Assistant Secretary-General Mulet.
Unfortunately, I have to point out that the content of
the briefing by Mr. Pascoe shows that the Secretariat
and its leadership have not been able to adopt an
objective position showing a thorough grasp of the
substance of this conflict, as should be expected from
the leadership of such an authoritative international
organization.

Over the past three or four days, we have held
four meetings of the Security Council, three of which
were open, because of the situation that arose due to
the aggression by Georgia against South Ossetia. I
would like to recall the fact that this series of meetings
began with a meeting held at the initiative of the
Russian Federation. We not only proposed that
meeting, but we insisted that it be an open meeting,
because we had something to say about what is taking
place. Today's meeting, as the President has said, is
taking place on the joint initiative of Georgia and the
United States of America, which is in no way
surprising. We all know how close the relations
established between the leaders of those two States in
recent years are.

In one of our previous meetings, the Permanent
Representative of Georgia named seven of supposedly
Russian citizens who are allegedly working in various
capacities in South Ossetia and presented that as some
sort of proof that Russia was governing the whole of
South Ossetia. According to my information at least
127 advisers from the United States Department of
Defense alone are working in Georgia at the present
time. I cannot give their names. Most likely, the
Permanent Representative of Georgia knows the names
of those advisers, to say nothing of other types of
advisers.

On 7 August - precisely the day on which
Georgia subsequently launched its military attack
against South Ossetia - a large-scale joint American-
Georgian military exercise concluded involving some

1,000 American troops. Tellingly, the name of this joint
exercise was "Immediate response". So our Georgian
colleagues, trained and to a considerable degree armed
by our American colleagues, have immediately put to
use the training that they had received.

What is taking place now is far from unexpected.
As members will recall, on many occasions the Russian
Federation drew attention to the dangerous situation
that was evolving around Abkhazia and South Ossetia.
On many occasions the Russian Federation drew
attention to the fact that Georgia was building up its
weapons, including offensive weapons, at an increasing
rate. Georgia is the world record holder in the increase
of its military budget, which over recent years has
grown thirtyfold. Now we understand what the purpose
of all that was.

I shall now return to the events that we are
discussing today. Let me recall that everything began
on the night of 7 August, but I shall return to that
theme later. When I speak of the close cooperation
between the United States and Georgia, we should not
like to believe or to think that the United States gave
the green light to the adventurist military action by the
Georgian leadership. We are in close contact with the
United States, and despite what Ambassador Khalilzad
said with regard to our cooperation and our
cooperation with other partners in the international
community, that cooperation will, of course, continue,
so as to return peace to Georgia.

Allow me to return to the events that we are
currently discussing. The Georgian aggression against
South Ossetia began on the night of 7 to 8 August.
When it began, our military forces contacted the
Georgian Defense Ministry. The Georgian
representative stated that they were beginning a war
against South Ossetia, and the commander of the
Georgia peacekeeping contingent, Mr. Khurashvili,
publicly explained that Georgia was undertaking a so-
called restoration of constitutional order in South
Ossetia. So, they were resolving a conflict that had
lasted longer than 15 years by military means.
Georgian military forces started firing against South
Ossetia with artillery including Grad multiple rocket
launchers. These systems were used in a barbaric way,
since, as everybody knows, they do not have accurate
targeting systems; they are used to fire at large areas.
Therefore, there was a large loss of civilian life.

At the same time, the military action by Georgia
began when they started to attack our peacekeepers and
to seize the camps where our peacekeepers live. They
attacked with tanks, aircraft and heavy artillery. As
members know, there have been deaths and casualties
among our peacekeepers: 12 of our peacekeepers died
on the first day.

So how can we describe this action by the
Georgian leadership? It has been said that aggression is
only when one party attacks another. But if the
aggression is carried out against your own people, is
that in any way better? What legal terms can be used to
describe what has been done by the Georgian
leadership? Can we use "ethnic cleansing", for
example, when, over a number of days, nearly 30,000
of the 120,000 people of South Ossetia have become
refugees who have fled to Russia: more than a quarter
of the population. They went across the border from
South Ossetia to the North at great risk to their lives. Is
that ethnic cleansing or is it not? Should we describe
that as genocide or not? When out of that population of
120,000, 2,000 innocent civilians die on the first day, is
that genocide or is it not? How many people, how
many civilians must die before we describe it as
genocide?

Today, as President Saakashvili did yesterday on
television, the Permanent Representative of Georgia
spoke sorrowfully about the death of innocent civilians
in Georgia, and of course the death of any civilian is
naturally a cause of great concern and regret. But why
were they not saddened when Tskhinvali was wiped
from the face of the Earth, along with 10 villages on
the border between South Ossetia and Georgia? How
should we react to all of that? How should we and the
international community react when, despite all the
international agreements that exist - and let me recall
that our peacekeepers are in South Ossetia in
accordance with the Dagomys agreement of 1992,
which was signed by Georgia and South Ossetia
they are attacking directly and are trying to annihilate
civilians, most of whom are Russian citizens? What did
they expect? Did they expect our peacekeepers to run
away, as some peacekeepers ran away from
Srebrenica? We could not allow that to happen. We
could not leave the civilian population in South Ossetia
in dire straits or leave our peacekeepers without

 
protection. So, additional troops were sent to Georgia,
and they are still engaged in the task of removing
Georgia from South Ossetia. Let me say that we are not
occupying territory that does not belong to South
Ossetia.

There has been talk today of the area of action
and of the appropriateness and reasonableness of our
action. Well, our action was appropriate for 16 years
according to the Dagomys agreement. We operated
perfectly well as peacekeepers when the Georgian side
was behaving properly. Now, tell me, was the Georgian
side acting properly when it committed this act of
aggression? Let us all behave properly, and then we
can start talking about what constitutes proper
behaviour.

Any military person knows - and not only
military people, I think - that when such an operation
is conducted, places are targeted not only within the
immediate zone of conflict, but sometimes also beyond
that area: those areas that support military action are
targeted. We have seen that on many occasions in many
situations.

If we look at Kosovo, nobody there limited
themselves by any definitions of what Kosovo was.
They simply started to bomb Belgrade and bridges over
the Danube that were many miles from the area of
conflict. I categorically reject the suggestion that we
are conducting military operations in an indiscriminate
way. Mr. Alasania ventured to make a reference by way
of argument to a "statement" that allegedly was made
by a Russian prisoner of war pilot when being
interrogated in Georgia, that he had allegedly been
instructed to fire indiscriminately. Such comments are
absolutely outrageous and unacceptable at an open
meeting of the Security Council.

The statement made by Ambassador Khalilzad
with regard to terror against the civilian population is
absolutely unacceptable, particularly from the lips of
the Permanent Representative of a country whose
actions we are aware of, including with regard to
civilian populations in Iraq, Afghanistan and Serbia. So
if indeed we would like to find a solution to this armed
conflict, then let us try to find serious political
solutions, and not indulge in propaganda, even if
perhaps some of their politicians would like them to
engage in propaganda activities in the Security
Council.
I would like to turn specifically to two issues.
With respect to the Kodori Valley, the simplest thing
would be to invite the Abkhaz representatives. On
many occasions, we have said that the representatives
of Abkhazia should come here and explain their
position. Now they are making public statements, and,
of course, they could have clearly explained the
situation here. Now, in Abkhazia, how do you think the
Abkhaz feel when South Ossetia is being wiped off the
face of the Earth, in a similar conflict on Georgian
territory? Did we not draw attention to the
unacceptable situation in the southern part of the
Kodori Valley. That was in contradiction to the
Moscow agreements of 1994, and many resolutions of
the Security Council. So why are people so surprised
now?

With regard to the activities of the Black Sea
fleet, I can inform the Council that indeed ships of the
Black Sea fleet of the Russian Federation have started
to patrol the sea along the coast of Abkhazia near the
zone of the armed conflict in South Ossetia. A note has
been sent to the Georgian authorities in that regard.
The aim of that operation is to ensure that we protect
Russian citizens who are in that region, to provide
support to the Russian peacekeeping contingent if there
should be a military attack against them, and also to
provide humanitarian assistance to the civilian
population who are in the zone of conflict.

With the aim of preventing armed incidents in the
area patrolled by Russian ships, we have established a
security zone. These actions do not seek to establish a
maritime blockade of Georgia. Force will be used only
in accordance with Article 51 of the Charter, in
exercise of the right to self-defence by the Russian
Federation.

Now, what about the way forward? What
decisions should be taken? What can the international
community do? First of all, we heard the strange
statement that the Russian Federation was rejecting all
international efforts. Of course, it is not: the fact is that
President Medvedev had good talks with President
Bush yesterday or the day before; our Minister for
Foreign Affairs is in constant telephone contact with
the Secretary of State of the United States - I think
they have had five or six conversations over the past
36 hours, the most recent of them, within the past few
hours, of 45 minutes in duration. We are talking to
everyone, and we are explaining everything to
everyone. We are listening to everyone, including
representatives of the European States and the
representatives of many European institutions. So, the
international community can indeed play an
appropriate role here.

With respect to the Permanent Representative of
Georgia's outrage that our President had refused to
speak with the President of Georgia. Excuse me, but
what decent person would talk to him now? For years
we have been explaining to him that any attempt to
resolve the conflict by military means would be suicide
for Georgia and that we would not permit South
Ossetia and Abkhazia to be wiped off the face of the
Earth or its people chased out of the Republic of
Georgia. That has been clear from the first contact
between President Saakashvili and the Russian
President right to this very moment. He assured us -
and stated publicly to the international community -
that he had no intention whatsoever to use force against
his own people.

But this, of course, does not mean that we are
evading any contacts with our Georgian colleagues.
Such contacts are continuing at a wide variety of
levels. For example, the most recent was just a few
hours ago: a lengthy telephone conversation between
our Minister for Foreign Affairs and the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Georgia. What, then, is the problem
here? Once again, we in the Security Council are
facing this issue.

For some reason, the clearest statement about a
ceasefire and peace-loving intentions was made not by
the Permanent Representative of Georgia but by the
Permanent Representative of the United States. The
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Georgia is speaking to
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Russia. Our
Minister for Foreign Affairs has stated very clearly all
that I said yesterday both to my Security Council
colleagues and publicly: the Georgian military must
withdraw from South Ossetian territory, and Georgia
must state its readiness to sign an agreement on the
non-use of force in South Ossetia and Abkhazia. Then
comes the complicated process of discussing all the
other issues, including, at the appropriate time, the
attainment of a political solution. That will be made
much more difficult, of course, following Georgia's
adventurist actions.

What do they say in response? They say, "We
have already left". But we know that they have not left
South Ossetia: after all, they are still firing on our
soldiers. If they want to leave, I can assure the Council
that we will not prevent Georgian military forces from
withdrawing. I assure the Council that neither the
South Ossetians nor we have any use for the Georgian
military on the territory of South Ossetia. So, please do

not tell us that the deputy secretary of the security
council or anyone else said this, that or the other thing.

We have heard many comments from the
Georgian side, including very militaristic statements
and including a declaration of martial law and an
announcement of a general mobilization in Georgia.
Yes, we have heard all of that.

Let them state clearly: "We are ready to put an
end to the war; we are withdrawing from South
Ossetia, and we are ready to sign an agreement on the
non-use of force. This is a serious approach,
Mr. Khalilzad, not one that circumvents the Security
Council. By the way, Mr. Khalilzad said that they were
discussing this with colleagues. Perhaps he could have
discussions with Russian colleagues if he wants a
document to be adopted by the Security Council. That
would be a serious approach, rather than a
propagandistic one that might be to the liking of some
United States presidential candidate or someone else in
the United States political establishment.

Let us deal with this truly tragic situation in a
serious way. There are serious decisions that can be
taken; these can be adopted immediately - right now.
But they must first be adopted in Tbilisi. Then Russia
and, I hope, the entire international community will
help Georgia exit from the very difficult situation in
which it finds itself as a result of the adventurist
policies of its leadership.

