Ms. Zappone (Ireland): Thank you for convening
today's debate on this extremely important subject,
Mr. President. I would also like to thank today's briefers
and welcome the Secretary-General's report for 2017 on
children and armed conflict (S/2018/465), which makes
many valuable recommendations.

Children are on the front lines of armed conflicts
across the world. While their vulnerability in times
of crisis has been recognized since the early days of
international humanitarian law, our common efforts to
protect all children from aggression and Violence fall
short of where we need to be. Ireland therefore welcomes
a greater focus on linking the agenda on children in
armed conflict with strategies for conflict prevention
and sustainable peace. As a Minister responsible for
children and young people, I want to define security not
merely as a condition of peace but as a recognition that
in order to flourish we need to live in a just and equal
society where our States protect us from interpersonal
Violence and persecution.

In his acceptance speech for the Nobel Peace Prize,
Ireland's Sean MacBride reminded us that there can be
no peace without justice. I believe that inequality, in all
its forms, is a driver of conflict. Gender-based violence
is one of the most damaging and perilous types of
injustices towards children in armed conflicts. Young
girls are particularly vulnerable to sexual exploitation
and human trafficking, so empowering them and
prioritizing their protection from gender-based abuse
in conflict is absolutely vital. Under Ireland's chairship
of the Commission on the Status of Women earlier this
year, the conclusions of the priority theme "Challenges
and opportunities in achieving gender equality and the
empowerment of rural women and girls" were agreed
on. We also promote the protection of girls in conflict
through our national action plan on women, peace and
security. That is reflected in our humanitarian action
but is also a priority for our defence forces.

When violence erupts, children are frequently
denied education, leaving them open to indoctrination
or exploitation, and without positive economic
opportunities for the rest of their lives. Ireland's
development assistance programme, Irish Aid, supports
a number of non-governmental organization partners
at the community level in establishing safe learning
spaces for boys and girls. In November 2017, Ireland
was one of 65 Member States to endorse the Vancouver
Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the
Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers, which raise
awareness of the recruitment and use of child soldiers
by armed groups and commit us to addressing issues of
trauma and lost childhood.

Far beyond being merely victims of conflict,
children and young people can also play a crucial role
in promoting long-term peace across the globe. That is
why Ireland is a strong supporter of the youth, peace
and security agenda, including providing funding
to the recent progress study on youth, peace and
security. In 2015 we introduced a United Nations youth
delegate programme, in a clear commitment to greater
engagement with young people on development, human
rights and global citizenship. They represent the future,
the values of Ireland and the values that established the
United Nations and the Security Council. It is for them
that we must together be a global vehicle for developing
and promoting sustainable security, a security that
allows all our people to flourish.

In conclusion, I invite the Council to imagine a
child who is allowed to flourish, and then one who is
not. As Minister, I am particularly proud that half of the
1,883 persons accepted into Ireland under resettlement
and relocation programmes are children fleeing war
and conflict. In addition, Ireland is providing care
for 79 children who arrived alone at our ports and
airports. All of those children - from such countries
experiencing conflict as Syria, Afghanistan and
Eritrea - are making Ireland their home. They speak
for themselves in a collection of stories and art created
by Syrian and Palestinian children now living in Mayo,
in the West of Ireland. In the book entitled A Strong
Heart, they tell of the beauty of their new hometowns,
the local rivers, mountains and even our world-famous
salmon. They express their passion for Irish sport, their
sense of fun and their hopes and dreams. Khaled, who
is l2-years-old and lives in Claremorris, writes,

"My dream for the future is to be a footballer first
and play for Ireland. When I am 33, I will be a
teacher and go back to Syria to teach English."

Khaled and his classmates - Irish, Syrian and
Palestinian - are flourishing. They are our future.

