Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): I would like to begin by
expressing Indonesia's appreciation to the presidency
of Spain for convening this open debate. Our thanks
also go to the Deputy Secretary-General for his briefing
earlier today.

I would also like to align my statement with those
made earlier by the representatives of Iran and Kuwait
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, respectively.

This debate is very timely, being held as it is amid
the increasingly worrying escalation of violence in
the occupied Palestinian territory. The international
community, especially the Council, must therefore do
its utmost to ensure that all sides exercise restraint and
defuse tension. We welcome the Secretary-General's
recent visit to Israel and Palestine and hope that it
will help to end the spiraling violence in the occupied
Palestinian territory.

That spiral of violence has worsened the hatred
and mutual suspicion among the people of Palestine
and Israel that has the potential to further complicate
efforts to restart the political process. With that in mind,
Indonesia underlines once again that there is no feasible
solution to the situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory other than an immediate start to a meaningful
and credible peace process with a view to ending the
Israeli occupation. To delay is to permit those feelings
of hatred and suspicion to make the prospects of peace
more intractable.

Indonesia firmly believes that a just and lasting
peace will be sustainable only a through political
process and when the peoples of Palestine are
allowed to exercise their long-overdue right of self-
determination. On that account, we stress the need of
the Security Council to create a climate favourable to
the resumption of the peace process. The Council must
ensure that Israel remains true to its commitment to
two-State solution. In this regard, all Israel's illegal
activities in the occupied Palestinian territory must
come to an end. The air strike on Gaza on October 11,
for example, as well as continued provocation in East
Jerusalem, notably in the areas of the holy sites, not
only are contrary to international law but also generate
more tension and anger on the ground.

Certainly, the Security Council cannot continue
to sit idly by and retire to its routine activities of
convening briefings and debates. We again call upon
the Council to assert its Charter mandate and act
as a matter of urgency to bring an end to the Israeli
occupation. The raising of the Palestinian flag at the
United Nations weeks ago was, in our view, not only a
symbolic act but also a strategic one. It was a natural
consequence of the growing international recognition
of the State of Palestine and its rightful place among the
community of nations. It was also a necessary building
block towards the eventual two-State solution.

On a different matter, Security Council must also
uphold the principle of the protection of civilians in
times of international armed conflict. The continued
violence committed against the Palestinian people
and their properties clearly underlines the urgency of
securing international United Nations protection for
Palestine. We therefore encourage the Council to work
together with the relevant United Nations bodies to
respond favourably to that urgent need.

Let me now turn to the situation in Syria. Indonesia
wishes to register its outright discontent at the lack
of unity of Security Council members in ending the
violence and address the humanitarian crisis there,
which have spread beyond the region. This organ's lack
of political will to even deliberate the Syrian issue, let
alone find a resolution to the conflict, demonstrates the
dysfunctional nature of the Council. How many more
innocent people must die before the Council decides
that the time is ripe for it to act?

Indonesia therefore reminds and calls upon Council
members to honour their Charter responsibilities in
the maintenance of international peace and security,
to act immediately and decisively, to end unilateral
actions that only complicate the situation, and bring
the relevant parties back to the negotiation table to
find a comprehensive and inclusive political solution.
Indonesia firmly believes that this is the only way to
resolve the conflict once and for all.

