Miss Durrant (Jamaica): The effectiveness of
United Nations peacekeeping has been the object of
much scrutiny in recent years. Indeed, over the past
year, four reports have been presented by the
Secretary-General - namely, his report on the fall of
Srebrenica, two reports on the genocide in Rwanda
and, most recently, the report of the Panel on United
Nations Peace Operations, the Brahimi Report.

All of these speak eloquently to the successes and
failures of United Nations peacekeeping. We are
reminded also that if we do not commit ourselves to
Vital reforms highlighted in these reports, there is a real
risk that we will continue to fail to meet the challenge
of saving the innocent from the scourge of war.

We realize only too well that swift action on the
key recommendations of the Brahimi Report is
imperative if we wish to seize the present momentum.
My delegation therefore wishes to pay tribute to
Ambassador Brahimi and the members of the Panel for
the excellent quality of the analysis and the
recommendations in the report.

It was against this background that my delegation
welcomed the establishment in early October of the
Security Council Working Group on the Brahimi
Report. The Working Group was tasked with
undertaking a full examination of those
recommendations in the report that fall within the
purview of the Security Council.

I wish to express the Jamaican delegation's
appreciation, on behalf of the Chairman of the Working
Group, Ambassador Curtis Ward, for the cooperation
received from the Council members and from the
Secretariat in enabling the Group to reach a speedy and
successful outcome.

The resolution just adopted by the Council
presents no elements of surprise, as it encapsulates
many of the key issues with which the Security Council
has grappled in recent years, given the paradigm shift
in the nature of peacekeeping operations. No longer is
the traditional concept of classical peacekeeping
applicable to the current realities. In most cases,
peacekeeping has become more multidimensional,
addressing complex issues ranging from disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants to
institution-building, civil administration, policing and
rebuilding the administrative structures of a post-
conflict society. The cases of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo, the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor and
the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone clearly
attest to this.

At this time I wish to take the opportunity to
underscore some of the key elements in the resolution.
First, my delegation supports the consensus that clear,
credible and realistic mandates must be given and that
the Security Council needs to be more scrupulous in
this regard.

Secondly, the mandate of a peacekeeping mission
should ensure that peacekeepers, once deployed, are
capable of defending themselves and are able to carry
out their mandates professionally.

Thirdly, the call for regular consultations between
troop-contributing countries and the Security Council
is an essential component, especially prior to the
definition of a peacekeeping mandate. Access to
military technical briefings by the Secretariat should
also play an instructive role prior to the formulation of
a peacekeeping mission. The use of private meetings
between potential and current troop contributors before
and after the establishment of a peacekeeping mission
is a step which my delegation believes should be
pursued in earnest. As past experience has shown, the
lack of consultations can lead to misunderstandings
about the mandate of a mission and its implementation.

Fourthly, my delegation wholeheartedly supports
the movement towards cooperation and coordination
between regional and subregional organizations and the
United Nations from an early stage of negotiations.
This, we believe, will facilitate a clearer understanding
between the parties of, inter alia, the political
objectives, the practicality of the tasks assigned and
compliance with the rules and principles of
international law. There has been a measure of success
in this area, and my delegation believes that this should
be encouraged.

Conflict prevention is another aspect to which my
delegation attaches importance. As was indicated
during the open debate in July on the prevention of
armed conflict, the United Nations must manage a
comprehensive and coordinated strategy to address the
root causes of conflict; and, in this regard, early
warning, preventive deployment, preventive
disarmament and post-conflict peace-building are
interdependent and complementary components of a
conflict prevention strategy.

We look forward to the report of the Secretary-
General which is to be presented to the Council in May
2001.

My delegation welcomes the reference in the
resolution to the need to mainstream a gender
perspective in peacekeeping operations and the
mechanisms to do so. This had been overlooked in the
Brahimi Report, but has been included in the report of
the Secretary-General on the report's implementation.
In this regard, the resolution calls for the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), adopted by
the Council on 31 October. We expect the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations to work with the Special
Adviser of the Secretary-General on Gender Issues to
ensure, inter alia, the early establishment of gender
units where appropriate, in Headquarters as well as in
the field. Member States must also be provided with
training guidelines and materials on the protection,
rights and particular needs of women in conflict
situations, as well as on the importance of involving
women in all stages of peacekeeping and peace-
building.

I wish to highlight three other issues: first, my
delegation agrees with the Brahimi Panel that an
effective public information strategy in mission areas is
an essential operational necessity for Virtually all
United Nations peace operations. It is therefore
essential that, in the implementation of the Brahimi
Report, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and the Department of Public Information collaborate
in the development of adequate information strategies
and in ensuring the assignment of personnel required in
the very first days of a peacekeeping mission.

The next issue to which my delegation attaches
importance is the issue of training. Given the complex
challenges of peacekeeping, it has become imperative
that peacekeepers be adequately trained and equipped
for their mission. Not only should peacekeepers be
technically prepared, but special emphasis should also
be placed on promoting cultural sensitivity to societies
undergoing conflict situations. Equally important is the
need for a systematic approach to training for civilian
police.

Also, my delegation wishes to emphasize that
there are many developing countries that are willing to
provide troops, but that lack the necessary equipment
and training. We recognize that some progress has been
made in assisting troop-contributing developing
countries, but we believe that much more can be done,
and we wish to work with the members of the Council
in ensuring that this provides an adequate incentive for
involvement in peacekeeping.

Finally, my delegation wishes to thank the
Secretary-General for his report and for the
implementation plan. This is evidence of the need for
us to take speedy action to translate the words of the
Brahimi Report into tangible deeds and we wish to
work with the members of the Council and the General
Assembly in ensuring that this report does not become
a dead letter.

