Mr. Al-Shamsi (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in Arabic): Mr. President, on behalf of the United Arab
Emirates, it is my pleasure to congratulate you on your
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
this month and to express our wishes for all success in
your task. Also, I cannot fail to express to your
predecessor, the representative of Norway, our
appreciation for his presidency last month.

I would also like to thank you and the Council
members most sincerely for your prompt response by
holding this important emergency meeting, which we
hope will reactivate the Council and its responsibilities
vis-a-vis events in the Middle East region, where a war
of extermination and practices of flagrant ethnic
cleansing are being perpetrated by the Israeli
Government against the defenceless Palestinian people
and their historic leadership.

The Council is meeting again today under
exceptionally grave circumstances imposed by images,
shown daily on television screens since last Thursday
from within Palestinian cities and villages, of human
massacres, destruction, a war of extermination and acts
of mass detention that have been perpetrated for over a
year and a half. In spite of many international
resolutions calling on Israel to lift the siege of the
Palestinian cities and villages, to respect the Tenet
ceasefire plan and the Mitchell recommendations, we
are astonished at the Israeli Government's persistence.
It has escalated its spiteful, aggressive campaign
against the Palestinians, including a premeditated plan
to reoccupy Palestinian cities, to destroy completely
the Palestinian Authority headquarters and its national
institutions, to kill or detain dozens of its employees, to
lay siege and to isolate President Arafat and some of
his aides. This is one of the most immoral political and
legal acts we have witnessed since the creation of the
United Nations.

Returning to history, we find that the war
declared by Prime Minister Ariel Sharon some days
ago against Palestinians and their besieged cities -
which are closed to peace advocates, television
cameras and international humanitarian
organizations - is not new; it is merely an extension, a
new episode in the series of criminal acts perpetrated
by Sharon, who is known for his hatred of Arabs and
Palestinians. How can the world explain the situation
in Ramallah today, this tragic repetition of the siege
against the Palestinian President, the massacres in the
Sabra and Shatila refugee camps in Beirut, events in
Bethlehem, Qalqilya, Tulkarm, Jenin and other cities
and Palestinian villages and refugee camps? Everybody
knows what Sharon and his war machine are
perpetrating today - the killing and execution of
Palestinian civilians, particularly in Ramallah, where
the streets and closed quarters are strewn with dozens
of wounded and dead Palestinians, a city closed to
ambulances and Red Crescent vehicles. Furthermore,
the Israeli army has not stopped its siege or its sniping
at anything that moves in the Palestinian cities, villages
and refugee camps. Indeed, since last Friday it has cut
electricity and water, food supplies and emergency
services to defenceless people. It has invaded homes
and destroyed hospitals and houses of worship. It has
killed civilians under the pretext of pursuing wanted
men.

The pretext of security and of fighting terrorism
declared by the Sharon Government to justify its
increasing violence against the Palestinian people and
its plan to reoccupy their land cannot be believed by
international public opinion, which every day is
witnessing these war crimes against the Palestinian
people and their national leadership perpetrated by
tanks, warplanes, armoured personnel carriers and
Israeli artillery. The international community and the
Security Council, which have always condemned
terrorism in the past and which have renounced
colonialism and occupation in all forms, must
differentiate immediately between State terrorism and
war crimes perpetrated relentlessly, on a daily basis, by
the Israeli army inside occupied Palestinian territory,
and the legitimate struggle of the defenceless
Palestinian people to lift this unjust occupation, to
defend themselves, their properties and their
aspirations to an independent State, with Jerusalem as
its capital.

While reaffirming our solidarity with and full
support for the fraternal Palestinian people and its
courageous leadership, we call on the Security Council
and all States of influence, particularly the United
States of America and the European Union member
States, to shoulder their political, legal and moral
responsibility vis-a-vis the question of Palestine and
the grave developments there. These should include the
following measures.

First is the strongest possible rejection and
condemnation of these war crimes and Israeli terrorism
so that Israel does not misunderstand the message of
the international community, as enshrined in Security
Council resolutions, particularly the most recent one,
resolution 1402 (2202), calling for a withdrawal from
all Palestinian territories that were reoccupied in
violation of previous agreements - the Oslo
Agreement in particular - and other relevant
international resolutions.

Secondly, we must demand an immediate and
unconditional Israeli withdrawal, which must also
mean lifting the siege against the President of the
Palestinian Authority, Yasser Arafat, as the legitimate
elected leader of the Palestinian people, and the release
of thousands of Palestinian detainees. Thirdly, the
dispatch of international observers from the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, human rights
organizations and international emergency aid
organizations in order to protect the Palestinian people
and ensure provision of food, medicine and
humanitarian assistance to the thousands of displaced
persons and to identify those Israeli war criminals who
have killed hundreds of people, including women and
children.

Fourthly, Israel must be compelled to pay
adequate compensation for the grave damage to the
Palestinian infrastructure and property of defenceless
Palestinian civilians. Fifthly, we must promote and
strengthen the role of the "quartet" of the United States
of America, the European Union, the Russian
Federation and the United Nations, based on
evenhandedness and transparency in order to help the
two parties - the Palestinians and the Israelis - to
implement the Tenet plan and the Mitchell
recommendations and to resume dialogue and peace
negotiations from the point at which they stopped in
the year 2000.

Sixthly, we must support and adopt the historic
peace initiative of the Arab leaders at the Beirut
summit as the strategic basis for a comprehensive
settlement of the Palestinian question and the Arab-
Israeli dispute, including a just and comprehensive
peace based on international legitimacy and the
relevant United Nations resolutions, including General
Assembly resolution 181 (II) and Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002) and
1402 (2002), and the principle of land for peace.

In looking forward to the declaration in the near
future of the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State, with Jerusalem as its capital, as a
fundamental reason to strive for a just, comprehensive
and lasting peace in the Middle East, we express the
hope that the international community will provide
urgently needed financial, economic and humanitarian
assistance to the Palestinian people in order to heal
their wounds and to allow them to rebuild the towns,
villages and economic and social infrastructures that
have regrettably been destroyed by Sharon and his
accomplices in war crimes.

