Nana Effah-Apenteng (Ghana): At the outset, I
wish to express my delegation's appreciation of the
statements made by Special Representative Tom
Koenigs and by Mr. Antonio Maria Costa, Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, whose assessment of the situation in
Afghanistan we fully share.

The international community has a shared interest
in the transformation of Afghanistan into a peaceful
and stable democracy. Therefore, it is imperative that
our approach to the current crisis be based on moral
clarity and a steadfast commitment to the values of
openness, tolerance and social inclusion. Hence, the
brutal assassination of the head of the Kandahar
Department of Women's Affairs in September 2006 and
all other acts that are calculated to obstruct the
progress of Afghanistan must be unreservedly
condemned and wholly rejected for what they represent
in today's world.

In launching the Action Plan on Peace, Justice
and Reconciliation in December 2006, President Karzai
took a brave step forward, and he deserves every
encouragement and support if he is to implement the
plan effectively.

While we strongly deplore the loss of innocent
lives resulting from the ongoing violence, we heartily
welcome the steady progress being made in laying the
foundation for a modern, united and prosperous State
that would be at peace with itself and with its
neighbours. In that connection, we commend the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), the International Security Assistance Force
as well as the numerous non-governmental
organizations that are extending invaluable support to
the Government and people of Afghanistan.

At the same time, we do recognize that ultimately
the people of Afghanistan must be the masters of their
own destiny. That is why the gravity of the governance
issues raised in the Secretary-General's report cannot
be overstated. We urge the Afghan authorities and their
international partners to endeavour to address them
with the utmost sense of urgency. Only a strong central
authority that enjoys the confidence of the population
can reconcile the nation and effectively implement the
objectives contained in the internationally-backed
Afghanistan Compact and allied initiatives, such as the
interim Afghanistan National Development Strategy
and the National Drug Control Strategy.
It has long been obvious that failure to reign in
the illegal trade in narcotics and arms and to suppress
the terrorists and extremists who are bent on
destabilizing Afghanistan shall impact negatively on
global peace and security. It is thus heartening to learn
about the brave initiatives undertaken by various local
communities in some of the most volatile areas in the
country to contain the insurgency and improve their
circumstances. They deserve all the support they can
get in seeking to fashion for themselves a safe and
secure environment. Obviously, the people know very
well that without security there can be no meaningful
development, and vice versa. The challenge, therefore,
is to prevent the current situation from evolving into an
intractable vicious cycle that allows widespread
impoverishment and deprivation among the population
to feed into the insurgency.

Ghana further supports regional initiatives aimed
at improving relations between Afghanistan and its
neighbours within the framework of the 2002 Kabul
Declaration and the New Delhi Declaration of
November 2006. It is significant that the forthcoming
Third Regional Economic Cooperation Conference on
Afghanistan will be held in Pakistan, as the meeting
will afford the two countries an opportunity to enhance
their cooperation in combating the insurgency and,
more importantly, to give a much-needed boost to
security, governance and development cooperation
throughout the region.

We have every confidence that, with the
formation of the Joint Coordination and Monitoring
Board and the Policy Action Group, the prospects for
sustained progress in Afghanistan could not have been
better enhanced. Against that backdrop, our delegation
looks forward to the early adoption of a resolution that
will extend the mandate of UNAMA in line with the
Secretary-General's recommendations.

Finally, my delegation appreciates the presence in
our midst of the Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign
Minister of Italy.

