Mr. Mayong Onon (Malaysia): At the outset,
allow me to commend you, Madam President, for
having convened this timely open debate on children
and armed conflict. I wish to thank Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres and Ms. Virginia Gamba, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, for their respective remarks. We
also express our appreciation to Mr. Mubin Shaikh for
sharing his valuable and insightful experiences as a
former recruited child soldier and his continuous work
in preventing children from joining terrorist groups.

There can be no doubt as to our shared international
commitments on the development, preservation and
protection of children in situations of armed conflict
over the past two decades in the Security Council. We
recognize that this year marks the tenth anniversary
of the Paris Principles and related commitments. It is
an important instrumental framework that continues
to guide our collective efforts aimed at the release and
reintegration of children associated with armed groups.

Overall reintegration strategies must take into
account the special needs of girls, who are at greater
risk of rape and sexual violence, exploitation and abuse.
We wish to highlight the plight of second-generation
children of armed conflict, namely, the children born
of war, and the need to also recognize this group as
victims in post-conflict settings.

We must be clear on the fact that ending and
preventing grave violations against children is only
one side of the coin. Equally important is ensuring
that appropriate mechanisms and community-based
reintegration programmes are in place to facilitate
long-term efforts aimed at reconciliation and the
rehabilitation and reintegration of victimized children
into their respective communities.

We are conscious of the fact that a large number
of parties listed in the annexes to the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2017/821) represent a wide array of
non-State armed groups with diverse motives operating
in vastly different circumstances. But it is important
to acknowledge that there can be no one-size-fits-all
approach in addressing such groups. Each must be dealt
with in accordance with the unique context in which
it operates. We believe that further analysis of these
groups would be invaluable to ensure a more tailored
approach both by the operational actors on the ground
and by the Security Council.

Our discussions today raise several crucial questions
as to how the tools at our disposal, including exploring
non-exhaustive solutions and concrete actions, can be
used to influence non-State armed groups to safeguard
the lives of children. My delegation emphasizes the
importance for the United Nations, the Security
Council and Member States to consult and cooperate
closely with one another in dealing with non-State
armed groups to ensure that sustainable measures are
being undertaken to improve the situation of children in
armed conflict. Malaysia believes that peace processes
provide a critical forum of engagement with non-State
armed groups and calls for child-protection provisions
to be integrated in all peace processes, negotiations
and agreements.

In conclusion, the concerted efforts of all actors
and stakeholders are vital to ending the grievous
violations and abuses committed against Children. I
pledge my delegation's commitment to working with
the international community to play a constructive role
to that end.

