Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): At the outset, I wish
to say how pleased I am to see you, Sir, assume the
responsibility of the Security Council presidency. I
know we can count on your wisdom.

I should also like to welcome the new members of
the Council and to assure them of our readiness to work
with them closely, as we did with those colleagues who
just left us upon completion of their terms. We applaud
the contributions they made.

I would like to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Taye-Brook Zerihoun for his very factual briefing on
the matter before us today. We have also taken note
of what the Secretary-General said in his statement
released two days ago. I would like to refer, in all
humility, to a few points in connection with the latest
developments in Iran.

First, we have no reason to contest the argument that
raising human rights issues has no relevance here. What
we have doubts about is whether the Security Council
is the proper forum for such discussion. The debate on
this matter has yet to be settled. What we find a little
troubling is that this may not enhance the possibility
of achieving unity in the Council at a time when such
unity is so critical. We do not say this without meaning
it: we attach great importance to the issue.

We are undoubtedly at a very difficult and complex
period in world history, when there are so many
issues that call for greater cooperation among nations,
particularly among members of the Council. The
Middle East is an area where there is a great need to
take advantage of whatever opportunities we have for
diplomacy to work. All countries have a responsibility
to contribute to the realization of this objective. Iran
also has a great responsibility in this regard, as do
others, including ourselves in our own region.

While we do not want to sound self-righteous,
we seriously believe that everything should be done
to ensure that Iran contributes to regional peace and
stability. That is very critical for the developing world
and Africa, where there is great hope for the right global
context to realize the 2030 Agenda and the promise
made in 2015 to eradicate extreme poverty. Peace on
the Korean peninsula would contribute to thiat as would
peace in the Middle East - to which Iran should, and
could, contribute. No doubt the concerns that people
may have in this regard need to be addressed as frankly
as possible, while noting that, at all times, adherence to
the principles of international law governing relations
among States is imperative.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate, lest I sound self-
righteous, why as a country we attach great importance
to these principles: we do so because of what befell us
as the only country to be abandoned by the League of
Nations when those principles were blatantly abused to
our detriment.

