Mr. J allow: Like President Byron, I would like to
reassure our Rwandan colleagues that, as a matter of
policy, the ICTR is indeed committed to the transfer of
cases in accordance with the conditions that are laid
down in our rules. It will be recalled that we have two
systems of transfer: a Prosecutor to prosecute a
transfer, and a transfer of cases of indictees. Under the
initial system, I have already handed 30 files over to
the Rwandan prosecutor-general for him to consider
investigating and, if possible, prosecuting. The transfer
of indictees, of course, is governed by the rules of
procedure and evidence of the Tribunal.

While we have recognized the tremendous efforts
and progress that Rwanda has made in trying to satisfy
those conditions, we believe the best way out of the
impasse is for further measures to be taken that would
enable me - as I said earlier - to go back to the
judges with fresh applications for reconsideration of
the earlier decisions, measures that need to be taken by
Rwanda in order to meet the concerns of the judges. I
think that is the best way out of the impasse.

I also wanted to reiterate, with regard to the case
of Kabuga, that the information I bring to the Council
concerning his entry and residence in Kenya and his
business activities there is not based on a unilateral
investigation by the Office of the Prosecutor. Some
three years ago a joint task force was established by the
ICTR and the Kenyan Government, comprising the
investigators from the ICTR and members of the Kenya
police force. They have submitted a series of reports. It
is those reports that have documented Kabuga's entry
into the country, from immigration records that are
available in Kenya, his application for residence and
the approval of his residence and of his visa, his
establishment of various businesses in the country, his
opening of bank accounts, et cetera. It is information
collected jointly by the Kenya police and by the ICTR
investigators. It is therefore surprising that it is being
described as untrue by the representative of Kenya. It
is information that is available to the Kenya
Government.

Since those reports were submitted, as I said, the
only step taken was in May, in relation to one property.
There are bank accounts there, some of which, it is
suspected, were operated by his colleagues. There is at
least one account in his own name, in respect of which
no steps have been taken so far by the Government of
Kenya. No steps have been taken either in respect of
the businesses which he is suspected of running with
colleagues.

It is not for the ICTR to implement the
recommendations of that task force, because we do not
have the mandate to do that in Kenya or in any other
country. The Tribunals do not have the powers to make
such an arrest in any country; that is for national law
enforcement authorities to do. The Tribunal does not
have powers to freeze assets and accounts in any
country; that is for national authorities to do.
Therefore, it is now the responsibility of the
Government of Kenya to move forward to implement
those recommendations, which have been put together
in a report jointly prepared by the ICTR and the
Kenyan police, and not unilaterally by the ICTR alone.

I would just wish to appeal to my colleague to
reiterate the message to his colleagues back home that,
having worked with the ICTR until we were able to
unearth a lot of information concerning Kabuga's
activities in Kenya and reached the point at which we
have been able to make a number of recommendations, he
should urge his colleagues in Nairobi to now move
forward towards implementing those recommendations,
which were jointly arrived at.

Beyond that, I should like to thank you, Sir, and
the members of the Council for your continued support
to the work of the Tribunal.

