Mr. Serrano (European Union): Let me thank
you, Sir, for having invited the European Union (EU)
to participate in this debate. I also thank His
Excellency Prime Minister Ali for his important
statement. I further wish to thank the Special
Representative of the African Union Commission,
Mr. Diarra, for his presentation, and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Augustine
Mahiga for this briefing and all his efforts.

The candidate countries Croatia, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro and
Iceland; the countries of the Stabilisation and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia; the European Free
Trade Association country Norway, member of the
European Economic Area; as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova and Georgia align themselves
with this declaration.

The European Union follows events in Somalia
with great attention. It seeks to help efforts to stabilize
the country and provide hope for those afflicted by
war, insecurity, poverty and starvation. There has been
encouraging progress, such as the accord signed in
Kampala between several of Somalia's interested
political parties. It is important that this accord be
implemented, promises be kept, and the one-year
extension of the transition period be put to good use.
The adoption of the road map in Mogadishu on
6 September represents an important positive step. As a
member of the technical committee facilitating
cooperation to implement the road map, the European
Union will spare no effort to support the Transitional
Federal Institutions on their path to reforms. This needs
to happen in compliance with the agreed benchmarks
and timelines.

Encouraging progress has been made at the
security level. The withdrawal of Al-Shabaab from
Mogadishu gives more reason for hope. Despite such
positive developments, however, the situation remains
fragile. And now we are faced with a new challenge:
famine. Almost 4 million Somalis are in need of
assistance. Thousands are fleeing to neighbouring
countries, and food shortages threaten to expand
further. Together with international partners, the
European Union pursues a comprehensive approach to
Somalia.

In order to respond to the immediate needs posed
by the famine, the European Union and its member
States have allocated over €166 million from funds
reserved for humanitarian assistance to help the people
of Somalia. These funds serve to finance the provision
food as well as health care, water and sanitation
facilities by a number of partners and United Nations
agencies. Stepping up the immediate humanitarian
response will save lives, but it is also necessary to
invest in long-term solutions to build up resilience to
future droughts.

This is why the European Union looks closely at

the causes of famine. It is committed to supporting

programmes in the areas of drought preparedness,

agriculture, rural development and food security. EU

engagement includes an additional €l75 million in

development funds recently allocated to Somalia for
the period 2011-2013.

As part of its comprehensive approach, the
European Union is helping to stabilize the country by
providing support to the security sector. On 28 July, the
European Union extended its military training mission
for Somalia by another year in order to help the
transitional Government to build up its security forces.
Some 150 military staff from 14 European Union
States are serving in a mission that has trained around
2,000 Somali soldiers so far. Over the next year, the
European Union training mission will focus on
developing command and control structures and
forming trainers who can then take over the training
exercise.

In addition, EU Naval Force Atalanta remains
substantially involved in naval operations against
piracy off the shores of Somalia. On 7 December 2010,
the Council of the European Union extended the
operation's mandate for another two years, until
12 December 2012. The European Union also provides
support to the countries in the region that have taken
up the task of prosecuting suspected pirates.

Other actions focus on building up the maritime
capacities of Somalia and neighbouring countries.
Within the framework laid out by the International
Maritime Organization - the so-called Djibouti Code
of Conduct - our objective is to enhance information-
sharing and training capacities for maritime
administrations. In addition, the European Union is
working on a new possible action to support regional
maritime capacity-building in the Horn of Africa and
the Western Indian Ocean. Measures taken in this
context should enhance Somalia's capacities for
controlling its coastal areas on land. We are also
intensifying contacts with the United Nations and other
relevant actors concerning Somalia's judicial system
and the setting up of Somali courts. Through these
actions we aim at strengthening national capacities and
the rule of law - vital building blocks for a stable
development environment.

The African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) remains a crucial element to support and
protect Somalia's Transitional Federal Institutions. In
2011, the European Union made another contribution
worth €65.9 million to AMISOM. It is preparing a
€50-million additional support programme for the
remaining months of 2011. This will bring overall EU
support to AMISOM. to more than €258 million since
2007.

The security context has changed significantly
since the withdrawal of Al-Shabaab from large parts of
Somalia, including the capital, Mogadishu. The
Transitional Federal Government and AMISOM. are
facing new challenges, such as consolidating security
in newly accessible areas and filling the security
vacuum. Addressing these challenges will have clear
resource implications. It is important to broaden
resource mobilization and to identify alternative and
additional sources of funding.

All this having been said, the role of the
international community is only to assist. The main
responsibility for Somalia's security lies with the
Somalis themselves. The European Union will continue
supporting the region's leadership and efforts in
finding solutions. It also appreciates strong United
Nations leadership in Somalia with a view to providing
direction and support to the political process and to
coordinating international support.

In conclusion, the European Union reiterates its
commitment to helping improve the lives, dignity and
security of the Somali people. Reconciliation, respect
for human rights, the protection of civilians, the
inclusion of women in peacebuilding, the rule of law
and good governance are indispensable stepping stones
on the road to peace and sustainable development.
Somalia can count on the EU's support in this. At the
same time, the European Union calls on Somalia's
stakeholders, especially the Transitional Federal
Institutions, to redouble their efforts to address the
enormous political, economic and security challenges
before them. The upcoming meeting of the
International Contact Group on Somalia later this
month in Copenhagen will provide an important
opportunity for the Somali authorities and their
regional and international partners to continue working
together towards peace and stability in Somalia.

