Mr. Akram (Pakistan): First of all, allow me
to congratulate the United Kingdom on assuming
the presidency for this month and on organizing
today's debate.

Reconciliation is an important thematic area in
post-conflict peacebuilding. I recall participating in
a debate on national reconciliation in this Chamber
in 2004 (S/PV.4903). I welcome the resumption of the
consideration of this important issue.

We would also like to thank Secretary-General
Guterres and Mr. Ozerdem for their briefings.

As we approach the seventy-fifth anniversary of
the United Nations next year, we should not forget that
the United Nations itself is a symbol of reconciliation.
It is an Organization that was born from the conviction
that animosity and discord can indeed be put to rest
and that nations can rise above their differences to
build a shared future. The development of peace and
cooperation in Europe following two devastating world
wars is an illustration and example of the benefits of
political reconciliation. I must add that I am sure that
Brexit will not reverse that.

We have made some progress over the years
in reconciling conflicts, such as in Cote d'Ivoire,
Liberia and Sierra Leone. Pakistani peacekeepers have
contributed to bringing protracted wars and conflicts
like those to an end. Such efforts should be maintained,
avoiding, however, a one-size-fits-all approach. Besides
being a leading troop contributor to United Nations
peacekeeping, Pakistan has also been a member of
the Peacebuilding Commission since its inception in
2005. I would like to share some key points based on
our experience.

First, nationally owned reconciliation processes
firmly anchored in the principles of inclusiveness
and victim-centred transitional justice offer the best
hope of rebuilding and sustaining peace. Secondly,
reconciliation is an extended process and should
not replace accountability; both processes should
be mutually reinforcing. Thirdly, inclusivity is key
to advancing national peacebuilding processes. All
communities must be taken on board and their concerns
addressed judiciously. Fourthly, development is an
essential, yet insufficient, part of rebuilding peace in
communities ravaged by conflict. The root causes of
conflict need to be identified and addressed.
Pakistan has supported an Afghan-led, Afghan-
owned peace process. With the mutual release of
hostages and prisoners yesterday, we hope that the
peace process will be quickly revived. Furthermore,
we are host to 3 million Afghan refugees. They should
return home and have a voice in the intra-Afghan
reconciliation process that we hope will start soon. The
international community must support the early and
dignified return of Afghan refugees.

As conflicts continue across the globe,
reconciliation will remain a relevant mechanism in
post-conflict peacebuilding. However, the central
purpose of the United Nations is to prevent and resolve
conflict to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war. Unfortunately, the Security Council
has had an uneven record in resolving threats to and
breaches of international peace and security, which
is its primary mandate. Both its endeavours and their
outcomes have been inconsistent. We have witnessed
prolonged inaction and silence in some cases.

In particular, Pakistan is deeply concerned at
the absence of action by the Security Council to halt
India's violations of human rights and Security Council
resolutions in the disputed state of J ammu and Kashmir.
In contrast, the Council has been propelled in other
instances to rapidly resort to sanctions and enforcement
action. Resolving that issue will require political
will and commitment on the part of the international
community. Given that less than 0.5 per cent of global
defence expenditures is invested in peace, it is a telling
commentary on the commitment required to build
peace in the world.

