Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
Bolivia thanks the presidency of the Security Council
for having convened this meeting. We also wish to thank
Secretary-General Antonio Guterres for his briefing.

Bolivia wishes to stress the primary purpose of
the Charter of the United Nations to act jointly and
effectively to prevent and eliminate threats or breaches
of peace, to suppress acts of aggression and to settle
disputes peacefully and in line with the principles of
justice and international law. The Plurinational State of
Bolivia, in keeping with its political constitution, affirms
its peaceful vocation and rejects all acts of aggression
as means to settle disputes and conflicts among peoples
and States. In that regard, the Government of President
Evo Morales has created a policy of rejecting all
confrontation, armed or otherwise.

In order to avoid armed confrontation, we think it
is essential to advance towards the priority objective
of global nuclear disarmament. Latin America and the
Caribbean, my region, became a nuclear-weapon-free
zone after the signing of the Treaty for the Prohibition of
Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean
50 years ago, thereby becoming the first nuclear-
weapon-free zone.

In that respect, and following the same line of
thought on non-proliferation, we reiterate our strongest
rejection and condemnation of the launching ofballistic
missiles and the carrying out of nuclear tests by the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, the most
recent of which took place on 15 April. This attitude
represents a threat to international peace and security,
and we therefore call for unity on the part ofthe Security
Council in addressing this situation. Compliance with
the resolutions of the Council is crucial in order to meet
this objective.

Likewise, we would recall that sanctions are not
an end in themselves but, rather, a means of achieving
an objective. As recalled at the recent meeting of
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the Group of 77,
Bolivia also rejects unilateral sanctions in this case,
as in others, and for that reason believes that the
Council, through multilateral mechanisms, must take
the necessary action.

In recent weeks, the world has witnessed escalating
tensions owing both to the tests carried out by the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea and to the
military deployment of the United States. The current
situation can be considered as posing the greatest threat
of nuclear war in this century. We urge all parties
involved to avoid any escalation of rhetoric or actions
that would increase tensions and endanger international
peace and security, especially on the Korean peninsula.

In that respect, we support China's proposal of a
simultaneous halt aimed at defusing the crisis in the
Korean peninsula. The Democratic People's Republic
of Korea must abandon its nuclear-test and ballistic-
missile programmes, and the United States must refrain
from carrying out military exercises in the region. The
parties involved must resume negotiations, keeping
in mind that the Six-Party Talks represent the most
appropriate forum to that end. It is also crucial that
the countries of the region take part in the negotiations
in a positive spirit that would make it possible to ease
current tensions.
The only solution to this conflict is a political
solution. We must rule out once and for all any military
alternative. In the current high-tension situation, reason
must prevail, and we must refrain from taking any stance
that could lead to provocations or misunderstandings.
Priority must be attached to respect for the dignity
and equality of peoples as well as to the lives of the
inhabitants of our planet.

War is a failure of the Council. War is a failure
of policy. War is a failure of diplomacy. We have the
internationally recognized obligation to negotiate.
I reiterate: we have the internationally recognized
obligation to negotiate. We must eschew belligerent
lines of thought and approaches, because once we have
unleashed the demons of war, the only ones who benefit
are those who profit from it.

