Mr. Kolby (Norway): I too would like to thank
the Executive Director of the World Food Programme
(WFP), Catherine Bertini, for her briefing. I would also
like to thank her for the way she has led the World
Food Programme to its current position as an
indispensable part of the international machinery for
emergency assistance and recovery in crisis areas.

Ms. Bertini has in a timely manner reminded us
that the role of food aid can go well beyond the most
immediate aim of feeding a hungry population.
Through innovative means, which WFP has
championed for many years, food aid can also become
an effective vehicle for a wider set of objectives for
conflict prevention and post-conflict recovery.
Although not without its limitations, food aid could
thus also be seen in the context of meeting basic needs
and providing local communities with opportunities to
prevent grievances which can fuel conflict and hamper
post-conflict reconciliation. The ongoing humanitarian
crisis and recovery challenges in Afghanistan are a
clear case in point. Norway gives high priority to
promoting a wide-ranging reconstruction effort
focusing on programmes aimed at filling basic long-
term needs for the peaceful transition of Afghan
society, notably restarting agriculture and securing
long-term food security.

As is clear from Ms. Bertini's briefing, food aid
can contribute substantially to that end. The
achievements of WFP and of other humanitarian
agencies in Afghanistan are impressive. At the same
time, a substantial part of that country's population will
still require emergency food aid at least until the
summer harvest and perhaps beyond. In the longer
term, reconstruction efforts must underpin the political
process and ensure sustainable development. The food
supply system is of direct relevance for Afghanistan's
transition to a safe, stable, democratic and eventually
prosperous Afghan society. Large-scale investment is
urgently needed in the agricultural sector in
Afghanistan.

We recognize the need for adequate funding for
both short-term recovery and long-term development.
As Chair of the Afghanistan Support Group, Norway
has consistently urged the donor community to live up
to its commitments. We will continue to do so in the
future.

Finally, I would like to wish Ms. Bertini success
in her future life and thank her for her achievements at
WFP.

