I thank Estonia for convening today's important meeting, and I thank the briefers for their insightful remarks and their valuable contributions to the core issues. Highlighting the need to ensure the Council's transparency, efficiency and effectiveness is more urgent than ever during these unprecedented circumstances of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and the challenges the Council now faces as a result. We welcome that initiative and hope that the Council will take up the concrete proposals put forward today. The upcoming seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations is an opportune moment to not only reflect but also act to improve the functioning of the United Nations system, including its Security Council. Given Poland's experience as a non-permanent Council member and Vice-Chair of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and other Procedural Questions, complemented by my recent experience co-chairing the intergovernmental negotiations on the question of equitable representation and increase in Council membership and other Council- related matters, let me offer a few relevant ideas of what could be done. First, we must ensure the continuous, transparent, effective, efficient and agile functioning of the Security Council - both during ordinary and exceptional circumstances like today - in line with the Charter of the United Nations, including Article 24, paragraph 1, and Article 28, paragraph 1, the Council's provisional rules of procedure, presidential notes on its working methods and other relevant documents and practices. We recognize the unprecedented nature of the challenges arising from the COVID-19 pandemic, which occurred during China's presidency of the Council. This rendered physical meetings at the United Nations Headquarters impracticable for the daily work of the Council and its subsidiary bodies. We welcome the initiatives and decisions to adapt the Council's working methods to these extraordinary circumstances, including the agreement on procedures for adopting resolutions and presidential statements. We also appreciate the issuance - during the Council presidencies of the Dominican Republic, Estonia, France and Germany - of guides on working methods, and welcome the role of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines in encouraging them to do so. We hope that subsequent presidencies will follow those good practices and take into account the lessons learned. At the same time, we support and encourage further adjustment of the working methods of the Council, including its subsidiary bodies, in order to provide it sufficient flexibility to function continuously in a transparent, efficient, effective and inclusive way and to ensure that it is accountable to the wider United Nations membership. To that end, in addition to the observations and proposals offered in the statement on behalf of the States that served as elected Council members from 2011 to 2019, we encourage considering open debates held through video-teleconference to be official meetings. Moreover, we advocate employing creative and innovative approaches to promote the transparency, efficiency, effectiveness, inclusiveness and accountability of the Council. I would like to take this opportunity to express our gratitude to Estonia's presidency in particular for implementing its excellent ideas and solutions, including its cutting-edge technological ones. Secondly, we must build and follow-up on the work done in the Informal Working Group, including under the recent dedicated and successful chairmanships of Japan and Kuwait. The full implementation of the latest comprehensive presidential note (S/2017/507) and the notes related to the Council working methods adopted since then remains vital. However, that should not be the only goal. Rather, it should be complemented by continued progress on a number of issues, including fair and clear procedures related to Council sanctions regimes, as well as co-penholdership. Therefore, the exceptional circumstances related to the COVID-19 pandemic notwithstanding, we encourage further efforts to improve the Council's functioning. We hope that the current and future elected members of the Council will remain united and continue that endeavour. We look forward to the future successes of the Informal Working Group, under the presidency of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, and of initiatives outside of it, in steadily advancing the Council's working methods. In conclusion, I would once again like to thank Estonia and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines for convening today's debate, and all who contributed to the improvement of the Council's working methods, which are critical to its functioning. Let me reiterate Poland's support for further increasing the transparency, efficiency and effectiveness of the Council's work and strengthening its ability to respond to current and emerging crises. Guided by the Charter of the United Nations and the values of solidarity, responsibility and commitment, we encourage all initiatives aimed at improving the Security Council's performance.
