Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for Yemen, Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed; the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
Mr. Zeid Ra'ad Al Hussein; and the Assistant Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Kyung-wha
Kang, for their briefings on the situation in Yemen.

We welcome the resumption of negotiations
between the Yemeni parties. We note the productive
work of Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed, who overcame
numerous difficulties in Switzerland and was able
to bring together all the key parties to the conflict to
conduct comprehensive political talks with a view to
putting a timely end to the bloodshed. We regret that
the talks did not coincide with a lasting ceasefire. It is
not encouraging that the meeting has been deferred to
mid-January. We underscore our position that we do see
no alternative to a political settlement of the conflict.
We truly hope that the Coordination and De-Escalation
Committee, comprised of military advisers from each
party to the conflict, will be able ensure reconciliation
as soon as possible.

We believe that the agreements with regard to
unhindered humanitarian access and the lifting of any
blockades are exceptionally important. We continue
to believe that the establishment of humanitarian
pauses is timely, a point on which Russia has insisted
since the very beginning of the crisis in Yemen. Such
humanitarian pauses, aimed at alleviating the suffering
of civilians, are of critical interest and must be complied
with under all international humanitarian laws. The
Russian Federation has provided and will continue to
provide humanitarian assistance to Yemen.

We welcome the outcome that was reached under
Mr. Ahmed's leadership in Switzerland with regard
to the exchange of prisoners. In the future, it will be
necessary to gradually establish an atmosphere of
mutual trust. In that regard, the unifying elements
might also include a joint effort to fight the terrorist
threat emerging in the country. The development of
events on the ground this year have demonstrated the
evident futility of wagering on a military solution to
resolve the crisis in Yemen. Ongoing military clashes
can lead only to the further deterioration the situation,
exacerbate the humanitarian crisis and promote the
anarchy and chaos that terrorist groups actively exploit
to spread their presence and influence in Yemen. All
Yemeni patriotic forces must come together to push
back against terrorism.

In conclusion, we would like to express our support
for the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ould
Cheikh Ahmed, and his team. We expect an increased
level in his efforts to end the military clashes as soon as
possible and launch substantive talks on the withdrawal
of forces and the start of an inclusive dialogue to rebuild
statehood and the unity of the country.

