Mr. Pleuger (Germany): My delegation is
grateful for the Secretary-General's latest report on the
situation in Bougainville and we also highly appreciate
the very comprehensive briefing that Assistant
Secretary-General Danilo Tiirk has given us.

Germany commends the success already achieved
by Mr. Sinclair and his small team, in cooperation with
the members of the Peace Monitoring Group, and
expresses its full support for the accomplishment of the
mission as planned by the end of this year. We still
consider this timetable to be a realistic timetable.

As stated in the Secretary-General's last report, in
most areas of Bougainville stage II of the weapons
disposal plan has been completed to date. Two districts
have already fully completed the process of
disarmament. This represents an extraordinary
achievement and a steady improvement of the weapons
disposal process since the last Security Council
meeting in November 2002. Germany appreciates this
steady development.

This positive overall assessment cannot be
impaired by the recent shootout, resulting in the death
of one combatant of the Me'ekamui Defence Force. We
consider this incident to be of rather small scale and
without prejudice to the ongoing peace process in
Bougainville. We concur with the Secretary-General
that

"The development of the new Bougainville
Constitution is a central part of the
implementation of the Peace Agreement"
(S/2003/345, para. 8)

and that the holding of free elections should conclude
the successful disarmament process. However, as the
constitution and election process cannot move ahead
until the completion of stage II of the weapons disposal
plan has been verified, we urge all parties to contribute
actively to the early completion of that stage of the
plan.

We have taken note of the intentions of the Peace
Monitoring Group to cease all operations on the island
on 30 June 2003. However, as it can be questioned
whether the weapons disposal plan will be completed
by that date, we should focus our efforts on starting the

verification of stage II immediately in order to
maintain the possibility of its completion prior to the
Peace Monitoring Group's withdrawal. At the same
time, we should initiate contingency plans because we
can never be sure that we will achieve that goal on
time, and we should request members of the Peace
Monitoring Group, in cooperation with the Secretariat,
to consider, if need should arise, alternative
arrangements until the end of 2003.

Today, the peace process on Bougainville is
undoubtedly stronger than it has ever been before.
However, in order to solidify what has been achieved
so far and to consolidate peace and stability in
Bougainville, the international community must give
continued support even after the expected departure of
the Office at the end of 2003.

