Mr. Eteffa (Ethiopia): May I first of all congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of January and on your very
effective leadership. I should also like to pay special tribute
to the Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation,
Ambassador Lavrov, for the competent and outstanding
manner in which he presided over the affairs of the Council
during the month of December. We also commend the
Secretary-General for his concrete, thought-provoking and
comprehensive report and observations, as reflected in
document S/1996/47.

May I also express deeply felt appreciation to the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Liberia for his briefing.

Fifty years ago Liberia was one of the three
independent African countries, with leaders who
commanded respect at home and internationally. Today,
unfortunately, it hardly has a functioning Government that
has effective control over its territory. Liberia deserves our
sympathy and action. The people of Liberia, like people
anywhere, are entitled to peace, stability and security. The
situation in Liberia, which is before the Council, is of the
utmost importance to the African countries and to our
regional organization - the Organization of African Unity
(OAU). It is therefore a privilege and an honour for me to
participate in this debate today in my capacity as
representative of the current Chairman of the OAU, His
Excellency Prime Minister Meles Zenawi of the Federal
Democratic Republic of Ethiopia.

It is quite some time since the plight of Liberia
captured the attention of the international community. But
the suffering of the Liberian people has not been alleviated.
At times we saw promising signs and the signing of
Agreements which appeared to represent a breakthrough.
Unfortunately, however, some of the Agreements are
violated before the ink on the documents has had time to
dry.

Let us respond to the problems in Liberia with
concrete action in terms of the commitment of financial
resources and logistical arrangements for the peace-keepers
as well as by extending the mandate of United Nations
Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL), so that a lasting
solution can be found to the plight of the Liberian people.
It goes without saying that it is only the people of Liberia
who can bring about a lasting political settlement to the
problems of their country. The international community
can only assist them to do so.

There should be a political settlement of the conflicts
and the creation of a peaceful situation in Liberia before
the legislative and presidential elections can take place in
August 1996, in accordance with the Abuja Agreement.
Of course, it would be naive to expect that free and fair
elections can take place without demobilization of
combatants and without extensive consultations which
might lead to reconciliation and the creation of a
generally conducive environment before the elections.
Furthermore, the exchange of prisoners should be effected
as agreed and the delivery of humanitarian relief
assistance should flow, unhindered by any of the factions.
The Liberian National Transitional Government (LNTG)
should be allowed to function until elections take place in
August. In this election process, the Secretary-General's
recommendation in his report should be implemented; that
is, that UNOMIL should be in a position

"To observe and verify the election process, in
consultation with the Organization of African Unity
and ECOWAS, including the legislative and
presidential elections to be held in accordance with
provisions of the peace agreements". (resolution 1020 (1995), para. 2 (g))

It seems that there is a formidable task and a real
challenge ahead of us to remove the increased and
increasing insecurity in many areas of Liberia. Unless
these challenges are met, it will not be practical to have
meaningful elections in August. Along with the
improvement of the security situation in Liberia, the
process of disengagement, disarmament and
demobilization should be dealt with as priority items.

The civilians who are displaced and trapped between
ECOMOG and ULIMO-J forces outside Kle should be
helped in every way possible, in order to release them as
soon as possible; and while they are still trapped,
humanitarian assistance should be rendered to them. All
concerned should help this group of civilians and other
civilians in similar situations, and all other victims of the
fighting should be assisted.

The recent agreement between the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) and the LNTG in regard to the repatriation of
the estimated 750,000 Liberian refugees should be
implemented as part of the general process of creating a
conducive environment for reconciliation and political

 
settlement, which would eventually lead to recovery and
reconstruction. The intended special consultation meeting of
the LNTG and its international partners in March 1996 to
address the problems of recovery is an undertaking which
should be encouraged and assisted by the international
community at large. The preparations toward this end
should be under way shortly, according to the Secretary-
General's recommendation. Needless to say, this is an effort
in the right direction. However, real, positive results cannot
be expected unless, to use the Secretary-General's words,

"a safe and secure environment can be established
throughout the country." (S/1996/47, para. 43)

The success of the peace process in Liberia, as much
as it depends on the cooperation of the parties concerned,
also requires greater commitment on the part of the
international community. The cooperation and coordination
among the United Nations, OAU and ECOWAS should be
further strengthened. In particular, we wish to emphasize
the need for ensuring adequate resources and logistical
support required for the operations of UNOMIL and
ECOMOG. The report of the Secretary-General before the
Council indicates that the status of assessed contributions to
the UNOMIL special account leaves much to be desired. As
regards the United Nations Trust Fund for Liberia, we urge
the international community to make generous contributions
to the Fund, so as to enable ECOMOG to fulfil the
challenging task of ensuring peace and stability in Liberia.

The Organization of African Unity closely monitors
the situation in Liberia. The fifth ordinary session of the
Central Organ of the OAU Mechanism for Conflict
Prevention, Management and Resolution, held in Addis
Ababa from 18 to 19 December 1995, expressed its
satisfaction at the conclusion of the Abuja Agreement that
led to the establishment of a new Transitional Government
in Liberia. While commending the current Chairman of
ECOWAS, His Excellency President Jerry Rawlings of
Ghana, and other leaders of West Africa for their untiring
efforts to bring about peace in Liberia, the OAU Central
Organ also appealed for international assistance to Liberia,
and, in particular, for generous contributions to the Trust
Fund established by the United Nations Secretary-General,
in order to enable ECOMOG to fulfil its mandate. The
OAU has also committed itself to provide financial support
to assist ECOMOG in carrying out its important tasks.

We share the view expressed in the
Secretary-General's report that, in spite of recent setbacks,
the peace process in Liberia will succeed, given the full
support and cooperation of all concerned. We therefore join
the Secretary-General in urging the faction leaders to
ensure observance of the cease-fire and to cooperate fully
with ECOMOG and UNOMIL, in particular as regards
the disarmament, disengagement and demobilization of
combatants.

At the same time, we wish to point out once again
that the success of ECOMOG in ensuring implementation
of the Abuja Agreement depends a great deal on the
availability of the necessary resources. In this regard, we
call on the international community to provide such
resources and logistical support as are critically important
for the successful fulfilment of ECOMOG's tasks.

The cooperation and partnership existing between the
United Nations, OAU and ECOWAS should be continued
and further enhanced until a lasting political solution to
the Liberian problem is achieved, in accordance with the
Abuja Agreement. To this end, we call on the Security
Council to extend UNOMIL's mandate to ensure its
continued cooperation and coordination with the OAU and
ECOWAS in the fulfilment of the challenging tasks of
ensuring peace and stability in Liberia.

