Mr. de La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I recall that France associates itself with
the statement which will be made by the presidency of
the European Union.

The building of a separation wall, which deviates
from the Green Line and encroaches on the occupied
Palestinian territories, together with the continuation of
the establishment of settlements in the occupied
territories, is an issue of vital importance for the future
of the settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

What is at stake is historic - nothing less than
the possibility of a negotiated settlement on the basis of
two States - Israel and a viable Palestinian State -
living in peace and security, within secure and
recognized borders.

What is at stake is the very idea of a peace
process based on the principles enshrined by the
international community in resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973) and 1397 (2002) - the principle of land for
peace, which was given concrete expression in the road
map of the Quartet, which was accepted by the two
parties at the Aqaba Summit on 4 June last.

With such high stakes, it seems to us legitimate
and critical for the international community, through
the Security Council, to respond, recall the rule of law,
and show the parties the way to be followed.

France has publicly indicated its opposition to the
construction of the separation wall following a route
that cuts into the occupied Palestinian territories and
deviates from the Green Line, as it has indicated its
opposition to the settlement activities in the occupied
Palestinian territories, and this for at least three
reasons.

First, construction of the wall following the route
chosen is illegal in terms of international law and
cannot be justified in terms of the war on terrorism.

France recognizes Israel's inalienable right to
security, its right to self-defence and its right to combat
terrorist attacks, which are totally condemnable,
morally odious and which no cause can justify.
However, the struggle against terrorism cannot justify
everything and must be carried out with respect for the
law.

What can be criticized from a legal perspective
regarding the building of the separation wall is not so
much the wall itself as the route chosen by the Israeli
Government. That route broadly cuts into the territories
occupied in 1967 and opens the way to the confiscation
of Palestinian territories, thus contravening
international humanitarian law and in particular the
Fourth Geneva Convention, as well as the agreements
signed between Israelis and Palestinians.

This is all the more true of the second segment of
the wall, which is closely following the location of
settlements - and in particular of Ariel - which are
clearly illegal. The permanent nature of the wall means
that the territories between the wall and the Green Line
will be de facto incorporated by Israel and under its
control.

Moreover, the inadmissible nature of the
acquisition of territory by force is a fundamental
principle of Security Council resolution 242 (1967), on
which the peace process is based.

In East Jerusalem, the construction of the wall
calls into question once again a fundamental principle
of the peace process, which should allow the city to
become the capital of two independent States and
which should preserve the specific status of the holy
places.

Today the construction of the security wall on the
Mount of Olives directly threatens the property and
gardens of several charitable religious congregations. I
would recall here the importance to France of ensuring
free access to the holy sites of Jerusalem and
Bethlehem.

Secondly, construction of the wall following the
chosen route has inadmissible humanitarian
consequences. The wall is a physical barrier which
gravely hampers the movement of persons and of
goods, separates families and cuts off numerous
Palestinians from their agricultural lands, thereby
depriving them of their livelihood.

According to various estimates, the lives of more
than 200,000 Palestinians will be directly affected by
the construction of the wall. Several thousand people
will find themselves trapped between the wall and the
Green Line. Life in general and the humanitarian
situation in the Palestinian territories, which are a
source of great concern, can only further deteriorate -
let alone the offence to human dignity represented by
the creation of a quasi-ghetto, as is the case in

Qalqilya.

Thirdly, the construction of the wall runs counter
to the road map and is likely seriously to jeopardize the
future of the peace process and of a negotiated solution
between Israelis and Palestinians, which can be
conceived only based on the 1967 borders and a viable
Palestinian State.

The construction of the wall directly contravenes
the road map, which expressly demands that the Israeli
Government not undertake any action that would
undermine confidence, in particular the confiscation of
Palestinian houses and property.

This will be a permanent structure that will
permanently change geographic and demographic data.
The building of the wall can only encourage the
development of settlements and aggravate the already
serious problems that these are causing.

What Israeli leader would dare in future to
dismantle the settlements in the interests of a necessary
peace with the Palestinians, if they have developed in
the shadow of a security barrier? The price of peace for
Israel will then be considerably higher.

The planned route, if indeed followed, prejudges
the borders of the future Palestinian State. The
continued building of a wall of separation following a
route that departs from the Green Line would de facto
indicate that Israel no longer recognizes resolution 242
(1967) as an essential basis for negotiations with the
Palestinians.

There cannot be peace without mutual recognition
by each of the parties of their territorial rights. The
route also seriously damages the viability of a future
Palestinian State, which would be likely to find itself
reduced to a collection of isolated enclaves.

What Palestinian leader could make his people
agree to peace without the assurance of the creation of
an independent and viable State, which is predicated on
territorial continuity?

To thus so seriously and permanently jeopardize
the opportunity for a negotiated settlement to the
conflict is in no one's interest. In such conditions, we
believe that it is the responsibility of the Security
Council to respond through the adoption of a draft
resolution showing its opposition to the building of the
wall following the route selected - a route that is
illegal in terms of international law and whose
humanitarian and political consequences are extremely
serious and inadmissible.

Security and peace, moreover, go hand in hand.
France reaffirms its conviction that only a just and
negotiated solution to the conflict, leading to the end of
the occupation of 1967 and to the creation, side by side
with Israel, of a viable Palestinian State, will provide
Israel that security to which all Israelis have an
inalienable right.

It is on this path that the two parties embarked in
accepting the road map during the Aqaba Summit on 4
June last. They must stay on this path. France calls on
the parties immediately to fulfil their reciprocal and
parallel obligations within the framework of the road
map. France is convinced that the international
community, in particular through the Quartet, has a key
role to play to contribute to the advent of peace. We
must press on.

The time has come to hold an international
conference and to establish in the field a credible third-
party monitoring mechanism. There is a need to take
risks that will lead to peace in the Middle East; it is our
collective duty to act.

