Mr. Khalilzad (United States of America): We
greatly appreciate the briefings provided today by
Under-Secretary-General Guehenno and Special Envoy
Eliasson. We thank them for their efforts to bring a
sustainable peace to the region. We also thank
Permanent Observer Ratsifandrihamanana of the
African Union (AU) for her statement. In addition, we
are grateful to the Secretary-General for his personal
engagement on Darfur issues, including his recent trip
to Africa, about which he briefed the Council on
Tuesday.

The rapid deployment of an effective
peacekeeping force for Darfur and finding a lasting
political settlement to the conflict are both of critical
importance to my country. This morning, I would like
to cover those two issues and also address the impact
of the Chad conflict on the future of the region.

We were pleased by the Secretary-General's
briefing to the Security Council on 5 February, in
which he reported - as Mr. Guehenno did today -
progress in discussions with the Sudanese on the
deployment of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). We hope that
a breakthrough has indeed been achieved.

As always with the Government of the Sudan, the
proof of its commitment is in its actions. If the
Sudanese are truly committed to UNAMID's
deployment, we expect the following to happen in the
coming weeks.

First, we expect the status-of-forces agreement to
be signed on 10 February. The United States urges the
Sudanese Government to cooperate fully with
UNAMID to finalize that agreement without further
delay, including the outstanding issues of aviation and
ground movements. The agreement must incorporate
the same principles that apply to United Nations
peacekeeping missions anywhere in the world.

Secondly, the United States expects that the
Government of the Sudan will cooperate fully with the
upcoming deployments of UNAMID forces. The
Egyptian engineer, signal and heavy transport unit
should deploy by 10 March, followed by Egyptian and
Ethiopian infantry battalions in March and April. The
Thai infantry battalion should deploy within an April
time frame. If the Sudanese Government does not
deliver on those steps in a timely manner, then the
Security Council will need to consider appropriate
action to ensure compliance. The credibility of the
Security Council is on the line.

I now turn to the role of the international
community. Like other delegations, we urge redoubled
efforts to ensure that UNAMID can fill its force
generation gaps, including by filling the critical need
for air, logistical and transport assets. We were
encouraged to hear that the Government of Ethiopia
has offered helicopters that appear to meet some of
UNAMID's requirements, and we look forward to
hearing formally from the United Nations about the
prospects for the deployment of those assets.

The United States, for its part, is committed to
assisting UNAMID deployment through the training
and equipping of certain African troop-contributing
countries that have made pledges to UNAMID. We
have provided the United Nations with more than
$40-million worth of equipment to be used by
UNAMID. We have allocated an additional
$100 million to train and equip troop-contributing
countries. We urge other members to join us in a
coordinated effort to ensure that UNAMID troop-
contributing countries arrive in Darfur trained and
equipped to carry out their mission.

With regard to the peace process, it is clear that
we have not made enough progress. Success in the
Darfur peace process, led by the United Nations and
the African Union, is essential to ending the suffering
of the people of Darfur and to the long-term prospects
for success of the United Nations/AU peacekeeping
operation in Darfur - UNAMID.

We continue to urge rebel factions to come
together in order to reach a peaceful settlement of the
conflict, and we support the Special Envoy's effort to
unify the rebel movements. We think that that effort
needs more consistent attention from the international
community. We strongly urge the United Nations and
the AU to quickly agree upon the immediate
appointment of a single joint mediator to lead the
negotiations and to assist all parties in reaching a
negotiated settlement of the conflict.

The recent conflict in Chad underscores the
regional dimension of the conflict in the area. With
regard to Darfur, in addition to the humanitarian,
political and UNAMID tracks, the United Nations
effort also needs to be focused on developing an
effective regional approach. To that end, we need to
fully deploy the United Nations Mission in the Central
African Republic and Chad as soon as possible.

We are very disturbed by reports that the
Government of the Sudan played a significant role in
supporting the rebel attack on the legitimate
Government of Chad. We call on the Sudan, Chad and
rebel groups to cease all cross-border incursions. We
urge the Sudan and Chad not to interfere in each
other's internal affairs. Those are necessary steps for a
lasting and sustainable peace in the region.

Like other speakers, I wish my Croatian
colleague all the best in her next endeavour; we will
miss her. I also wish my Chinese colleagues a happy
new year.

