Ms. Soderberg (United States of America): I
want once again to commend Assistant Secretary-
General Annabi and his team, particularly the
Secretary-General's Special Representative, Sergio
Vieira de Mello, for a historic job that they are
performing under very difficult circumstances in East
Timor. This has been one of the very difficult
challenges the United Nations has undertaken, and I
think by all accounts they are doing a stellar job under
very difficult circumstances. So we pay tribute to them
once again.

I think the nature of the discussion today is in
sharp contrast to what we were discussing only a few
months ago here. The task of the United Nations is
often to give the people of the world what President
Clinton has often referred to as the chance to live the
quiet miracle of a normal life, something many have
been denied. While in the past few months, and
certainly in the difficult months of last summer before
and after the referendum and the violence that ensued,
we were dealing with crises in life-saving situations,
the question of militias and intimidation and all the
problems that have resulted from difficulties
surrounding last fall's events, today the events are
shifting to the more normal tasks of how to rebuild a
country, how to get the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund in there and how to get
investors in there to begin to trade and integrate the
economy of East Timor into the normal trading systems
and normal economic systems. I think the simple
nature of that shift in a discussion is a tribute first and
foremost to the people of East Timor, who are pulling
together and trying to move their country forward after
a number of very difficult decades. I think the United
Nations is working with them hand-in-hand in trying to
move that forward in a way that we all need to
commend.

The Nobel laureate Jose Ramos Horta, who has
been working on behalf of the people of East Timor for
many years, is here in the United States. We had the
honour of speaking with him this morning, and I was
struck by the nature of that conversation, talking about
the normal functions of a government as opposed to a
people in crisis. He deserves great credit for moving
things forward. The more the international community
and the United Nations can do to ensure that the
situation in East Timor moves in that direction as
quickly as possible, that will certainly help the people
of East Timor rebuild their society.

I think the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) has made
very substantial progress in establishing elements of a
civil administration. There are obviously very
frustrating delays in initiating projects from the
UNTAET and the World Bank trust funds and in
ensuring that the necessary personnel with the
appropriate skills are in the field. In our briefing on 27
April, Assistant Secretary-General Annabi specifically
mentioned the positive effect of our Government's
temporary employment projects through the Agency
for International Development. We have been trying to
create temporary bilateral programmes to fill an
immediate need while working to get the
comprehensive United Nations and World Bank
employment-generating projects on line. I encourage
other Governments to look at ways that they could help
in that. I think, as Ambassador Eldon mentioned, the
World Bank review conference in Lisbon and the
subsequent donors' conference will be a major point of
reference for discussing these issues, but they will also
hopefully bring tangible resources that certainly are
much in need.

In previous briefings we have been fairly blunt in
some of our concerns about the security situation on
the ground with the militias and the failure of the
Indonesian Government to appropriately rein in some
of them. I think it has to be said that the Indonesian
armed forces (TNI) have subsequently made efforts to
end cooperation with the militias. We remain
concerned about the need to permanently resolve the
situation of the remaining refugees and to break up the
militias definitively. It is worth pointing out that
progress has been made on that. We commend that
progress and want to continue to see it reinforced and
made a permanent situation. Any backsliding into the
previous concerns would obviously be of major
concern to the Security Council. There are still militias
on the ground, however, and I think that we have to
continue to watch the situation so that it does not
evolve into a threat in future that would cause many of
us difficulties.

The Security Council acted very quickly in
endorsing the need for UNTAET to assist in the floods
in West Timor, and I think our actions there are a
model for international cooperation to help in a
humanitarian situation that assisted a number of
refugee families in their decision to return to East
Timor.

The decision to send these UNTAET helicopters,
I think, was a concrete way that the UNTAET
operation could assist all of the people of East Timor,
and it enabled us to work in a very cooperative effort
with Indonesia that will assist in developing further ties
and cooperation. Also, I would commend the
Secretary-General's decision to ask Mr. Vieira de
Mello to travel to Fiji to deliver a strong message of
concern over the situation there. That is obviously a
situation that we are following very closely. We have
called for the immediate release of the hostages and
certainly urge all the people of Fiji to resolve this crisis
in a peaceful manner and in accordance with Fiji's
Constitution.

On the issue of civilian police, I think that in East
Timor they need to have the means to carry out their
responsibilities effectively. In some areas, including in
Dili and the western districts, the civilian police are
currently armed, and we continue to believe that this
policy should be considered throughout the territory of
East Timor. I know that this is something that the
United Nations has under discussion; I think it is
important to have a consistent policy throughout the
territory, particularly in areas where there are special
needs on the ground.

UNTAET is now beginning to establish a
functioning judiciary, and this is an area that we have
been following with particular interest. I will repeat
one story just to show how far things have come. There
is now a new East Timor judicial system and a newly
trained judge presiding over a hearing about the
legality of continued detention of a Falintil member
who is accused of killing a militia member on 22
September. This hearing was attended by 50 people,
local and international, journalists and family
members. To us it was a normal judicial function that
would happen in any normal situation. Jose Ramos
Horta noted that this was the first case of an East
Timorese judge presiding in an East Timorese
courtroom in nearly 500 years. I think that that small
story represents just how far individuals have been able
to make a difference in East Timor, and the United
Nations should be rightly proud in noting its
accomplishments.

In closing, I would just add that the people of
East Timor are now actively discussing with the
international community, the World Bank and possible
investors how to develop their own country. I think it is
up to the international community to remain engaged in
East Timor - just because it is not on the front pages
any more does not mean that there are not broad needs
there, including for the sustained, continued
engagement of the international community, albeit in
the more traditional senses of trade, economic policies,
investment and judicial functions. It is a tribute to the
people of UNTAET and the people of East Timor that
the conversation is shifting towards those types of day-
to-day activities and away from the crises that we were
dealing with just a few months ago.

Once again, I commend the United Nations for its
efforts.

