Mr. Alasania (Georgia): Thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting.

In my previous addresses to the Council, we
asked this body to act swiftly to stop the aggression
that my country was facing. Unfortunately, the state of
affairs in Georgia has not changed, despite the
ceasefire agreement reached a few days ago. The
Russian side continues to violate agreed ceasefire
arrangements. At the moment, the entire territory of
Abkhazia, Georgia, and South Ossetia, Georgia,
together with the cities of Zugdidi, Senaki and Poti in
western Georgia and Gori and Kaspi in eastern
Georgia, are under Russian occupation.

Georgia is occupied by Russian military forces,
forces that are determined to devastate my country.
Their actions have crossed all imaginable boundaries
of common sense. Roads, bridges, railway tracks and
other Georgian communications infrastructure have
become targets of the Russian armed forces. Russian
forces continue their attacks on Georgian seaports, oil
refineries and terminals. Russian naval forces are
blocking Georgian seaports and have destroyed vessels
of the Georgian coast guard.

In addition to that, Georgian came under a cyber
attack from the Russian side, causing a shut-down of
Georgian information sources for the rest of the world.
Moreover, Russian forces have completely destroyed
and looted Georgian military bases in Senaki and Gori,
and now are proceeding towards the Sachkhere
mountain training centre. Russia is continuously
conducting reconnaissance flights in sovereign
Georgian airspace.

Looting, destruction and murder have become
commonplace. Russian militaries are conducting raids
in various parts of Georgia and keeping the population
under constant threat and in constant terror. The
population is in fear that the next destroyed city will be
theirs.

All of that is aimed at destroying Georgia as a
sovereign independent State and is in contravention of
the commitments undertaken by the Russian side to
stop the violence and withdraw. Through its
aggression, Russia threatens the freedom and ability of
Georgia and other emerging democracies throughout
Eurasia to build political, legal and judicial systems
without fear of external threats or domination.

The total number of people killed in the armed
conflict reached 250 on the Georgian side as of
19 August. Sixty-nine of them were civilians; 133 of
those killed were Georgian Ministry of Defence
personnel, including four servicemen from the reserve
troops, and 13 were from the Ministry of the Interior.
Over 1,469 have been injured, and 446 of those remain
in hospitals; according to reports, that toll will
increase. The Government of Georgia regrets the
human losses in all communities of Georgia. Our
deepest sympathies go to the families of the deceased
victims of this brutal, provocative war.

I would like to focus attention on the
humanitarian crisis unfolding in Georgia in the
territories occupied by the Russian armed forces.
Moscow has decisively chosen ethnic cleansing as an
instrument for achieving its political aims. Ethnically
based robberies, persecution and slaughter are reported
from the Russian-occupied territories. As a
consequence, ethnic Georgians are forced to flee their
homes and seek shelter in cities under the control of
the Georgian authorities. More than 150,000 citizens of
Georgia are displaced. I quote Human Rights Watch:
"The remaining residents of these destroyed ethnic
Georgian villages are facing desperate conditions, with
no means of survival, no help, no protection, and
nowhere to go".

The Moscow-backed, self-proclaimed Mr. Kokoity,
has declared that the de facto South Ossetian
authorities will not allow the Georgian population to
return to their homes. As was reported and affirmed by
Tskhinvali authorities, they have burned down the
houses of ethnic Georgians to ensure that the
Georgians will not have places to return to.

Russia's aggressive actions have no boundaries.
Russian armed forces attacked the Borjomi Forest
Park, a unique 1,000-year-old Georgian heritage site.
Even further, Russians refused to grant access to
firefighting aircraft and vehicles to put out the fire.

I would like to thank the countries, United
Nations entities and non-governmental organizations
that have stepped forward and are providing much-
needed help to citizens of my country. Humanitarian
efforts are not as successful as they could be because
United Nations agencies and other humanitarian
organizations have no access to the conflict zones
because of the Russian refusal to provide access to the
occupied territories. We urge everyone to exercise their
utmost powers to ensure that humanitarian help and
relief will be provided to those in need without any
impediment.

Russian troops have invaded an independent
country and have settled themselves on our territory.
Towns and villages are bombed; peaceful citizens are
robbed, tortured and killed; and the victims are
numerous. Thousands of people are left homeless.
Under the aegis of the so-called unilateral peace
enforcement operation, Russian troops are annexing an
independent country. The transport infrastructure of the
country is paralysed. After these barbaric actions from
the Russian side, no arrangements in which Russia is
perceived as a mediator or guarantor will be acceptable
to the Georgian people.

Georgia once again adhered to the principles
agreed through the European Union presidency and
President Sarkozy's mediation. We are complying with
the ceasefire agreement reached and fully commit

ourselves to it. We demand the same actions from the
other party to the conflict. The Russian Federation has
to withdraw its forces to the pre-conflict locations.
Along with full respect for the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Georgia within its internationally
recognized borders, which cannot be questioned, the
ceasefire has to be backed with a subsequent Security
Council resolution. Georgia stands ready to
accommodate any legitimate security concerns that the
Abkhaz, Georgian and Ossetian population of Georgia
might have through direct dialogue and truly
international negotiations.

Having described the ravaged situation in
Georgia, I am still looking forward to creating certain
conditions that will only be possible after the
occupation of Georgia, when it will be possible to
discuss the rebuilding of severely damaged Georgian-
Russian relations.

We appeal to the Council to act - and act
decisively.

