The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Israel, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Gillerman
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 19 May 2004
from the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United
Nations, which will be issued as document S/2004/406,
and which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council being held
today, Wednesday, 19 May 2004, regarding the
situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting in accordance with the
provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al-Kidwa
(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.


The President: The Security Council will begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council
is meeting in response to the request contained in a
letter dated 17 May 2004 from the Permanent
Representative of Yemen, which has been issued as
document S/2004/393.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2004/400, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Algeria and Yemen.

I should also like to draw attention to the
identical letters dated 17 May 2004 addressed to the
Secretary-General and the President of the Security
Council from the Permanent Observer of Palestine,
which have been issued as document 8/2004/394.

I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kofi Annan, at this meeting.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution. Unless I
hear any objection, I shall put the draft resolution to
the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Benin, Brazil, Chile, China,
France, Germany, Pakistan, Philippines,
Romania, Russian Federation, Spain, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland

Abstaining:
United States of America


The President: The result of the voting is as
follows: 14 votes in favour, none against and
l abstention. The draft resolution has been adopted as
resolution 1544 (2004).

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements following the
voting.


