At the outset, I would like to welcome Minister Heiko Mass and all Ministers joining us today. I express my gratitude to the German presidency for timely convening of this important meeting. I also thank the Secretary-General for his insightful briefing. I welcome the presence of the representatives of Libya and of other countries and regional organizations, as well as the Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Libya and Head of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL). In January, the Berlin Conference was a silver lining in the gloomy situation in Libya at that time. The outcome of the Conference and the subsequent adoption of resolution 2510 (2020) provided hope for the pursuit of an inclusive Libyan-led and Libyan-owned peace process, on the basis of respect for Libya's independence and sovereignty. Since then, however, the situation in Libya has continued to witness ups and downs. Despite the truce agreed between the Libyan parties and the initial success of the three-track dialogue of the Berlin process, the situation on the ground has actually worsened. Viet Nam remains concerned over the ongoing violence, especially attacks on civilians and civilian objects, including schools and health- care facilities. The presence of and threat posed by terrorist groups continue to loom over the country, thus affecting the security of the whole region. With the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, the situation has become even more precarious. In that context, Viet Nam wishes to highlight the following points. First, we call on the relevant parties in Libya to immediately stop the fighting and return to peace talks. We also call on members of the international community, especially the Berlin Conference participants, to spare no efforts in supporting the peace process, in line with resolution 2510 (2020). Furthermore, the collaboration among UNSMIL, regional organizations and Libya's neighbouring countries will remain crucial. Secondly, Viet Nam once again urges the relevant parties in Libya to fully respect international humanitarian law, stop targeting civilians and civilian objects, ensure the safety of health-care workers and allow unhindered humanitarian access to effectively fight the COVID-19 pandemic. Further attention and measures must be taken to protect women, children and other vulnerable groups from the effects of the conflict. We welcome the efforts of UNSMIL and the United Nations Mine Action Service in addressing the humanitarian challenges in Libya. We would also like to commend UNSMIL and the African Union for advancing the role and participation of women in the peace process in Libya. Thirdly, we reiterate the importance of upholding the relevant Security Council resolutions on Libya, particularly those related to the arms embargo and foreign interference. We urge all parties inside and outside Libya to strengthen their commitment and actions in implementing these resolutions, especially resolution 2510 (2020). To conclude, we would like to commend the efforts of Ms. Williams and reaffirm our full support for the work of UNSMIL. At the same time, we would also like to reiterate the importance of the appointment of the new Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Libya.
