Mr. Requeijo Gual (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba shares the concern regarding the dangerous links
existing between terrorism and weapons of mass
destruction (WMD) and we completely support all
legitimate international efforts to prevent the
acquisition of such weapons and their means of
delivery by terrorists. Nonetheless, the Cuban
delegation is also concerned that the Security Council,
recognized to be of limited composition, and in which
some members have the right of veto, has taken the
initiative to prepare a draft resolution on a subject
which should continue to be considered in the
framework of the traditional multilateral disarmament
machinery, where the appropriate space exists to
negotiate a legally binding instrument.

In this connection, we believe that international
legal obligations, including those that relate to the field
of disarmament, weapons control and non-
proliferation, must not be imposed upon Member States
without their participation and their sovereign
acceptance, through the signing and ratification of the
corresponding treaties and agreements that have been
negotiated multilaterally. The possibility of terrorist
attacks with WMD cannot eliminated through a
selective approach, such as that promoted by this draft
resolution, which confines itself to combating
horizontal proliferation, and virtually disregards
vertical proliferation and disarmament.

The only guarantee that WMD will not fall into
the hands of terrorists is the prohibition and the total
elimination of this type of weapon, especially nuclear
weapons, whose very existence constitutes, in itself, a
threat to international peace and security.

For reasons of time, I will not explore in depth
other concerns that we have with regard to other
elements of the draft resolution, such as, for example,
the issue of the definitions used, the true scope and
implications of this text for Member States and the
negative impact that it might have on the existing non-
proliferation treaty regime.

Furthermore, it cannot be ruled out that some
Power might interpret the adoption of this text under
Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter to be a pre-
authorization or a justification for the unilateral use of
force against given States because of alleged
suspicions of proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction (WMD) or their components. In our own
case, this is of particular concern, bearing in mind that
high officials of the United States Government have
repeatedly and dangerously levelled completely false
and unfounded accusations against Cuba, alleging,
without presenting the slightest evidence, that our
country possesses a limited capacity for the research
and development of biological weapons, an accusation
which we will continue to vigorously reject.

The text of the draft resolution is ambiguous
enough for some States to proclaim that, in it, the
Security Council legitimizes the interception of ships
and of aircraft in the framework of the so-called
Proliferation Security Initiative. This initiative is
already operational, although the great majority of
States were not given an opportunity to participate in
its development, in spite of its important implications.
The Initiative, instead of contributing to international
unity on this subject and contributing to the
strengthening of the role of the United Nations and of
international treaties, weakens these. Cuba believes
that a multilateral and non-discriminatory approach is
the only effective way of countering the use of WMD
by terrorists.

Several elements of this initiative do not
correspond to the basic principles contained in the
United Nations Charter and recognized in international
law that prohibit interference in the internal affairs of
States and the use or the threat of the use of force
against the territorial integrity or political
independence of any State. There is absolutely no
guarantee that the prerogatives, which were self-
assumed by the participants in the Proliferation
Security Initiative and which could be given legitimacy
by this draft resolution, might not be manipulated by
some, particularly by the States that have the greatest
military might, to commit abuses against the ships and
aircraft of other States for a range of reasons.

Likewise, we must not discard the possibility of
some of the participants in the Proliferation Security
Initiative considering that they have been given some
kind of authorization to intercept any type of cargo on
the basis of arbitrary criteria. This would lead to
attempts to board ships and aircraft, even violating
rights established by the 1982 United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea, the provisions on
the right of innocent passage of ships through States'
territorial waters and the jurisdictional regime of the
high seas contained in the above-mentioned
Convention.

Lastly, it would be useful to recall that the main
author and promoter of this draft resolution is precisely
the State that has the largest military expenditures in
the world, that has doctrines of security that
contemplate preventive attacks and the use of nuclear
weapons against States that do not posses such
weapons, and that not only has many nuclear weapons
but is also in the process of developing new types of
such lethal weapons. This double standard represents a
real threat to all that must not be left without due
denunciation.

