Ms. Amos: My November briefing on the Syrian
crisis focused on the constraints and challenges to
humanitarian access across conflict lines inside Syria
and across borders into Syria. In this month's briefing,
I would like to focus on issues relating to the protection
of civilians in Syria, following the adoption of
resolution 2139 (2014) in February. The resolution was
unanimously adopted in recognition of the magnitude of
the human cost that this conflict carries. The intention
of the resolution was to seek protection for civilians
caught in the midst of the fighting and to ensure that
civilian facilities and infrastructure, for example
hospitals and schools, were not attacked. The Security
Council demanded that the parties to the conflict take
immediate action to end the relentless violence and stop
all violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law.

I regret to inform the Council that, 10 months
later, the Council's strong demands have gone unheard.
The parties to the conflict continue to ignore the most
basic principles of humanity. In many parts of Syria
the level of violence has worsened, with civilians
continuing to pay heavily with loss of life, serious
injuries, psychological trauma, ongoing and recurring
displacement and massive damage to property and
infrastructure.

By February, an estimated 100,000 people had
been killed. Today, the United Nations estimates that
number is closer to 200,000, with around 1 million
people injured. And the numbers increase daily.
Some 12.2 million Syrians now require humanitarian
assistance, an increase of 2.9 million people in only
10 months. Almost half of the Syrian population
is displaced, with more than 7.6 million internally
displaced persons and well over 3 million refugees
in neighbouring countries. A fifth of that number of
people is displaced worldwide.

Every time we use a new figure in relation to the
Syrian crisis, we say that it is unprecedented. We have
run out of words to fully explain the brutality, violence
and callous disregard for human life which is a hallmark
of this crisis. The international community has become
numb to its impact with the vast numbers, regional
reach and sense of political impasse.

The Council made a number of specific calls in
resolution 2139 (2014), including a call for the end to
the indiscriminate use of weapons. However, all parties
to the conflict continue to violate that most basic of
laws with devastating consequences. The Government
has continued to use barrel bombs in densely populated
areas, killing and maiming people. The use of barrel
bombs has been particularly acute in Aleppo, Hama,
Idlib, rural Damascus, Deir ez-Zor, Raqqa and Dar'a. In
the first five months following the adoption of resolution
2139 (2014), Human Rights Watch documented over
650 major new damaged sites, consistent with the use of
barrel bombs on neighbourhoods in the city of Aleppo
alone. Armed opposition groups and designated terrorist
organisations have also used explosive weapons,
including mortars and car bombs, in populated areas,
killing civilians.

Resolution 2139 (2014) explicitly condemns grave
violations and abuses committed against children
and condemns all forms of sexual and gender-based
violence. Yet today, Syria is one of the most dangerous
places on earth to be a child. In February, around four
million children were particularly vulnerable and in
need of international assistance. Today, over 5.6 million
children are in need of immediate assistance. Children
have been murdered, tortured and subjected to sexual
violence by all parties to the conflict. Reports of
children killed or publicly executed, crucified, beheaded
and stoned to death, particularly by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), have increased in recent
months. Millions of children have been traumatised by
the horrors they have been forced to witness. We have
also seen a trend of children receiving military training
and weapons, being used in combat roles, younger and
younger. Reports have been received of 350 children,
some as young as five years old, being trained for
combat in a military camp in Raqqa. As I have reported
on many occasions, this conflict is not only shattering
Syria's present. It is also destroying its future.

Reports of sexual and gender-based violence have
increased since July, particularly but not exclusively,
perpetrated by ISIL. Recently, Kurdish refugees from
Kobani reported the capture of young girls by ISIL
for sexual purposes, girls as young as 12. Reports of
early and forced marriage are also on the rise. That is
in part due to a depletion of family resources, and more
recently, because parents are terrified oftheir unmarried
daughters being forced to marry ISIL fighters in areas
under their control. Women captured as slaves by ISIL
have been sold in markets in Raqqa. Some are sold to
individual men, others are kept by ISIL in rest houses
and face multiple rapes by fighters returning from the
battlefield. As noted by the Commission ofInquiry, ISIL
has carried out mass victimization ofcivilians, including
murder, enslavement, rape, forcible displacement and
torture, and has violated its obligations toward civilians
and persons hors-de-combat, which amounts to war
crimes.

In resolution 2139 (2014), the Security Council
demanded the immediate end to the practice of
arbitrarily detaining people and the use of torture in
detention centres. Despite that, tens of thousands
of civilians continue to be arbitrarily detained and
subjected to systematic and cruel, inhuman and
degrading treatment and torture. The majority are
males taken at checkpoints or during ground raids. The
Commission of Inquiry continues to receive reports of
serious torture and beatings in Government detention
facilities. Detainees are often held in overcrowded,
unsanitary conditions without adequate food, water
and health care. Reports of detainees dying from
torture and malnutrition continue. The Commission
has also reported on armed opposition groups taking
people hostage, including women and children. People
are being held under conditions that constitute cruel,
inhuman, degrading treatment or punishment.

In resolution 2139 (2014), the Security Council
demanded that all parties respect the principle of
medical neutrality and desist from attacks against
civilian objects. Despite that call, the deliberate and
indiscriminate damage to essential services, including
hospitals, schools and infrastructure, has become a
regular occurrence. In the past 10 months, accounts of
damage to water systems and electricity have continued
to be reported, with large parts of cities cut off from the
receipt of basic services.

Hospitals across the country have been attacked.
Between the adoption of the resolution and the end of
November, Physicians for Human Rights documented
70 attacks on medical facilities, 60 of them by
Government forces. In the same period, 150 deaths
of medical personnel were reported, 97 of them were
killed in the line of duty.

The passage of medical assistance to hard-to-
reach locations continues to be hindered by the lack of
approvals from the Government of Syria. Opposition
groups have also prevented medical supplies from
reaching besieged communities in Nubul and Zahra.
The Government continues to withdraw from United
Nations convoys medicines, medical equipment and
supplies, including for surgical interventions, such as
antibiotics and injectable medicines. Hospitals continue
to be militarized by the parties to the conflict.

Schools, which should be safe places for children
to learn and grow, have been bombed from the air,
subjected to mortar fire and been attacked with car
bombs. In the last nine months, the United Nations has
verified at least 35 attacks on or near schools, killing
more than 105 children. The actual number of schools
attacked is likely higher.

Parties to the conflict continue to use siege as a
weapon of war, deliberately denying people access to
basic assistance, such as food and medicines. At the
adoption of resolution 2139 (2014), in February, there
were 220,000 people besieged by either Government
or opposition forces. Two hundred and twelve
thousand remain besieged today - 185,500 people by
Government forces and 26,500 people by opposition
forces. Many of these communities have been besieged
for years: no one allowed out, no aid allowed in - for
years. And there is now a new tactic, as we have seen
in Yarmouk. Tiny amounts of aid are allowed in, giving
people hope, but so little it can only help a fraction
of those in need. People's hopes are raised and then
dashed, time and time again.

Despite the Security Council's continued call to lift
the sieges, only two locations have seen an end to such
practices, Homs Old City and Moadamiyah. The United
Nations and its partners have been allowed to deliver to
an average of only 5 per cent of people besieged each
month with food and medicine since resolution 2139
(2014) was adopted.

Even in war there are rules. The denial of medical
assistance and the use of starvation as a weapon of war is
prohibited by international law. In February, I appealed
to the Council to use its influence on parties to protect
civilians and demand greater humanitarian access. By
adopting resolution 2139 (2014), the Council committed
itself and the wider international community to the
well-being and the protection of the people of Syria.

Today I appeal again to Council members to ensure
the parties heed its call and comply with resolution
2139 (2014) in its entirety: to end the indiscriminate
use of weapons in populated areas - this practice
is responsible for a large proportion of the growing
casualties; it is disproportionate and a violation of
international law - to protect children from the wide
range of violations they are subject to - parties to the
conflict can give a clear direction to those who fight
for them that committing crimes against children
is unacceptable and will not be tolerated; to lift the
sieges and allow people access to assistance essential
to their survival; to facilitate unhindered humanitarian
access, including for medical assistance, and respect
the neutrality of medical facilities; this is expressly
outlined as a basic premise of the Geneva Conventions;
to hold the parties to account and end the pervasive
climate of impunity; and, most important, the Council
and the international community must find a political
end to this conflict once and for all.

