Mr. Takei (Japan): At the outset, I should like to
congratulate you, Foreign Minister Nin Novoa, on your
presentation and to thank you for holding this open
debate. It is also my pleasure to see Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres again after the London Somalia
Conference two weeks ago. I would also like to thank
Ms. Christine Beerli, Vice-President ofthe International
Committee of the Red Cross, and Mr. Bruno Stagno
Ugarte, Deputy Executive Director of Human Rights
Watch, for their insightful briefings.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict,
including health care in armed conflict, is an imperative
that requires the united efforts and courage of the
international community. Japan is honoured to have
assumed an important role, together with the other
co-penholders, in drafting Security Council resolution
2286 (2016). In order to push for the realization of
the principles of the resolution, Japan has urged
all parties to conflict to take seriously the former
Secretary-General's recommendations under that
resolution. However, despite the unanimous adoption
of that landmark resolution last year and despite our
hopes, attacks on medical personnel and facilities have
continued in many parts of the world, especially in
Syria and Yemen.

Japan associates itself with the statements to
be delivered later by the representative of Spain, on
behalf of the co-penholders of resolution 2286 (2016),
and by the representative of Switzerland, on behalf of
the Group of Friends of the Protection of Civilians in
Armed Conflict.

Against this backdrop, I would like to express my
appreciation for Secretary-General Guterres' dedicated
efforts in producing his informative report (S/2017/4l4).
Allow me to comment on his vision for the protection of
civilians and health care in armed conflict.

Japan fully supports the Secretary-General's
vision for enhancing respect for international law and
believes that raising awareness, as provided for under
Recommendation 7 of the former Secretary-General's
recommendations (S/2016/722, annex), should be the
first step. In this regard, Japan has recently revitalized
its National Committee on International Humanitarian
Law. In addition, Japan has also participated actively
in the multilateral discussions of the intergovernmental
process on strengthening the respect for international
humanitarian law, held in Geneva.

As the Secretary-General's report indicates,
conflict prevention is the best way to avoid attacks
and threats against civilians and medical personnel.
Japan, which gives great importance to the concept
of human security and which aims to contribute to
sustaining peace, has been making various efforts
in the field of peacebuilding to prevent the outbreak
and recurrence of conflict, including by contributing
$48.5 million to the United Nations Peacebuilding
Fund and leading the discussion on institution-building
at the Peacebuilding Commission.
I would now like to briefly touch upon the issue
of forced displacement, refugees and internal displaced
persons, which is also an important element in the
context of the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
At the Group of Seven (G-7) Foreign Ministers Meeting
held in Hiroshima last year, the Japanese Minister
for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Fumio Kishida, stressed the
importance ofthe G-7 countries utilizing their respective
strengths and proceeding with initiatives related to
terrorism and the refugee crisis in a manner that is
mutually complementary and generates synergistic
effects. Furthermore, starting tomorrow, the issue of
refugees and displaced persons will be discussed at the
G-7 summit in Taormina, Italy. Japan will continue to
work proactively on this issue.

One of the main factors behind the failure to
prevent recurrences of attacks against medical
personnel and facilities is the lack of accountability.
While underlining the Security Council's active role
in fact-finding and ensuring accountability, Japan
emphasizes the important role of the International
Humanitarian Fact-Finding Commission, with a view to
ensuring respect for and compliance with international
humanitarian law. Japan will continue to contribute to
the Commission both financially and by nominating the
most qualified and independent members it can.

Among the various issues related to the protection
of civilians in armed conflict, the protection of health
care in armed conflict should be a priority for the
international community. As a member of the Security
Council, Japan strongly condemns all attacks against
medical facilities and personnel and is fully committed
to realizing the principles of resolution 2286 (2016).
We will continue to work closely with other Member
States, the United Nations system and civil-society and
international humanitarian organizations to make a
substantial contribution in this area.

