Mr. Ladsous: I thank you, Mr. President, for
this opportunity to present to the Security Council
the Secretary-General's special report on Liberia
(S/20l6/968). I would like to begin by expressing my
deep appreciation for the long-standing support that
the Council has given Liberia, in particular through the
deployment of the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL).

As members are aware, the strategic assessment
of Liberia is the third and final such exercise we
conducted in West Africa this year, which collectively
have resulted in what I think is a reshaping of the
peacekeeping footprint in the region. As the report
indicates, the political environment in Liberia is
dominated by preparations for the presidential and
legislative elections scheduled for October 2017. That
should lead to the inauguration of the next President in
January 2018, which will mark a historic milestone for
Liberia's democracy. Peaceful and successful elections
and post-election leadership transition will be key to
ensuring Liberia's stability. What happens next year,
therefore, will be critical. It will demonstrate whether
the foundations of peace that we have been building
since the conflict ended 13 years ago are strong enough
to be sustained. It is incumbent upon the people and
the Government of Liberia, with support from their
partners, to ensure that measures are put in place now
to deliver free, fair, transparent and credible elections,
the outcomes of which are accepted by all.

There have been some promising developments
on the political front since September, when we
undertook the assessment that provided the basis for
the report of the Secretary-General. At that time, an
ongoing standoff within the House of Representatives
had effectively stalled the legislative agenda, including
reforms that were essential for sustaining peace. As
it happened, however, on 5 October, the House of
Representatives elected a new Speaker, who announced
that he would focus on improving the relationships and
coordination with Government so as to make progress
on the development agenda.

On 8 November, the legislature reconvened for a
one-month extraordinary session, in the midst of its
annual recess, in order to advance work on critical
legislation. For instance, it adopted the Land Authority
Act and ratified 32 Economic Community of West
African States protocols and conventions, including
on democracy and good governance. The legislature
also considered constitutional amendments submitted
by the President more than a year ago, as well as
a package of legislation on land reform, economic
and financial frameworks and counter-terrorism. I
think that demonstrates the commitment of elected
representatives to deliver results to their constituents.
We look forward to seeing further concrete progress in
advancing the legislative agenda.
There was also some realignment among the
political parties. In November, three major opposition
parties formed the Coalition for Democratic Change in
order to challenge the ruling Unity Party in the October
elections next year.

In a nutshell, Liberia remains stable. Since the
conclusion of the security transition in June, there
have been no serious incidents that have warranted
the intervention of UNMIL. Indeed, there have been
no incidents that have justified an armed response
from UNMIL in the entirety of 2016. The assessment
team, led by my colleague Mr. El-Ghassim Wane,
was particularly impressed by the commitment and
determination of the national security personnel. Despite
facing serious constraints with respect to finances,
logistics and basic equipment, the women and men that
make up the national security personnel demonstrated
resolve in performing their sovereign responsibilities of
protecting the population and securing the State.

The security agencies have continuedto develop. The
Liberia National Police has increased its strength since
the assessment was conducted. The Drug Enforcement
Agency has conducted important operations in
partnership with INTERPOL. The national police and
immigration services are considering new legislation
that, if implemented, will help consolidate professional
law enforcement institutions with strong civilian
oversight mechanisms to protect the public against any
abuses. However, sustaining those gains that have been
made will require continued and greater investment
in the security sector, as well as commensurate
improvements in the justice and corrections sectors.

The Government of Liberia has many priorities to
address in the final year of the present Administration
in order to ensure that it hands over to the next
Administration a country that is truly on the path of
transformation. There are manypolitical and institutional
reforms that must be adopted and implemented.
Security and defence institutions require continued
development. Democratic oversight mechanisms must
be established and equipped to effectively perform their
roles. A human rights institution must be established
with an expanded mandate, which requires that there
be adequate capacities and resources in order for that
institution to perform its mandate. Citizens continue
to expect to receive the most basic services from their
Government. Let us not forget that there is a major
electoral process on the horizon, which will require
considerable resources.
All of those, and other, priorities must be taken
forward in a very limited fiscal space. Eighty-seven per
cent of the approximately $600 million national budget
is earmarked for recurrent expenses. We know that the
economic environment is one of complete austerity
that features negligible growth projections. Since the
Secretary-General's special report was published, the
Government has instructed all ministries, agencies and
other governmental bodies to save an additional 5 per
cent from their approved budgets.

Two years ago, the Council set a deadline for the
full assumption of UNMIL's security responsibilities
by national institutions. That decision was a remarkable
demonstration of confidence that the country had
overcome the instability and dependency of the past.
It was no small challenge for a fragile country that was
freshly emerging from the devastation of Ebola, which
the Council recognized as a threat to international
peace and stability. However, the Liberian institutions
rose to that challenge and met the 30 June deadline for
the security transition.

After a careful assessment of the progress and
remaining challenges, the Secretary-General's special
report outlines three possible options regarding the
future of UNMIL, taking into account the parameters
provided by the Council, namely, the security situation
in the country and Liberia's overall capacity to maintain
stability. Those options are as follows: first, there is
the option of withdrawing UNMIL and establishing
a successor mission; secondly, there is the option of
maintaining the status quo; and, thirdly, there is the
option of continuing the drawdown of UNMIL.

Irrespective of the Council's decision, it would,
in our view, be important that Liberia remain on the
Council's agenda through the establishment of the
next Administration. We will engage closely with that
Administration in developing recommendations on
the future of the engagement of the United Nations in
Liberia beyond June 2018. Over the next 18 months,
it will be necessary to retain a mission that is able
to provide strong good offices and political support,
mentoring of the security and rule-of-law institutions,
as well as human rights monitoring and capacity-
building. Although we have full confidence in the
ability of the national security services, we consider it
essential that there remain some capacity to respond,
in extremis, should there be a deterioration of stability
that entails a strategic reversal.

Therefore, for each of the three options outlined in
the Secretary-General's special report, a crucial aspect
of our contingency planning is the quick reaction
force, which is presently in Yamoussoukro, Cote
d'Ivoire. That unit will transfer to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali when the United Nations Operation in Cote
d'Ivoire ends early next year. As the Council is aware,
that unit has a mandate to provide over-the-horizon
support for Liberia in support of the front-line response
of the Liberian security and defence forces. The Council
may also recall that part of that unit was deployed to the
Central African Republic last year, where it provided
remarkable and essential support during the visit of His
Holiness the Pope, to Bangui, as well as in preparation
of the country's presidential elections.

The assessment team also heard the call made by
members of Liberian civil society that we undertake
serious introspection about our failures in Liberia
with a view to moving forward on the basis of mutual
accountability through the elaboration of a compact,
as we have just done on an experimental basis in
the Central African Republic. That compact would
establish a framework of mutual accountability,
which would strengthen the partnership and future
engagement between the Government of Liberia and
the United Nations.

Throughout its history, Liberia has been a country
that has demonstrated remarkable resilience and a
great ability to overcome seemingly unsurmountable
adversity. Liberians are a people who have
endured - and are still enduring - the devastation
wrought by more than a century of systemic exclusion,
decades of dysfunction and 14 years of successive,
brutal civil wars. Not so long ago, they were confronted
with the national tragedy of Ebola for over a year. And
yet, the country continues to transcend adversity. It
must continue on its path of positive transformation.

The people and the Government of Liberia
must take forward the essential work of building
a nation - a unified, reconciled nation with an
accountable Government committed to addressing
corruption within its ranks; a nation where all citizens
share the benefits of Liberia's abundant natural
resources; a nation fully responsible for its own destiny,
with institutions and a Government that provide the
basic guarantees of security, protection and services to
its citizens.

Clearly, we are now in the final stretch of the life
cycle of UNMIL. Both the Liberians and their partners
would stand to gain by ending this cycle as soon as
possible so that Liberia can fully take upon itself the
responsibilities of a sovereign State. But precisely
because it is the final stretch, it must be handled with
delicacy and prudence. We must keep in mind that the
success of UNMIL will be assessed not only on the
basis of the impressive results achieved in just under
13 years, but also on the way UNMIL withdraws from
Liberia and, maybe above all, on the perception that the
Liberians will retain after its has left.

