Mr. Shcherbak (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having taken the initiative to convene a debate on this
issue in the Council today. We are also very grateful to
Judge Higgins and Mr. Michel for their informative
briefings. There can be no doubt that today's theme is
extremely relevant in the context of the work of the
Security Council, as well as for the Organization as a
whole. We are convinced that promoting the rule of law
in international relations is the cornerstone of any
lasting system of collective security, in which the
United Nations, the General Assembly and the Security
Council play a key role.

Nor must we forget the role of the International
Court of Justice and the International Law Commission
in establishing, compiling and developing modern legal
norms at the international level. International law is
civilization's unique achievement. It must always
prevail over the selfish aims and interests of individual
States.

Today we have an opportunity to consider the
interrelationship between the rule of law and
international peace and security from the perspective of
the Security Council's role in that process. I do not
know what legal experts would say as to whether the
Security Council can create law, but it is obvious that
in the recent past its legislative activities have
influenced the establishment and interpretation of
international legal norms. In that regard, suffice it to
point to Security Council decisions on the
establishment of ad hoc international criminal
tribunals, its adoption of resolutions reasserting the
right of States to self-defence in the event of terrorist
attacks against them, and the universally mandatory
character of decisions concerning measures to
counteract terrorism and the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction. We believe that those innovations
in the work of the body with the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security
merit the attention of legal experts.

The Charter of the United Nations confers upon
the Security Council the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. It also
gives it the necessary powers to do so, from making
recommendations with regard to the peaceful
settlement of disputes, including support for regional
agreements, to the use of coercive measures. The
Council is also unique in that it is the only body in the
United Nations system endowed with the power to
enforce the implementation of its own decisions.

In the course of the last decade and a half, we
have seen the Security Council play an increased role
and make greater use of its potential. It faces more
difficult tasks in meeting old and new threats and
challenges, primarily those posed by international
terrorism. In line with that trend, the means at its
disposal are also evolving. It is for that very reason of
considerably increased responsibility that the Security
Council should pay particular attention to reasserting
the principle of the rule of law, in both its own work
and its relations with other United Nations bodies,
organizations and States.

As we are all aware, in the early stages of
establishing the rule of law in post-conflict situations,
we have established expensive international tribunals
whose work, as experience has shown, has not been
effective enough. Most important, such tribunals have
been cut off from the realities of the societies with
regard to which they operate. The international
community has placed great hopes in the International
Criminal Court to counteract the culture of impunity.
The Russian Federation has consistently upheld its
belief that we cannot successfully combat impunity
unless we take account of local conditions and
traditions.

The United Nations should not be a substitute for
national measures to establish a legal system for
bringing the guilty to justice; rather, it should provide
an impetus for doing so. Extinguishing the flames of
conflict between warring parties is not enough. The
United Nations must be closely involved in the
complex task of establishing peaceful conditions. The
Peacebuilding Commission will become an important
instrument for the international community to support
countries emerging from hot crises. It will work at the
nexus between the efforts of the Security Council, the
Economic and Social Council, representatives of
international financial institutions and the donor
community. The Security Council will no doubt have a
central interest in the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission, and it is important that the Commission's
advice be in line with existing mechanisms for the
management and coordination of integrated United
Nations peacekeeping missions.

We welcome the various processes launched by
the Council to share experiences and best practices in
updating the procedures of its subsidiary bodies. We
consider the work done by the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) to improve the
sanctions regime to be particularly important.
Sanctions are an important tool in the maintenance of
international peace and security, and they are utilized
by the Security Council under the powers conferred
upon it by Chapter VII of the Charter. It is important
that sanctions regimes adhere to fair and clear
procedures, without impinging upon the Council's
powers or detracting from the primary goal of
improving the effectiveness of sanctions.

Here too, we believe that priority should be given
to improving national laws in this area. We are
convinced that the proper resolution of many problems
at the national level would keep those problems for
exploding on the international scene. The international
community must encourage States to take effective
steps in this area.

In conclusion, I would like to touch upon an
important issue, namely, the Security Council's
recourse to Chapter VII. We believe that debating this
matter is particularly relevant in the context of
discussing the rule of law and the maintenance of
international peace and security. Unfortunately, we
have recently noted a trend towards increased recourse
by the Council to Chapter VII of the Charter. In that
connection, I would like to stress that employing
Chapter VII is justified only in situations where the
Security Council determines that there is a threat to
peace or a violation of international law in a given
region. Discussion of enforcement measures and use of
force can take place only once all other avenues of
ensuring international peace and security have been
exhausted. The outcome document of the 2005 summit
of heads of State and Government (General Assembly resolution 60/1) stated that peaceful coexistence and
cooperation among States requires a commitment to the
purposes and principles of the Charter and international
law. The Russian Federation fully shares that belief,
which we think can be realized. That would serve as a
guarantee for a peaceful, prosperous and just future.

