Mr. Salarzai (Afghanistan): I would like to thank
Egypt for its leadership of the Council this month and
for organizing this important debate.

Afghanistan aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the Permanent Representative of the State
of Kuwait on behalf of the Organization for Islamic
Cooperation (OIC).

Let me be brief and to the point. Much has been
discussed today about the internal factors involved in
countering the narratives and ideologies of terrorism.
While we agree with most of what has been said, let
me focus on the external factors, particularly in the
case of Afghanistan, and remind the Council that the
creation of the Taliban in Afghanistan in 1994 opened
the current tragic chapter of terrorism in the world.
Before the establishment of the Taliban, terror in its
current behaviour and form was little known to the
world. The Taliban came into existence before groups
like Al-Shabaab, Boko Haram and Da'esh gained
notoriety. In a way, it was the Taliban and their backers
who characterized the kind of terror that we witness
today from various violent extremist groups around the
world.

In the current global climate of unspeakable
brutality committed by these terrorist outfits, let us not
forget that it was the Taliban who stoned women to death;
it was the Taliban who closed girls' schools, thereby
denying millions of girls of their right to education; it
was the Taliban who prevented women from pursuing
a livelihood; and it was they who introduced suicide
attacks on civilians and destroyed towns and villages in
Afghanistan. One can easily trace how the Taliban long
started promoting Al-Qaida and Da'esh-style divisive
and hateful ideology.

Since the Taliban mushroomed overnight in the
landscape of Afghanistan, mainly with foreign support,
our entire population has been brutalized at their
hands. The latest attack came three weeks ago, when
an indiscriminate brutal bombing in Kabul led to the
deaths of 68 people and wounded 350. But their vicious
bloodlust has never been limited to Afghanistan. Let us
not forget that it was under the Taliban that Afghanistan
became the jumping board for international terrorism
when thousands of young men received training and
logistical support in terrorist camps. This was the
precursor of today's terrorists carrying out deadly
attacks in Asia, Europe, the United States, the Middle
East, Africa and elsewhere.

So the question is how and why did the Taliban come
into being? We need to ask ourselves how they learned
to drive tanks and fly jets overnight, stage conventional
warfare and capitalize on prolonged political conflict in
our country? Who trained them? Who provided them
with supplies? Who financed them? Who provided
them with safe havens and orchestrated their spring
offensives year after year?

Religious outfits and sloganism, as well as an
ability to take advantage of the weaknesses emerging
from the prolonged conflict in Afghanistan, were the
cheapest and easiest ways to recruit for the rank and
file of the Taliban. In this case, ideology and violent
behaviour were used in pursuit of political objectives
by circles within State structures outside our borders.

The question should be what motivated and still
continues to motivate those circles to use violence
through proxies in pursuit of political objectives at the
national, regional and global levels? Three causes can
be identified: first, negative State rivalry in the region
with excessive anxiety and suspicion on the part of one
State for the other's intentions, resulting in the adoption
of misguided policies; secondly, the tension between
military and civilian control in politics, an inherent
struggle emerging from militarism in society; and
thirdly, a trust deficit between States that has prevented
constructive dialogue.

Hence, it is not, in our case, the ideology but the
initiatory, enabling and facilitating role of political
actors and their use of radical ideology for short-
term gains that need to be addressed. Targeting the
promoters and drivers of such policies, who use
violence in pursuit of political objectives within the
State structures, especially in the security apparatus,
is absolutely crucial when dealing with the threats of
Violent extremism. In that regard, it must be mentioned
that the differentiation between good and bad terrorists
is futile, since all forms of terrorism are inherently
appalling and must be condemned.

In Afghanistan, we have witnessed how terrorists
and violent extremist groups take advantage of
prolonged and unresolved conflicts, the lack of basic
peace and security, and most importantly, negative
competition between States to push forward their
brutal agendas. The world today is in dire need of
reducing State rivalries and addressing trust deficits.
In that regard, regional countries and international
actors bear particular responsibility to assist countries
experiencing strife in their efforts to restore peace.

In conclusion, Afghanistan reiterates its
commitment to engage constructively with the United
Nations and other international partners to discuss
counter-terrorism measures, including the upcoming
biannual review of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy. We hope to achieve tangible results
at the end of the review process.

