The Russian delegation was not in a position to support resolution 2521 (2020), on the extension of the sanctions measures imposed on South Sudan. The proposed text does not reflect the reality on the ground. Speaking about the current situation in South Sudan, it has a sustainable trend towards stabilization. The country has recently entered the transitional period. The Revitalized Transitional Government of National Unity was formed. The parties to the conflict reiterated their adherence to the Agreement on Cessation of Hostilities, Protection of Civilians, and Humanitarian Access. We commend the fact that since the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan was signed, there has been a considerable drop in violence. More refugees and internally displaced persons are returning to places of their permanent residence. Confidence-building measures continue to be implemented. Unfortunately, the resolution does not reflect all these developments. We do not share the opinion that the mentioned progress was reached through the increased sanctions pressure. The regional mediators, not sanctions, played the key role here. At some point the arms embargo did not let the countries of the region support the peace process with their own security initiatives. It is very disappointing that amid calls from Juba and Addis for lifting, or at least easing, the arms embargo, the penholders were able just to offer to review it by the end of the year. We would like to emphasize that a review of Security Council sanctions is not a concession, but an integral part of the restrictions imposed by the Council. Relevant provisions are included in resolutions on most of the current Security Council sanctions regimes. The fact that they were not incorporated earlier into resolutions on South Sudan is an abnormal situation, and that was due to the reluctance of the penholders to include them in the text. It is also not appropriate to condition the review on the dynamics of the human rights situation in the country. Equally worrisome are the attempts to portray the issues of the economic management in the country as a risk to the peace, stability and security of South Sudan and as a basis for the listing. We cannot support such passages in the text. We hope that, during the upcoming review of the sanctions regime imposed on South Sudan, the penholders will listen more carefully to the legitimate appeals of all Council members and the South Sudanese themselves.
