Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): A colleague of the three States that called
to convene this meeting - namely, the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom - mentioned
that my country, Syria, is broken and moribund. I
would like to reassure him that my country has never
been broken and will never be broken. His words are
tantamount to the dream of Satan to ascend to Paradise.
These are mere mixed dreams that cannot be interpreted
and they are meaningless. They are not worthy of a
permanent member of the Security Council. As for
the three permanent members together, they sounded
as if they were reinventing the wheel when they said
that the Syrian Government was trying to recapture
Aleppo. What a great discovery! As if Aleppo were a
town in Djibouti or Afghanistan - or in Brazil, for that
matter. I reassure them that the Syrian Government will
recapture the entire city of Aleppo. If the countries' of
the permanent members of the Security Council each
have one capital, we have two capitals, Damascus and
Aleppo.

If Shakespeare or the pioneers of the Theatre of
the Absurd, Jean Genet, Adamov, Kafka, Kierkegaard
and Georges Shehadeh, were to come to life again,
they would have written better tragedies and better
plays than they did in their time. They would never
have even heard the kind of lies that were told to King
Lear. Some of them are mourning the deaths ofthe very
persons whom they killed with their own hands. They
weep crocodile tears. Thirteen times, the same three
permanent members that called for this urgent meeting
have aborted a presidential statement that would have
condemned terrorist car bombs and suicide bombers as
well as erroneous strikes by their own forces. Thirteen
times, those countries aborted the adoption of a mere
presidential statement condemning a terrorist act in
Syria. They have also foiled the efforts of our friends in
the Council to adopt resolutions condemning terrorism.
But when a lone French terrorist named Mohammed
Merah wreaked havoc in the French city of Toulouse,
he was killed by 300 bullets at the hands of elite French
forces. And good riddance. But no one in Syria or
elsewhere ever called that French terrorist a member of
a moderate armed opposition group. Nor do we refer to
terrorists that way in the United States or other places.
Even if Spain were to give away the Basque region - or
France Corsica or Great Britain Scotland or the United
States California or Texas - the Syrian Government
would never relinquish one inch of its territory, as laid
down in its Constitution and in international law.

Once again, the Council is meeting today at the
request of a number of members who are attempting
to rescue the armed terrorist groups that they falsely
classify them as the moderate armed opposition. They
do that whenever indications point to the possibility
that these groups, under attack from the Syrian Arab
Army and their allies, face defeat. They overlooked
the crime committed by the Nur al-Din al-Zanki rebel
group when they beheaded Abdullah Issa, a Palestinian
child, before the eyes of the world. At that time, that
rebel group, together with the Al-Nusra Front, was in
control of the Handarat Palestinian refugee camp in
Aleppo. We believe that the call for this urgent meeting
is a message from the countries that called it to the
Al-Nusra Front and the other terrorist groups, namely,
that their support and political cover will continue
unhindered, and that the weapon of terrorism as a
means of political pressure on the Syrian Government
and its allies is still viable.

It is the constitutional responsibility of the Syrian
Government to protect our citizens from the acts of
armed terrorist groups that have inflicted suffering
on our people in Aleppo, a responsibility similar to
that of other Council members. The Syrian Army and
its allies began the military operation two days ago,
specifically after the end of the so-called seven-day
halt to military operations, in the wake of the failure
of the so-called truce. They made every effort to
protect civilians, advising them to stay away from the
armed terrorist groups in neighbourhoods of eastern
Aleppo. The Army made every effort to give civilians
a safe exit and to provide them with housing and the
basic necessities of life, including for those who had
been deceived into taking up arms against the State.
By contrast, the armed terrorist groups continued to
prevent civilians from leaving eastern Aleppo, with the
intention of using them as human shields. We know that
there are 2 million inhabitants of Aleppo, 1.75 million
of whom are living under the authority of the State
in areas controlled by the State, while 275,000 are
hostages living under duress in eastern Aleppo, which
is controlled by the Al-Nusra Front and its allies.

In that context, my country condemns the use of
internationally prohibited weapons. We stress that all
military operations conducted by the Syrian Army
and its allies on Syrian territory abide by the Charter
of the United Nations and international laws, and are
consistent with the Council's resolutions on combating
terrorism. In that respect, my Government denounces
the fabricated accusations levelled by certain members
of the Council and the most senior United Nations
officials against the Syrian Army and its allies through
alleging that they use internationally prohibited
weapons or that they deliberately target civilians.
Such false accusations by the most senior Secretariat
officials will ensure that this international Organization
will meet the same fate as the League of Nations. Such
irresponsible behaviour will bring it down.

It is indeed bewildering that the Secretary-General
and his senior aides should make such false accusations
based on fabricated testimony given by terrorists. And
this is while ignoring incontrovertible evidence that
armed terrorist groups, including the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), have used chemical weapons
dozens oftimes against military personnel and civilians
and that ISIL has seized a chlorine gas factory situated
40 miles from Aleppo.

I have just received information to the effect
that terrorists disguised as Syrian military personnel
are plotting to use toxic chemicals, including yellow
phosphorus, against Syrian civilians. The aim of the
operation of these terrorists, dressed in Syrian military
fatigues, is to fake photographs and videos that suggest
that these crimes were committed by the Syrian military.
That is exactly what they are now doing with pictures
of the little boy named Omran and other victims. They
are the Victims of their terrorism, and the aim of the
photographs is to blackmail the Council and world
opinion. Those toxic chemical materials are located in
a garbage dump outside the city of Suraqeb, north of
Aleppo. The toxic material is 20 kilometres from Idlib,
buried 12 metres underground in a depot containing six
barrels of it. On 6 September, the warehouse housing
yellow phosphorous material was visited by two female
United States experts, who then left for Turkey.

This is a proof to the Security Council, like other
tens of letters we have conveyed to this organ in
connection with terrorist activities in my country.

Those who commit war crimes in Syria are well-
known. They are the ones who killed more than 200
civilians in the town of Manbij, bombed a school for the
deaf in Raqqa and targeted the Syrian army in Deir ez-
Zor, in support of Da'esh, and who for the past several
years have been providing all kinds of support for the
tens of thousands of terrorists who have been brought
to Syria from more than 100 countries, according to the
Council's own reports.

My Government has a keener interest than anyone
else in putting an end to the bloodshed in Syria and
to the prolonged suffering of the Syrian people.
Accordingly, we welcomed the United States-Russia
agreement on fighting the two terrorist groups Da'esh
and the Al-Nusra Front and their allies - distinguishing
between the terrorist Al-Nusra Front and the so-called
genetically modified moderate armed opposition
groups - and ceasing hostilities for one week. While
we were committed to the agreement, those who employ
terrorist groups in Syria told them to reject it. More
than 20 armed terrorist groups immediately rejected it,
including the Ahrar Al-Sham, Nur al-Din al-Zanki and
the Al-Nusra Front. That rejection was accompanied by
targeting the Syrian Army on the Castello Road and
at various other positions. They violated the agreement
300 times before it expired, leading to the martyrdom
of 200 civilians and 157 military personnel, as well as
to hundreds of seriously injured victims.

In a premeditated attempt to sabotage and bury the
agreement before it began, the military aircraft of the
so-called international coalition led by the United States
bombarded the positions of the Syrian Arab Armed
Forces fighting Da'esh in the area of Mount Thardeh
in Deir ez-Zor. The terrorists seized a humanitarian
assistance convoy in the Aleppo suburbs and set fire
to it. As usual, this was accompanied by a fabricated
media and political campaign that accused the Syrian
Army and its allies of committing the crime. That was
not the first time that these groups have committed
such horrific crimes.

It is truly deplorable that certain members of the
Council, in addition to the most senior United Nations
officials, including the Secretary-General, continue
to call on the Syrian Government and its allies to
adhere to the cessation of hostilities - despite all
kinds of evidence on the ground proving that since the
beginning, those countries have been backing armed
terrorist groups, which have never wanted and will
never want this endeavour to succeed.
That was made abundantly clear by the violations
of the agreement by the armed terrorist groups and the
so-called international coalition. Worse still, the United
States shirked the responsibility for its main obligation,
namely, to differentiate between the Al-Nusra Front
and those groups that it insists on classifying as
moderate armed opposition groups. That avoidance of
responsibility has aborted all the progress achieved over
five years towards ending the war of terror imposed on
our country, and clearly demonstrates a lack of political
will on the part of those who sponsor terrorism to stop
the bloodshed - as if the objective were to neutralize
the Syrian forces fighting terrorism, especially the
Syrian Air Force, instead of finding a solution to the
arms.

With the terrorist war now entering its sixth year,
is it not time for certain members of the Council to stop
deceiving themselves and public opinion by insisting
on protecting and supporting what they refer to at times
as the moderate opposition, at others as the moderate
armed opposition and at still others as non-State armed
groups? All such groups are only one side of the same
coin - terrorism - which has had a boomerang effect,
through attacks, terrorist activities and the propagation
of extremist ideologies in those members' capitals,
owing to their flawed policies and practices, which
they continue to advocate against my country to this
day. Would any representative in this Chamber dare
to justify the support given by some for four years
in the form of hundreds of millions of dollars and
thousands of tons of weaponry to Nur al-Din al-Zanki,
the terrorists who beheaded that Palestinian child, an
event that the Security Council has lamented today?
That terrorist group, whose name demonstrates that it
is an agent of the Turkish regime, exposed the political
media campaigns and claims aimed at portraying it as
a moderate opposition group when it announced that
it was operating under the authority of the terrorist
organization the Al-Nusra Front.

My country will remain committed to its national
constitutional duty to combat terrorism in all its forms.
It is now incumbent on certain members of the Council
and other members of the international community to
end their exploitation of the Syrian people's suffering,
which they have created themselves through their
military, political and financial support for armed
terrorist groups. The politicization of the humanitarian
crisis, aimed at achieving ends that have nothing to do
with humanity or the interests of the Syrian people, will
lead only to a prolongation ofthe crisis and ofthe plight
of Syrian people, as well as a proliferation of terrorism
that threatens international peace and security.

Our commitment to fighting terrorism goes hand
in hand with our commitment to reaching a political
solution through intra-Syrian talks through which the
Syrians shall decide the future of their country without
any foreign intervention. Solutions imposed from
outside are totally rejected by the Syrian people.

With regard to solutions imposed from abroad, they
are completely and categorically rejected by the Syrian
Government. In that regard, I must emphasize that any
political solution can be successful only if it provides
the necessary support and circumstances that will
enable it to be implemented through efforts to combat
terrorism and to continue national reconciliation, which
has already succeeded in many areas.

Finally, everyone must realize that the real war
against terrorism has not yet begun. The victory of
the Syrian Government and its allies over terrorism
is inevitable. That victory will be part of the Security
Council's resolutions on combating terrorism and in the
maintenance of international peace and security.

I would like to conclude by saying that the Syrian
Air Force has air-dropped assistance to the residents of
Deir ez-Zor, the city that fell victim to the terrorism of
ISIL in the wake of the bombing by the United States
Air Force of the Syrian army bases that protected it.

