Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom fully subscribes to the European
Union position presented by Spain yesterday.

In the last Security Council debate on Palestine, I
called the continuation of Israeli actions in the West
Bank intolerable. The development of the situation
since then has indeed become I think for almost all of
us more than we can bear. The image of the region's
only truly democratic State lowering its standards to
the point - if first reports are in due course
confirmed - of callous disregard for civilian life and
humanitarian circumstances is a truly disturbing one.
All the evidence points to excessive and
disproportionate use of force by the Israeli Defense
Forces in Jenin and elsewhere. This is not only
unacceptable in terms of what Israel is professing to
achieve in the longer term; it is also futile and
unproductive.

The British Government believes that the
circumstances of the fighting in and around Jenin, and
perhaps elsewhere in the West Bank, need to be
carefully examined against the obligations on all States
to observe international law and international
humanitarian law in the conduct of military operations.
The United Kingdom would wish to see an independent
inquiry set up soon to establish the facts of what has
happened.

Also, in the short term, we regard the
humanitarian requirements as paramount. Unrestricted
and unconditional access for relief agencies and
medical workers must be allowed at once. Here, too,
the proper action has been too slow. We have made this
clear to the Israeli Government, and in turn they must
make it clear to their forces on the ground.

Meanwhile, we are all too well aware that the
resolutions of the Council have not been implemented.
The United Kingdom continues to insist on the
immediate withdrawal of Israeli forces from
Palestinian territory. Arrangements must quickly be put
in hand for a ceasefire and for steps to be taken for an
early return to political negotiations.

We applaud the efforts of Secretary of State
Powell, together with other members of the "quartet"
on the ground, to set in place the necessary steps. We
look forward to his and their continuing engagement.
As the British Prime Minister has made very clear in
his public statements, there is no alternative to
intensive third-party action to ensure that the parties
return to a sensible course of a cessation of violence
and a return to political negotiations. We accept that
this will have to be done in a series of measured steps.
There will be no overnight success.

The Secretary-General, who clearly shares that
View, has made a further, carefully considered proposal
for the introduction of an international force to help
damp down the violence and restore the prospects for
political discussion. The United Kingdom will study
his proposals in detail.

We all recognize that such a proposal, as the
Secretary-General himself has made clear, would need
the support of both parties if it was to be realizable. At
the very least, there will need to be significant
international assistance to the Palestinian Authority to
restore its capacity to administrate the occupied
territories and to regenerate some kind of a normal life
to the Palestinian people. Assistance in the security
aspects of that will have to be carefully considered.
The United Kingdom is prepared to stretch to the limit
the boundaries of practicality, but if proposals are to be
successfully implemented, realities will have to be
respected.

Automatic recourse to continued Violence is
entrenching itself deeply in the psychology of both
sides. A proper ceasefire is an essential prerequisite to
restoring the situation to a point where hope can be
regenerated. This has to include the complete cessation
of acts of terrorism by Palestinians against innocent
Israeli civilians. And on this, the Palestinian leadership
has not been convincing. Leaders on both sides carry
the responsibility ahead of anyone else of making sure
that the route to peace is now rebuilt.

We must not loose sight of the basics behind all
this. The Palestinians are entitled to a homeland, their
own State. Israel is entitled to absolute security. The
two go together.

