Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): First of all, I would
like to join previous speakers in thanking Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Iraq, for his comprehensive briefing. My
delegation also thanks the Permanent Representative of
the United States for his statement on behalf of the
Multinational Force.

The people of Iraq, like those of other nations,
have every right to live in a secure and stable country.
While remaining concerned over continued bomb
attacks, Indonesia draws encouragement from signs of
improvement in security, indicated by the steady
decline in overall violence across Iraq over the past
few months. We commend the efforts of the Iraqi
Government to promote security and stability. We also
commend the ceasefire declaration by some parties in
Iraq, which has also contributed to the decrease in
violence in the country. My delegation believes that all
parties concerned recognize the importance of making
additional efforts to achieve a permanent ceasefire,
which is essential to the realization of durable peace in
the country.

Capable and well-equipped Iraqi army and
internal security forces are important for the realization
of peace and stability in the country. We welcome the
continued progress made in training, equipping and
capacity-building of the Iraqi security forces. We attach
great importance to the day when the Iraqi forces
assume full responsibility for the maintenance of
security and stability in Iraq, which will eventually
allow for the gradual withdrawal of the Multinational
Force, towards the end of its presence in Iraq.

Peace in Iraq also requires political stability,
unity and consensus. Indonesia therefore underlines the
need for all parties to set aside differences and promote
dialogue in order to break the political impasse. One
way in which political consensus can be fostered is
with regard to constitutional issues. While resolving
such issues will not guarantee a well-functioning
political process in Iraq, their resolution will provide
added stability and credibility for the Iraqi authorities
as well as positive momentum. They are ingredients
that can ensure greater efficacy of the political process
in the long run.
Unity at the societal level is also key to achieving
a durable peace in Iraq. Dialogue among religious,
political and ethnic groups remains pertinent. The
formation of the National Iraqi Gathering by a group of
Sadrist activists, aimed at promoting tolerance and
dialogue with other groups, is commendable.

Given the Diwaniyah incident in October 2007,
which involved competing Shiite militias,
intrareligious dialogue is no less important than
interreligious dialogue in Iraq. In that regard, Indonesia
welcomes the signing of an agreement by the Supreme
Iraqi Islamic Council and the Sadrist Trend to prevent
further violence between their supporters. We also
welcome the convening of the first national forum for
Islamic scholars on 27 November 2007 and the cleric-
led initiatives aimed at reducing tensions between
Sunnis and Shiites.

Developments in Iraq have been shaped not only
by the dynamics inside the country, but also by the
situation in its regional and international milieus.
Neighbouring States can play an important role in
creating a regional environment conducive to
reconstruction efforts and the promotion of peace and
stability in Iraq. In that regard, we welcome the fourth
annual meeting of interior ministers of Iraq's
neighbouring States, held in Kuwait on 23 October
2007.

Indonesia supports an approach that promotes
regional cooperation on security issues with regard to
Iraq. We are heartened by the recent efforts of
neighbouring countries to reach out for greater
involvement in regional stability, including the recent
expanded meeting of the foreign ministers of the
neighbouring countries of Iraq, held in Istanbul on
2 and 3 November 2007, at which internal stability,
border security and expanded cooperation processes
were discussed. We also recognize the important role
that Iran and Syria have played in promoting
cooperation with Iraq in areas such as economic and
security cooperation.

Cooperation with neighbouring countries is also
essential in addressing the humanitarian challenges of
Iraqi refugees. The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees estimates that 2.2 million
Iraqis have fled to neighbouring countries, with 44 per
cent of that number in Syria and Jordan and 9 per cent
in other Middle Eastern countries.

My delegation continues to recognize the
increasing responsibility of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), in accordance

with Security Council resolution 1770 (2007). We
underline the importance of ensuring a balance
between this expanded role and the availability of
adequate resources. Indonesia therefore supports the
intention of the Secretary-General to closely review
every aspect of UNAMI's work, in order to determine
how progress can be made in implementing the
expanded mandate that it was given in resolution 1770
(2007).

We support the engagement of UNAMI in
discussions with relevant authorities in Iraq in order to
prevent the lapse of the deadline set out in article 140
of the Iraqi constitution from causing further violence.
We also support UNAMI's technical assistance to the
Government of Iraq to make progress in deciding the
future of some of the disputed territories.

Finally, I wish to reaffirm Indonesia's full support
for UNAMI and its work in Iraq.

