Mr. Abdulaziz (Libya): It is a pleasure to see you,
Sir, preside over this important meeting. Let me first
express our deepest thanks to you and to the members
of the Council for giving me the opportunity to address
the Council at this critical stage, when developments in
Libya are moving quite fast.

Permit me also to thank all the international
partners, countries and regional organizations for
the support they have provided and are providing to
Libya and for designating special envoys. Under the
leadership oer. Tarek Mitri, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), the Mission has
done a great job in a very challenging environment.
We highly appreciate the very encouraging message
conveyed by the Secretary-General and his personal
engagement. Our special thanks go to the European
Union for its political and technical support, to
the League of Arab States, the African Union, the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation and the Arab
Maghreb Union for adopting a number of resolutions
expressing firm support for the democratic process in
Libya.

The objective of my participation today is to provide
the Council with an actual and honest picture of the
situation in Libya, without any retouching whatsoever.

Starting with the positive aspects of that picture, I
should like to say that in 2012 the world applauded the
free and fair election of the members of the General
National Congress following 42 years of repression. A
transitional Government was established, followed by
the current temporary Government. A historic decision
was taken by the High Constitutional Court to consider
the decision of the General National Congress on the
establishment of a new Government null and void, thus
confirming the legitimacy of the current Government
and at the same time the independence of the judiciary.
During the past 60 years that has happened only twice,
once during the time of the Kingdom, when the High
Court took a decision, against the wish of the King,
to dismantle the Parliament, and now with this second
decision taken by the judiciary, which has really put the
normal functioning of the Government back on track.

The election of the members of the committee
responsible for drafting the Constitution went quite
well, and they have now started to draft the Constitution.
Most recently, as Mr. Mitri mentioned, elections were
held for the new Parliament, regardless of the turnout.
We are very hopeful that the process we are very hopeful
that it will be completed soon and that the results will
be announced before the end of the month.

A preliminary road map for the political process
has started to emerge. Municipal elections have started
in major cities, instituting a culture of decentralization
oflocal administration.

However, with respect to the negative aspects,
there are a number of challenges and negative elements
that represent serious threats to the democratic
transformation of Libya and, indeed, are indicative of
the possibility of heading towards a failed State, with
far-reaching consequences not only nationally but also
at the subregional and regional levels.

I should like to go through these impeding factors
so that the members of the Council can realize how
difficult the transformation of Libya is at the moment.

Let me start with the social challenges.

These include, first, the prevailing problems
relating to displaced persons within the country and
Libyan refugees outside the country; secondly, tribal
conflicts fed by close associations with armed groups;
thirdly, the flight of human resources abroad due
to fear of prosecution, also as a result of the unfair
political isolation law; fourthly, a quite passive public
opinion and inadequate public engagement, in spite of
the presence of thousands of registered civil-society
organizations; fifthly, crises of trust between the
people and the Government, the Government and the
National Congress, and the National Congress and the
population, which impede the political process; and,
sixthly, the absence of a communications strategy to
mobilize the support of the local population.

In relation to the economic challenges, I would cite,
first, the deteriorating economic situation, which is due
mainly to a decrease in oil production and oil exports.
The Council may recall that the export oil ports were
controlled by a militant group for almost 11 months.
We lost more than $30 billion as a result of that control.
The Government could not resort to a military reaction,
given the fact that it does not have enough tools to
do so. It Government decided to pursue negotiations
peacefully in order to solve this particular problem.

Other such challenges include, secondly, the
inability of the Government to secure basic services for
the local population, and, thirdly, a rising unemployment
rate among youth, to the extent that they have started
to join armed groups in order to secure some income.

Turning to political challenges, first, there are
political conflicts between political parties. Some rally
behind the the flag of building the State and the rule of
law. Others rally behind the flag of their own ideology,
not the flag of building Libya.

Other political challenges include, secondly, the
lack of a meaningful national dialogue and viable
national reconciliation programmes and initiatives;
and thirdly, the negative consequences of the political
isolation law. I believe that that law is catastrophic,
because its main purpose is to ensure isolation, not
integration. Most of the Libyan technocrats, who
have been trained for three to four decades, have no
ideological association with the previous regime, but
under the law they are marginalized and have no way to
contribute to the political process in the country.

In addition, there have been attempts during the
past few months by certain lawyers to submit proposals
to either eliminate or amend the law. Uncontrolled
military elements threatened the judges, saying that if
they took that decision lives would be threatened. That
is the situation.

With respect to military challenges, for the past
three years neither the defence sector nor the police
establishment have materialized. Secondly, there are
armed conflicts among armed groups, which could lead
to the outbreak of civil war, as we have witnessed in the
past five days. This is a conflict between those whose
objective is to build a State based on the rule of law and
with viable governance, and those who are against that
particular process. They want to have a small emirate
headed by ideologically oriented warlords; they do not
want to see a State built the way it should be. What
they say is completely wrong; the impression is thatjust
military groups are fighting each other for the sake of
authority. That is why we are trying to see how we can
mediate between those groups to ensure that there is a
cessation of hostilities, and then bring them to the table
to negotiate a proper reconciliation of their positions.

Thirdly, there are attacks on civil infrastructure
aimed at discrediting the Government and instigate
the people against it. Fourthly, there is the existence
of radical groups, religiously labelled, which have
more capabilities than the Government does. If the
Government does not have the necessary tools, how can
we blame it for being unable to face the growing threat
posed by armed groups whose only interest is to stand
against the democratic process?

There are also security challenges. First, there is
a deteriorating security situation due to the existence
of millions of heavy and small arms. Secondly, there
is a growing number of radical individuals and groups
who threaten and intimidate civilians and members
of the military alike and who commit serious crimes
of kidnapping for ransom, killing and assassinating
political activists, lawyers, journalists, police and
military personnel, judges and prosecutors. Yesterday a
lady member of Congress was assassinated in the city of
Derna, which is completely controlled by a religiously
labelled radical group. Thirdly, there is an absence of
a strong and effective and humane criminal justice
system. No one can talk about protecting democratic
institutions in the absence of a humane and functional
criminal justice system that is capable of protecting
the rights and freedoms of individuals. We have not
reached that stage yet. Fourthly, some detention centres
continue to be outside the control of the Government.
Fifthly, the illegal trafficking in arms and drugs and
the illegal migration of the smuggling of subsidized
goods, as referred to by my dear friend, Mr. Tarek
Mitri, continue to pose a very serious problem, not only
to Libya, but to neighbouring countries, in particular
those countries north of the Mediterranean.

Should Libya become a failed State, kidnapped by
radical groups and warlords, the consequences will be
far-reaching and could perhaps be beyond our control.
First, I think it could feed the conflicts and separation
attempts in neighbouring countries. It could also be a
negative element in relation to the intensification of the
illegal smuggling of arms, feeding internal conflicts
in neighbouring countries. I think Libya would be a
hub for extremists and religiously labelled radicals,
particularly in the eastern part of Libya. And we cannot
deny the fact that the radicals are not only Libyans;
some are also from Morocco, Algeria and Syria. That is
not to mention the fact that there is a rumour that, given
the fact that there is a serious need to control those
elements, the radicals are now encouraging others who
are fighting in Syria to come back to Libya because
there is a security gap and therefore Libya could be a
very favourable environment, which could be a source
of increasing trouble, not only to Libya, but also to the
neighbouring countries.

Do Council members not think that such factors,
which are indicative of Libya heading in the direction
of becoming a failed State, would justify a stronger,
more effective and strategic engagement of the
Security Council in the internal Libyan affairs? If so,
what prevents the Security Council from living up to
the expectations of the Libyan people to live in peace
and pursue their national democratic process in a
more peaceful environment? The current Government
is making tremendous efforts to think strategically
at the operational level and bring all stakeholders
together for a promising national dialogue, but the
means at the disposal of the Government are extremely
limited, not to mention the prevailing negative trend
among certain groups and individuals who are against
the democratic process. Given the fact that Libya is
still under Chapter VII, the Security Council could
provide the legal framework for an upgraded and more
effective international engagement in Libyan affairs
to bring more coherence to the political process and
reconstruction efforts.

I say with certainty that there is a serious
imbalance between the current and emerging problems
and the challenge in Libya, on the one hand, and what
the international community is offering, on the other.
That particular imbalance has to be rectified in order
to do justice to the Libyan case. A United Nations
stabilization and institution-building mission for Libya,
with the central focus of providing concrete structural
and legislative support in respect of some ofthe priority
areas that we think are the basis for building the rule of
law and viable governance, should be established.

First, it is necessary to build the national security
forces with a special focus on the establishment of
quality military forces, a police force and intelligence
structure. Equally important is the effective engagement
in the demilitarization process of the armed groups and
individuals. It is extremely important to follow the so-
called incremental approach in this process because
demilitarizing the military groups has two dimensions.
There is a political dimension, which we must work on
as a Government, and there is a technical dimension,
which the international community should help us with
either regionally or globally.

Secondly, it should contribute to the protection of
oil fields, oil export ports and civil airports. That will
ensure the normal flow of oil and its related revenues,
as well as the protection of other strategic sites. We
believe in so-called joint protection. Libyans have not
received enough training to be able to protect those
sites themselves. One example of that is the fact that,
12 months ago, when the oil ports were controlled,
we were pumping 1.5 million barrels per day. When
the oil production stopped, that amount went down to
250 to 300 barrels per day. The lack of protection of
oil fields and the ports through which we export our
oil remains a serious problem. We are not asking for
military intervention to protect the oil, but we need
teams, experts and trained people to work with Libyans
in so-called on-site training for Libyans to be able to
learn, for a certain period of time, how to protect those
strategic sites.

Thirdly, it should contribute to institution-building
and enhance the performance of public administration,
together with instituting anti-corruption mechanisms.
As the Council knows, Libya has signed and ratified
the United Nations Convention against Corruption, but
signing and ratifying it is one thing and implementing
it is another. We need legislative and structural reform
and an independent body that could really work hard
to start controlling the corrupt practices experienced
during the regime and during the stage of the last three
years.

Fourthly, it should contribute to reform of the
criminal justice system, which, as I mentioned, is also
a key to democratic institutions and the protection of
the rights of individuals and groups.

Fifthly, it should provide support to neighbouring
countries with respect to border security. In that regard,
I would like to inform the Council that the neighbouring
countries - starting with Algeria, Tunisia, Chad, the
Niger, the Sudan and Egypt - met on the occasion of
the Ministerial Conference ofNon-Aligned Countries in
Algeria. That was the first time that the representatives
of the neighbouring countries sat together at the
ministerial level and decided to think about the
situation in Libya and how they could add value to
assist Libyans. Given the fact that the neighbouring
countries understand the specificity of the problems
and realize the negative consequences to themselves of
what is going on in Libya, I salute them for taking that
initiative, which was followed up on the occasion of the
African Union Summit.

Most recently, Tunisia was kind enough to invite
the Ministries of Foreign Affairs of the neighbouring
countries to meet, and a solid declaration was issued.
Structurally, they decided to have two committees - a
security committee and apolitical committee-to follow
up on Libya's affairs and see how they can add value in
helping the Libyans in their democratic process.

Sixthly, given the fact that the League of Arab
States intends to take the lead in engaging the national
dialogue and reconciliation in close cooperation with
the African Union and the Ministerial Committee of the
neighbouring countries, the mission could also provide
viable support to that process. The speedy deployment
of such a mission, if it is possible, in close cooperation
and coordination with regional organizations, would
certainly enable the country to move forward in pursuit
of a more meaningful democratic transformation, the
fair distribution of wealth, the adoption of a consensus
constitution, the demilitarization of armed groups
and the establishment of the rule of law and viable
governance. At the same time, should this mission
materialize, I think it would create a model and success
story for post-conflict engagement of the United
Nations and regional organizations.

In conclusion, I wish to make a sincere appeal
to the Security Council to take the case of Libya
seriously before it is too late. Approaching the task with
determination and sustained support for the political
process in Libya will certainly pay off in the end.
We are dealing with a country of 6.5 million people
living on 1.8 million square kilometres, which is the
seventeenth largest in the world in terms of surface area
and the fourth largest in Africa, with oil reserves in
the amount of 41.5 billion barrels. It has tremendous
potential, not only for the Libya people, but also for
our neighbours and our partners. It goes without saying
that the Libyans are responsible for shaping their own
destiny, believing in a prosperous future, but we cannot
achieve it alone. We need a partnership in solidarity
that goes beyond national interests.

Finally, I wish to reiterate the fact that we are not
calling for a military intervention. Rather, we are calling
for stabilization and institution-building initiatives on
the part of the Security Council. That is the only way to
empower the State to respond to the challenges ahead.

I thank the President and the Council for giving me
this opportunity to convey to them the exact situation
in Libya and what the Libyan people expect from the
international community.

