The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Senegal.

First, I would like to thank Ambassador Zahid
Tanin, Special Representative of the Secretary- General
and Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
in Kosovo (UNMIK), for the excellent briefing he has
just delivered. I also thank Mr. Ivica Daeie, First Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Minister of
Serbia, and Ambassador Citaku for their statements.

I am necessarily concerned about the unabated
tensions mentioned in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2016/901), new tensions that undermine some
of the progress made since the end of the conflict
with the cooperation of stakeholders on both sides.
Such progress made possible the agreement on
telecommunications, which my delegation welcomes as
important. In that regard, in order to reinvigorate the
momentum towards ensuring lasting stability - which
beyond Kosovo is a matter of concern for the entire
Balkans region - we would strongly encourage the
political players in Kosovo to work towards a calm
political environment, on which the tenor of the
dialogue with Belgrade depends, while also calling
upon Serbian authorities to maintain and bolster their
commitment to a constructive and calm dialogue with
Pristina. My delegation joins the Secretary-General in
welcoming the progress made to date by both parties in
the context of the European Union-facilitated dialogue.
We encourage partners and countries with influence
to bring it to bear to continue to support the talks.
In order to draw upon the achievements made in that
framework, we think it crucial that the agreements
reached until now be carried out effectively and that
leaders on both side fully commit to resume dialogue
in a constructive spirit. That remains the only way to
normalize relations.

Recent developments noted in the report,
in particular the political context leading to the
ratification of the border demarcation agreement with
Montenegro and the new law on the Trepca industrial
complex, serve to remind us of the need for inclusive
dialogue on all pending matters, both among domestic
and foreign stakeholders. My delegation believes that
difficulties can be overcome; certainly, they should not
become an obstacle to the political process under way,
especially with regard to implementing the agreement
on integrating the Kosovo judiciary, where notable
strides have been made. Along the same lines, we
welcome the agreement reached on 5 August for the
implementation of the agreement of 25 August on the
reconstruction of the main bridge in Mitrovica. We
would encourage parties to ensure the success of the
agreement by upholding their outstanding obligations.

Senegal agrees with the Secretary-General that
efforts are needed on the humanitarian and human
rights fronts so as to increase the return of refugees,
foment trust among the various communities and build
diverse yet inclusive societies.

Similarly,withregardtotheactivitiesoftheEuropean
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), whose
mandate was extended to 14 June 2018, we welcome
its shoring up of Kosovo's achievements in the area of
defence, in promoting the rule of law and human rights
and in combating terrorism and organized crime. Its
support also contributed to the holding of a regional
conference of police directors general in Skopje from
8 to 10 September, which included representatives from
Kosovo, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
and Serbia. We welcome UNMIK's activities to promote
reconciliation, transitional justice and human rights
and to support the normalization of relations between
Belgrade and Pristina.

In addition to encouraging dialogue, Senegal urges
all stakeholders to make further strides towards peace
and development, in particular by encouraging the
implementation of the 25 August 2015 agreements in
north Kosovo. We therefore reiterate our unstinting
support to the joint EULEX-United Nations
Development Programme project aimed at increasing
trust among the communities by protecting cultural
heritage. We would also like to see a strengthening of
cooperation on information-exchange for resolving the
issue of missing persons.

By way of conclusion, my delegation would like to
pay tribute to Special Representative Tanin for his wise
guidance ofUNMIK. We also welcome the efforts made
by the Kosovo Force, EULEX, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and the European
Union. These are all stakeholders resolutely committed
to peace and stability in Kosovo and the whole region.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The representative of Serbia has asked for the floor
to make a further statement. I now give him the floor.

