Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): I join in the
tributes that have been paid to Ambassador Shen. Over
the last three and a half years, he has become not only
a good colleague but a good friend as well. I,
personally, will miss him.

Mr. President, congratulations on a very good
month. The output of the Council should not be
measured simply by quantity but by quality, too. I think
that this month we have not done badly. We, too, were
pleased with the open debate on Africa and particularly
pleased to have with us at the table the President of the
Economic and Social Council.

As Baroness Amos indicated, we will be making
Africa a major theme of our presidency in July. We
may not follow quite the same format, since, although

imitation is the sincerest form of flattery, it does not
always work best. But I took good note of what
Ambassador Valdivieso had to say about making the
focus a little bit more precise. Over the next few
months, we will be refining our ideas, and we will hope
to have a good package ready to submit by the time our
presidency starts.

I would like to make two other points. I do not
really think it is for the United Kingdom delegation to
comment on the counter-terrorism briefing. I would say
that others who have spoken to us found it useful. I
think it has been a deliberate effort of our collective
strategy to be as inclusive as possible about the work
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee in respect of the
wider membership. I have to say that I personally was
very pleased to see the regional emphasis that came out
in some of the statements. I think that has a direct
bearing on the remarks that Ambassador Strommen
was making about the need to try to think about how
we can keep our statements short and our public
meetings effective. I think that is one useful lesson that
one can perhaps draw, even if it is not directly
applicable to all other circumstances.

Finally, I would not like the review of the month
to go by without mentioning the work of the Working
Group on peacekeeping, on which we came to a major
decision this month. There is still a lot to do in terms of
other issues on the Working Group's agenda, though I
hope we will now be able to make the new
arrangements in respect of troop-contributors' work. I
wish Ambassador Strommen the best of luck in his new
incarnation as Chairman of the Working Group. We
will be cooperating with him fully.

