Prince Zeid Ra'ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, Sir, I would like to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for this month and to wish you
every success in discharging the tasks with which you
have been entrusted. We have every confidence in your
ability to fulfil your responsibilities. I would also like
to thank His Excellency Ambassador Munir Akram, the
Permanent Representative of Pakistan, for his
distinguished efforts as President of the Council during
the month of May.

(spoke in English)

On 16 June, four days from now, the first
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
will be sworn in at a ceremony in The Hague. This will
crown what has been an exceptional year for the Court
and its establishment, beginning with the entry into
force of the Rome Statute on 1 July 2002, followed two
months later by the convening of the inaugural session
of the Assembly of States Parties, the election of the
first 18 judges of the Court in February of this year and
the election of the Court's President and two Vice-
Presidents at the inauguration of the Court held in The
Hague only three months ago in the presence of Her
Majesty Queen Beatrix of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands, His Excellency Secretary-General Kofi
Annan and a large ministerial gathering from the States
parties and beyond.

The Court now has an address, a leadership and
core personnel. The number of States that have acceded
to the Rome Statute continues to rise. The ICC has
been the recipient of more than 200 letters and claims
and will, in due course, begin to function fully, once
the Registrar has been appointed and the Office of the
Prosecutor has been staffed.

It is in that overall context - with the final
piecing together by some 90 member States, whose
number is growing, of what we hold to be a more
enlightened approach to addressing the excesses of
humankind's regular recourse to brutality - that the
Security Council now wishes to review Security
Council resolution 1422 (2002).

Jordan, as a State party to the Rome Statute, is
mindful of the tensions and compressions through
which the Council has passed over the last 10 months,
and we would not wish to create any further discomfort
for the Council. While it is likely that the draft
resolution now before the Council will be adopted
shortly - and we take note of this - we remain
equally convinced that the Council should in due
course reconsider repeating such a decision.

For we are still concerned over how resolution
1422 (2002) has attempted to elevate an entire category
of people to a point above the law - a concern
exacerbated still further when thought is given to the
revolting nature of the crimes covered by the Court's
jurisdiction. The resolution is therefore, in our
assessment, a misapplication of article 16, and a
contravention of the Rome Statute. The resolution does
not relate to the Council's being seized of any
particular political situation, and the Council's
interpretation of article 16 does not accord with the
drafting history of that article. The resolution also
reverses the default position established by the Rome
Statute over which body - the Court or the Council -
should be the first to take up individual criminal cases
with relevance to current or former officials or
personnel from a State not party to the Statute over acts
or omissions relating to a United Nations-established
or -authorized operation. Thus, we join others in
believing that the Council should not be rewriting
treaties previously negotiated by all States comprising
the entire international community. The implications of
this practice are obvious to all here today.

The International Criminal Court will soon
become our permanent conscience where individual
criminal responsibility is concerned. The Court will
stay permanently in the background, deferring to the
national jurisdictions of States that are willing and able
to investigate claims and prosecute those accused of
perpetrating the offences enumerated in the Rome
Statute. It will only come to the fore and itself exercise
jurisdiction when States that should be taking up their
responsibilities are unwilling or genuinely unable to do
so. The ICC does not, therefore, seek to replace
national jurisdictions; rather, by its permanent
presence, it will remind them of their legal and moral
obligations, and thus reinforce national court systems.

We also believe that the Court will, in good time,
become the surest companion of global peace and a
more welcome future. Furthermore, in view of our
collective and, in many respects, lamentable past -
with recurring episodes of genocide as well as the
never-ending commission of war crimes and crimes
against humanity - this could not come sooner. We
appeal therefore to the Security Council to give some
thought to the few modest points that we have
attempted to put forward here today.

