Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank the United
States for convening this briefing. We also thank
Mr. Khiari for his report this afternoon.

We would first like to stress that the nuclear
and ballistic-missile programme of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea poses a serious threat to
international peace and security, in flagrant violation
of Security Council resolutions, the non-proliferation
regime and international law. We are very concerned
about the fact that the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea has continued actively developing and improving
its nuclear and ballistic-missile programme, which
we see as a challenge to the international community
compounded by its nuclear deterrent effect and defiant
attitude. In addition to violating stipulated provisions,
this has created an atmosphere of uncertainty both
regionally and internationally. Considering that, it is
clear that the discussion ofthis issue is a very important
one that should continue to be a priority on the Council's
agenda.

On the other hand, we want to emphasize that last
year's political and diplomatic advances between the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea and the United
States and the rapprochement between the two Koreas
were important steps in establishing relations, reducing
tensions and building confidence, which we commend.
However, these positive events nonetheless failed to
result in concrete progress towards the denuclearization
of the Korean peninsula. We also regret that since
May Pyongyang has actively resumed its ballistic-
missile tests, including of submarine-launched
ballistic missiles, and is working on the possibility of
a space launch and intercontinental missiles. A single
mistake or mechanical failure in those tests would
have devastating and unimaginable consequences for
humankind. We therefore categorically condemn these
launches and all the destabilizing activity in the region
and urge the authorities to show restraint, refrain
from aggressive and defiant rhetoric and return to a
dialogue that facilitates meaningful negotiations on
denuclearization.

We also note with concern the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea's continued violations
of the provisions of its sanctions regime, including
its continuing illicit ship-to-ship transfers, which
are a clear evasion of the annual import limit of
500,000 barrels of refined oil established by Council
resolution 2397 (2017). We are also concerned about
the diversion of national resources to the country's
nuclear and ballistic programme and its acquisition of
new technologies enabling it to expand its armaments
capacity while at the same time worsening its current
critical humanitarian situation. It is therefore crucial to
make greater efforts to ensure full compliance with the
Council's resolutions. We hope that the talks between
Washington and Pyongyang will resume and will
facilitate an immediate halt to all destabilizing activity
on the Korean peninsula, including ballistic-missile
launches, regardless of their range, while an agreement
is being negotiated for complete, irreversible and
verifiable denuclearization under International Atomic
Energy Agency safeguards.

In conclusion, we reiterate our call for unity on the
part of the Council, which we see as the primary actor
in the proceedings for taking diplomatic initiatives
and resuming dialogue with a view to achieving our
overall goal of ensuring lasting peace and the complete
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.

