President Obasanjo: "Africa is poised for action". The
international community should stand ready to assist
regional arrangements in their needs for capacity-
building, when necessary and appropriate.

The third point is that the United Nations is
increasingly called upon to look beyond its
intergovernmental horizons. The emergence of non-
State actors is not only a debit on the challenges side of
the equation, it is also - and perhaps much more so -
an asset on the side of expertise, public communication
and action. While decision-making in the United
Nations will remain the business of Governments, the
integration of non-State stakeholders and non-State
expertise in the deliberative process is in everybody's
best interest: in the interest of informed decision-
making and in the interest of popular acceptance. That
point has been given considerable emphasis in the
context of our deliberations on justice, the rule of law
and national reconciliation. Our debate on the role that
the private sector can play in addressing conflict and
post-conflict situations has been yet another
opportunity to demonstrate the complementarity
between State and non-State efforts.

The Council already has some experience in
bringing together State and non-State stakeholders, be
it through the convening of Arria-type Council
meetings or the very effective collaboration of
interested Member States, United Nations system
stakeholders and non-governmental organizations, such
as on the issue of children and armed conflict. We
encourage not only the Council, but indeed the United
Nations as a whole, to further explore such approaches.

I would like to conclude on a point that is easily
overlooked. Giving thought to better crisis
management, as we are doing today, implies the
recognition that, all too often, conflict prevention is
failing. Crisis prevention - based on early warning,
the vigilance and determination of effective and well-
legitimized United Nations bodies, credible deterrence
whenever feasible, and universally accepted norms -
must remain at the core of our endeavours.

