Mr. Dejammet (France) (spoke in French): Despite
some limited progress, such as the easing of tension along
the ceasefire line in recent months, the situation in
Abkhazia, Georgia, is still a matter for concern. For more
than seven years, peace, security and prosperity have been
losing ground to civil war, to attacks on the fundamental
rights of civilian populations and to ethnic cleansing, as
explicitly noted in the conclusions of the Lisbon summit of
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE). Hundreds of thousands of refugees driven from
their homes by Abkhaz militias are still denied the
guarantees they need to return home for good. The parties
should accept assistance from the competent international
bodies in working towards the necessary arrangements.

The lack of meaningful progress in defining a status
for Abkhazia that would respect the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Georgia is another matter for concern.
Here, the elections planned in Abkhazia, Georgia, seem to
constitute a new setback. The selection of voters on the
basis of racial, ethnic or religious criteria, in violation of
the most basic international standards, is completely
unacceptable and must be unequivocally condemned.
Moreover, any balloting based on such practices must be
regarded as null and void.

Overall, the prospect of a political settlement seems to
be blocked. This persistence of a status quo that flouts
international law and brings instability to the area is
unacceptable. Goodwill is needed from all to facilitate a
political settlement. It is therefore to be hoped that the
parties will demonstrate openness and give favourable
consideration to the ideas that the Secretary-General and his
Special Representative plan to submit to them in coming
months. These new contributions to the search for a
solution should be welcomed as an opportunity to revive
the peace process.

For its part, France fully supports United Nations
activities to resolve the conflict in Abkhazia, Georgia, and
joins other delegations in paying tribute to the departing
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Liviu
Bota.

For all these reasons, we shall support the draft
resolution before us.

