Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Special Representative Tadamichi Yamamoto,
Executive Director Yury Fedotov and Ambassador
Djani for their briefings. I appreciate the work done
by them all, the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA), the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime and the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), pertaining to
Afghanistan and the Taliban. I would also like to
thank the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan,
Ambassador Raz, for her statement.

At present, the Afghan situation is in a critical
phase, with the countdown to the elections, the parallel
advancement of the peace and reconciliation process
and the electoral preparations, the worrisome security
situation and grave humanitarian conditions. The
international community should effectively implement
its commitments and continue to provide resolute
support to Afghanistan.

First, there is a need to assist Afghanistan in holding
safe and smooth presidential elections. The presidential
elections are to be held this month, and preparations are

in their final phase. China appreciates Afghanistan's
work and efforts to prepare for the elections. In order to
maintain political and social stability in Afghanistan,
China hopes that the national electoral bodies will
draw on the experiences and lessons of last year's
parliamentary elections so as to ensure that all elections
unfold in an orderly manner. We hope that UNAMA
will provide technical support in this regard.

We hope that the Afghan National Defence and
Security Forces will predeploy for security situations
that may arise during the elections. We also call on all
political factions in Afghanistan to strengthen unity
and address any differences relating to the elections
through dialogue.

The second point is to assist in advancing the
Afghan-led and -owned reconciliation process. China
notes that the international community and countries
in the region have recently been actively pushing for
the Afghan Government to engage in direct dialogue
with the Taliban, and we urge the United States and
the Taliban to continue to advance their negotiations
and to implement agreements. We call on all parties
in Afghanistan, including the Taliban, to prioritize
the national interests and the interests of the people,
seize this historic opportunity, launch inter-Afghan
negotiations and speedily elaborate a political
framework that is acceptable to all parties.

We hope that UNAMA will continue to assist
the Afghan Government in advancing the domestic
political dialogue and push the Taliban to return to the
negotiating table promptly.

The third point is to assist Afghanistan in
strengthening its security capacity-building. The
Afghan security situation remains weak. Air strikes
and search operations have resulted in a large increase
in civilian casualties, terrorist organizations remain
active and drugs are still a major source of income for
terrorist organizations.

China calls for foreign troops to withdraw from
Afghanistan in an orderly and responsible manner
and for the United States and the Taliban to honour
their commitments on troop withdrawal and counter-
terrorism. China hopes that UNAMA will continue to
help Afghanistan strengthen security capacity-building.
The international community should provide training,
funding and technical support in that respect and assist
Afghanistan in effectively countering the threat of
terrorism, cross-border crime and drug smuggling.
The fourth point is to assist Afghanistan in
achieving socioeconomic development and improving
livelihoods. Recently, Afghan economic development
has been at a standstill. The Afghan people have an
urgent desire to improve their livelihoods. As peace
and stability require good socioeconomic conditions,
China calls on the international community to assist
Afghanistan in leveraging its own advantages and in
participating in regional economic cooperation and
interconnectivity so as to enable it to achieve stability
and prosperity as soon as possible.

UNAMA should plan out United Nations agencies'
overall capacities in Afghanistan to assist the Afghan
Government and people in eradicating poverty,
improving livelihoods and overcoming the challenges
resulting from natural disasters. The international
community should effectively honour its commitments
of assistance to Afghanistan, help displaced Afghans
and improve the humanitarian situation of Afghan
refugees in neighbouring countries.

China has consistently supported the Afghan
political process and the swift realization of broad and
inclusive political reconciliation. Regarding future
political arrangements in Afghanistan, China believes
that three principles should be followed: first, there
should be broad representation and inclusiveness to
ensure that all parties and ethnic groups in Afghanistan
can participate in the political life of the country on
an equal footing and promote power-sharing; secondly,
terrorism must be fought tirelessly to ensure that
Afghanistan never again becomes a safe haven for
terrorist organizations; and, thirdly, a foreign policy
of peace and friendly relations should be pursued to
ensure that Afghanistan can live in peace with the
countries of the world, especially its neighbours, and
play a constructive role in regional peace and stability.

The third session of the China-Afghanistan-
Pakistan Foreign Ministers' Dialogue, held in Pakistan
on 7 September, issued a joint statement and adopted a
list of initial projects under the trilateral memorandum
of understanding on counter-terrorism cooperation
among Afghanistan, China and Pakistan. The Foreign
Ministers of the three countries expressed their hope
that the intra-Afghanistan negotiations would begin as
soon as possible and lead to a full cessation of violence;
underlined the need to reach a comprehensive agreement
through an inclusive, Afghan-led and -owned peace
process; and reaffirmed their commitment to promoting
the building of interconnectivity in the framework of
the Belt and Road Initiative, the Regional Economic
Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan and other
regional economic initiatives. The Ministers stated
that they would not allow any terrorist organization,
element or individual to use their respective territories
to engage in activities against other countries. That
declaration is reflective of the current situation and
highly significant for the peace and reconciliation
process in Afghanistan.

China, through such multilateral mechanisms as
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization Afghanistan
Liaison Group and the China-Afghanistan-Pakistan
Foreign Ministers' Dialogue, will continue to provide
support to Afghanistan in its political process and other
relevant areas and to work with it to actively implement
the memorandum of understanding between China and
Afghanistan on jointly advancing in the Belt and Road
Initiative, thus actively supporting the reconstruction
of the country and its reintegration into the regional
economy.

China will continue to support UNAMA and other
relevant actors in playing a greater role on Afghanistan.
We will continue to make our contribution by working
together with the international community for the
security, stability, development and prosperity
of Afghanistan.

