Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Feltman for his comments
today and for his engagement on the Ukrainian issue,
including through trips to Ukraine.

Ukrainians turned out in historic numbers on
Sunday, uniting to express their political will to choose
freely their own future. The United States congratulates
the people of Ukraine on having voted in large numbers
to express their clear desire for a united, democratic
and peaceful Ukraine. The election reaffirms Ukraine's
commitment to the democratic process. We look
forward to working with President-elect Poroshenko
and the people of Ukraine to build on this victory for
democracy in order to create a more unified, secure,
transparent and prosperous Ukraine.

We note the importance of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) judgement
that the election was largely in line with Ukraine's
international commitments and demonstrated respect
for fundamental freedoms in the vast majority of
the country. Thousands of independent electoral
observers - international and domestic - supported
the OSCE determination. We thank the OSCE Office for
Democratic Institutions and Human Rights, the OSCE
Parliamentary Assembly, the Parliamentary Assembly
of the Council of Europe, the European Parliament,
the NATO Parliamentary Assembly and the other
international and non-governmental organizations and
observers who contributed to the effort.

But as we celebrate the successful 25 May
presidential election, we must also condemn the actions
of those who sought to derail the voting in parts
of eastern Ukraine. In particular, we condemn the
actions of pro-Russian armed separatists operating in
Donetsk and Luhansk, who attacked district election
commissions and polling stations and intimidated
election workers, notably through abductions, death
threats, forced entry into private homes, the seizure
of equipment and election materials, and the shooting
of a candidate proxy. Those illegal actions constituted
attempts to obstruct the election and to interfere with
citizens' rights to participate.

Yet even in those two regions of the east where
pro-Russian separatist groups sought to disenfranchise
the population, some courageous Ukrainians
endeavoured to vote. The United States commends the
resolve of the Ukrainian people to participate despite the
threats, provocations, and violence. We take particular
note of the Central Election Commission, which
established special accommodations to enfranchise
voters in the areas where separatists worked to disrupt
voting, by allowing citizens to vote at alternate
locations, and which made voting arrangements for
Crimeans to vote outside of Ukraine's Crimea region,
which remains under Russian occupation.

President-elect Poroshenko and the Ukrainian
Government have many challenges before them. We are
heartened by the President-elect's stated goal to make
national reconciliation a priority. Forging a common
political vision will be essential. In that regard, we
welcome the Ukrainian Government's intention to
continue the OSCE-supported national unity round
tables, which have allowed Ukrainians from all regions
and all political views to come together to discuss their
differences and their common interests in a peaceful,
unified and stable Ukraine. We also welcome the
Rada's 21 May memorandum of understanding and
peace, which calls on all citizens to abandon radical
actions and hatred and to protect, promote and build a
democratic, sovereign and united Ukraine.

We are also encouraged by President-elect Poroshenko's
willingness to seek greater decentralization for the
regions, to pursue constitutional reforms following the
election and to engage in dialogue with Russia. Since
the Russian Federation has stated that it will respect
the will expressed by the Ukrainian people, we urge
Russia to recognize the results of Sunday's election
and begin to engage constructively with President-elect
Poroshenko and the Ukrainian Government to resolve
the crisis.

Despite the progress made with Sunday's election
we are deeply concerned by the increased violence
in Donetsk and Luhansk, including the seizure of the
Donetsk airport by separatists, and we are disturbed
by ongoing reports that separatists continue to carry
out criminal actions in parts of eastern Ukraine. We
recognize that Ukraine must uphold law and order on
Ukrainian territory, and we call on the separatists to
disarm and end the violence. Of particular concern
are reports of the detention of international monitors
from the OSCE after they were stopped at separatist
checkpoints in the Donetsk region. We condemn the
abductions and call on Russia to use its influence with
the separatists to secure the the immediate release of
the monitors and their unimpeded access throughout
Ukraine. We also remain concerned by reports that
armed groups and weapons continue to cross the border
from Russia into Ukraine. We believe Russia can and
must act to stem such provocative actions along the
Russia-Ukraine border.

In conclusion, let me reiterate my Government's
continued support for the aspirations of the people
of Ukraine to a prosperous, sovereign, independent,
and united Ukraine, including the Crimea region,
with strong ties to both East and West. We remain
committed to working with Ukraine and other partners
in order to seek de-escalation and a peaceful resolution
of the conflict and to respect the territorial integrity of
Ukraine.

