Mr. Trullols Yabra (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank you, Mr. President,
and your delegation for convening this morning's
meeting on the strategic report (S/2019/103) of the
Secretary-General on the threat to international peace
and security posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) (Da'esh). We are also especially grateful
to Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Under-Secretary-General
of the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism,
and Ms. Michele Coninsx, Executive Director of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
for their contributions on the current state of affairs.
We continue to commend their critical work.

As we have heard, ISIL continues to pose a serious
threat to international security and peace. That should
keep alive the Security Council's concern and sense
of urgency, despite acknowledgements of the concrete
progress made in combating and eradicating that threat,
with the support and effort of all actors involved,
including States, the international community and
civil society. The ongoing transformation of ISIL into
a covert global network, the activities of its regional
affiliates around the world, the challenge posed by the
return and relocation of foreign terrorist fighters, the
new reality that we face, the result of those terrorist
groups' ability to adapt and the evolution of policies
and actions to fight them, call for greater collaboration
among States to strengthen joint global efforts, which
means making adjustments and undertaking new
initiatives and actions.

It is precisely ISIL's ability to adapt and take
advantage of spaces, with or without weak, fragmented
Governments or marginalized communities, that makes
us reflect on the growing importance of addressing the
causes that give rise or fuel radicalization and violent
extremism, particularly among youth and, to an equal
extent, women. Statistics indicating that about 10 per
cent ofthe 40,000 people who travelled to join ISIL are
minors and that about 20 per cent of foreign fighters are
women and girls point to the need to focus on prevention
as a key element in the fight against terrorism. The
stories that recently emerged in interviews about
women under ISIL's control being accompanied by
children and fleeing from the clutches of that terrorist
group show the level of persuasion and coercion to
which those women are exposed to join ISIL's ranks,
which erases all human impulse of concern for the
protection and well-being of their own children.

We must recognize the challenge faced by countries
of origin, and cooperate accordingly, by the return of ISIL
foreign terrorist fighters and in developing strategies
for prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration, in
particular with regard to fighters' family members.
Following their radicalization and traumatic violent
experiences, women and children can unfortunately
pose a future threat. In that regard, we underscore the
important work carried out by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and its Executive Directorate and the
Committee's December 2018 adoption of the addendum
to the Madrid Guiding Principles to facilitate the work
of Member States in addressing the challenges posed
by the return and relocation of foreign terrorist fighters
and their family members, while remaining sensitive to
issues concerning gender, age and human rights.

Another issue mentioned in the report that we
would like to stress is the need to continue to deepen
international cooperation among States with regard
to both judicial processes and efforts to impede the
financing of terrorism. We deem close cooperation
among the relevant authorities in the collection,
management, preservation and exchange of information,
including digital information, as crucial. To that end, it
is necessary to shore up trust and cooperation among
agencies in the area of information-sharing, while
recognizing that the threat posed by ISIL and other
terrorist groups is serious, imminent and shared by
all. In order facilitate such international cooperation,
it is necessary to implement agreements and protocols
within the framework of national legislation and
relevant international law, including international
human rights law and international humanitarian
law, that would make it operational. Likewise, it is
important to complement such initiatives with training,
procedural manuals, forms and platforms, among other
concrete steps mentioned in the report. Concerning new
methods and modalities used to finance terrorist group,
including some as sophisticated as cryptocurrency
exchange platforms and those that are more common
in today's economy, such as digital wallets and mobile
payment services, international cooperation continues
to be key to effectively combat terrorism.

