Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Mueller for her briefing.

The relevant actors of the international community
have recently made active diplomatic efforts to improve
the situation in Idlib. Since 31 August, Russia and the
Syrian Government have implemented a ceasefire in
Idlib, which has generally held. On 16 September, the
Presidents of Russia, Turkey and Iran met in Ankara
and agreed to take measures to ease the tension in
Idlib, stressing that no party is allowed to violate
Syrian sovereignty, independence, unity or territorial
integrity and reiterating their intention to cooperate
to fight terrorism and to take concrete measures to
protect civilians. China welcomes those developments
and supports Russia, Turkey and Iran in seeking,
in the interests of the Syrian nation and people, a
comprehensive solution to fight terrorism and address
the humanitarian issues in Idlib. We expect the Astana
process to continue its important role.

China has been closely following the humanitarian
situation in Syria, as it cares about the interests and
well-being of the Syrian people. Years of conflict have
resulted in a huge demand for humanitarian aid in
Syria, and the economic sanctions have worsened the
living conditions of the Syrian people. The international
community must take into account the current food
situation and other living conditions of the Syrian
people and issues relating to the country's post-war
reconstruction, national security and development. We
should also properly tackle the issue of foreign terrorist
fighters and their families and the return of refugees
and internally displaced persons to the homes.

The international community has a moral
responsibility to help the Syrian people emerge from
the shadow of war and lead a peaceful, stable and
promising life. In conducting humanitarian relief
operations in Syria, the United Nations and its relevant
agencies should fully respect Syria's sovereignty,
independence, unity and territory integrity, and strictly
abide by the resolutions of the Security Council, the
United Nations guiding principles on humanitarian
assistance and relevant provisions of international law.
They should step up communication and coordination
with the Syrian Government.
There has been a great deal of controversy over
the Secretariat's move to establish a Board of Inquiry
into incidents in north-west Syria. China is concerned
about the implications that might have on Syria's
political process. At present, the Syrian Government
is actively promoting development and improving
people's livelihoods. China appreciates those efforts.
In communication and coordination with the Syrian
Government, China plans to focus on launching
livelihood-related projects to support Syria in its
post-war reconstruction. A political solution to the
situation in Syria is the fundamental way to ease the
humanitarian situation in the country.

For some time now, the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Geir Pedersen, has
been actively engaged in good offices to promote
the political process based on the principle of Syrian
leadership and ownership and on resolution 2254 (2015).
With momentum now building for a political settlement
to the Syrian issue, China supports the Special Envoy's
efforts and calls for all parties in Syria to resolve their
differences through dialogue and consultation. Members
of the Council should also remain united in providing
political support for the Special Envoy's efforts, such as
that in forming a constitutional committee.

