Mr. Mohammad Kama] (Malaysia): In view of your
appeal for brevity, Mr. President, and as testimony to my
delegation's readiness to cooperate with you as always, I
shall read out only excerpts from my prepared statement.

Six months have passed since the parties signed the
Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement, but the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has not improved and
continues to be a serious cause for concern. The peace
accord is still very fragile. My delegation could not agree
more with the Secretary-General's assessment that

"the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement remains the best
hope for the resolution of the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo". (S/2000/30, para. 86)

We firmly believe that the future peace and stability of the
region rest on the successful implementation of the
Agreement. My delegation joins other Council members in
renewing the call on all the parties to uphold that
Agreement and to use the Joint Military Commission more
effectively to deal with allegations of violations of the
Agreement. The conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo cannot be resolved without the full commitment and
cooperation of all the signatories. Having commended them
for their good judgement in signing the Agreement, we now
urge them to show greater political will and commitment to
make the process work. It is imperative that the parties
work together in good faith and contribute positively to the
smooth implementation of the Agreement.

As we remind the parties of their obligations and of
their commitment to the peace process, we should equally
remind ourselves of our own responsibilities here in the
Council. The Security Council should make good its
promise to act promptly with a view to deploying a full-
fledged peacekeeping mission to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Were the United Nations to fail in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the ramifications would
almost certainly be far-reaching and wide-ranging. The very
credibility and authority of the Council would be in
question. How we respond to the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo will be a litmus test of
the Council's commitment to maintaining peace and
security in Africa. Time is of the essence, as a further delay
in the deployment of United Nations peacekeepers would
run the risk of unravelling the Lusaka Agreement.

...-J "Mu-MMJ A-tuvv
 

Malaysia welcomes the report of the Secretary-
General on further deployment of United Nations
personnel in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(S/2000/30). We agree fully with the view that any United
Nations force deployed in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo should necessarily be large and adequately
mandated to take up the task of monitoring the ceasefire
and verifying the withdrawal of all foreign forces. This is
in addition to the still unresolved question of who will
bear the responsibility of disarming all armed groups in
the territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
While we support the Secretary-General's
recommendation of an initial force of 5,537 officers and
men to protect military observers and civilian staff of the
United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC), we would like to
stress that this should be followed up quickly with a more
substantial presence.

The deployment of United Nations peacekeepers will
not in itself guarantee peace and security for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and other countries in
the region. Those countries will have to bear the principal
responsibility for their own long-term security. Continued
support by the international community will be contingent
upon renewed and strengthened commitment by the
signatories to the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement. We
therefore call on the parties to cease military hostilities
forthwith and to fully ensure the security and freedom of
movement of United Nations personnel. The parties
should cease their hostile propaganda, in particular
incitements to attack unarmed civilians.

The conflict in the Democratic Republic of Congo
has an external and an internal dimension. Clearly, the
final resolution of the conflict will have to take into
account both the legitimate security concerns of all the
States involved and respect for the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence of the Democratic
Republic of Congo. In our view, the role of the Joint
Military Commission is crucial to the success of the
ceasefire and the subsequent consolidation of peace. In
this regard, the Council should support the move to give
the Joint Military Commission the appropriate
enforcement authority.

In conclusion, my delegation reiterates its support for
the convening of an international conference on the Great
Lakes region, under the auspices of the Organization of
African Unity and the United Nations, to lay the
foundation for regional cooperation and durable peace. It
should address comprehensively all the relevant and
 

critical issues faced by the countries in the region. Such a
conference is timely now and should be given the necessary
impetus by the international community.

