The Russian delegation voted in favour of resolution 2532 (2020), on countering the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), drafted by France and Tunisia. Although the co-penholders did not fully take into account all of our approaches, we decided to support a document of exceptional importance for the entire international community. The tough negotiations, which nevertheless led to an agreement on the text of the resolution, demonstrated that the Security Council members are able to rise above their narrow national interests and respond to the global challenges of our time. We would like to draw attention to the fact that the resolution includes a reference to the measures proposed by the Secretary-General concerning the response to the potential impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on countries affected by armed conflict. We would like to recall that, in his March 2020 report Shared Responsibilities, Global Solidarity: Responding to the Socio-Economic Impacts of COVID-19, the Secretary-General stresses the urgent need to waive unilateral sanctions, which seriously limit the capacity of countries to respond to challenges related to the pandemic. We also fully support the Secretary-General's 23 March appeal for a global ceasefire. The Russian Federation was among the first to officially respond by posting a statement the very next day through its Ministry of Foreign Affairs. We consider it extremely important that the text of the resolution clearly states that the humanitarian pause and cessation of hostilities do not apply to counter- terrorism operations. We note with concern that some negative forces are already trying to take advantage of the current situation to obtain some benefits on the ground. We are particularly concerned about the increased terrorist activity in the Sahara-Sahel subregion, which is already facing a serious humanitarian crisis. That highlights the importance of the counter-terrorism exception agreed upon by the Council. We note that the resolution emphasizes the importance of a coordinated, inclusive, comprehensive and global international response to the COVID-19 pandemic, with the United Nations playing a key coordinating role. Such a task fits into our consistent efforts to support the World Health Organization (WHO) as the leading and coordinating body in international efforts to protect and promote public health. We underline the crucial role of that specialized agency of the United Nations system in ensuring the coherence of the multilateral response to the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact, especially the medical aspects of the global response to the outbreak. WHO is the leading mechanism for mobilizing the efforts of all nations to fight epidemics and infections like the one we are currently witnessing. We consider it extremely important that the international community jointly support the work of WHO. The pandemic, which - and we can say this without exaggeration - steamrolled the entire world and changed the usual course of everyday life, froze economies and entire continents, clearly demonstrated that humankind must be united in countering global challenges. Today the Security Council contributed to doing just that.
