Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): The Dominican Republic also
wishes to express its sincere condolences to France
following the loss of 13 of its soldiers in Mali.

We thank Mr. Khan for his detailed report
(S/2019/878) and his commendable performance in
leading the work of the United Nations Investigative
Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed
by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(UNITAD), which we strongly support. We would also
like to express our gratitude to Mr. Kachi for sharing
his moving story with us and for the valuable support
he provides to UNITAD in its investigation processes.

First and foremost, we want to commend the effective
and expeditious way in which the Investigative Team
reached its fully operational phase, as well as the spirit
of collaboration that has characterized its work, thanks
to the direct participation of various stakeholders,
especially the Government of Iraq, the Kurdistan
Regional Government and local communities, including
victims and witnesses of the crimes perpetrated by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. The Dominican
Republic supports Iraq's efforts to fight terrorism and
work closely with the Investigation Team to establish
accountability and bring to justice those responsible
for the crimes committed by the Islamic State on its
territory. We also welcome the fact that Iraq has taken
significant steps towards the introduction of legislation
that will enable the prosecution of acts committed by
the Islamic State such as war crimes, crimes against
humanity and genocide.

On another aspect, we take note ofthe progress that
has been made through the excavation of graves and the
collection of evidence and testimonies in Sinjar, Mosul
and Tikrit, as well as of the fact that the framework of
research priorities has been expanded, which is enabling
such activities to be carried out in other communities
directly affected by terrorism. We also encourage the
Investigative Team to continue to attach particular
importance to survivors of sexual crimes and gender-
based Violence through its special unit, as well as the
witness support and protection unit, which helps to
ensure witnesses' rights, integrity and confidentiality.

Finally, we reiterate that the Investigative Team
must maintain its independence and impartiality in
working with other United Nations mechanisms and in
consultation with the authorities of Iraq, while always
respecting the country's sovereignty and jurisdiction.
We believe that Iraq's collaboration is essential to
ensuring the effective performance of the Investigative
Team and the achievement of its agreed objectives, in
line with the mandate established for it in resolution
2379 (2017). We therefore hope that this existing
cooperation will continue to be encouraged.

