Mr. Repkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. David Shearer, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
briefing on the situation in South Sudan and on the
peace process there. We listened attentively to all of
today's briefers. We welcome the significant progress
in the implementation by the parties of the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan of 12 September 2018. It is
important that they have demonstrated a willingness
to resolve their differences by seeking what are often
difficult compromises.

We believe that the decision by the parties to the
conflict to extend the pre-transitional period was fully
justified, and we realize that a number of objective
factors prevented its completion by the 12 May deadline.
It will be important for the regional actors to maintain
a united approach, as was shown at the session of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
at which the agreement of the parties was approved.
We see that as a practical realization of the principle
of African solutions to African problems. Besides
that, the potential for effective cooperation among
the United Nations, the Security Council and the
relevant regional organizations is still there. We hope
that will help the national reconciliation process, and
that the IGAD member States will continue to support
the South Sudanese peace process despite their other
pressing issues.

We have noted the establishment and preliminary
operationalization of the structures and mechanisms
provided for in the agreement. We are pleased that
the level of armed Violence in the country and the
numbers of human rights violations have decreased. An
increasing number of refugees and internally displaced
persons have expressed the desire to return to their
permanent homes. In our View, all of that is linked to the
implementation of confidence-building measures and
contacts between the opposing parties on the ground.

We join the Secretary-General's call to the South
Sudanese parties to focus on security issues and
complete the constitutional amendment process. In
our view, only the parties' full and comprehensive
compliance with the commitments they have undertaken
will increase mutual trust and ensure that they do
not repeat the mistakes of the past. We call on the
South Sudanese parties to the conflict to make every
effort to implement the outstanding provisions of the
Revitalized Agreement. That is in their own interests
as well those of the country's ordinary citizens. South
Sudan deserves to live in peace.

We believe that the positive momentum that we have
seen in the South Sudanese peace process cannot be
attributed solely to increased sanctions pressure and the
introduction of an arms embargo. It is first and foremost
thanks to the contribution of the regional mediators.
Moreover, to some degree the embargo prevented the
region from being more flexible in supporting the
settlement through its own security initiatives.

