Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation wishes to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this meeting. I also thank
the Secretary-General for his progress report on the
recommendations of the Security Council mission to
West Africa (S/2003/1147). In addition, I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Kalomoh for his
introduction of the report.

Since the Security Council mission's visit to six
countries of West Africa at the end of June 2003, even
though there have been ups and downs in the situation
in a few isolated cases, the overall situation in the
region has witnessed encouraging changes. We are
pleased to note that, in Sierra Leone, the Government's
efforts to build the capacity of its army and troops, to
enhance its control over its diamond resources and to
prepare for local governmental elections are well under
way. The drawdown of the United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) is proceeding as planned.

We are pleased that, with the deployment of the
United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL), Liberia is
gradually emerging from the effects of a long-standing
war and has embarked on the road to rehabilitation and
reconstruction.

The political process in Guinea-Bissau has
achieved good results. The transitional Government has
pledged to hold legislative elections in March this year.

The peace process in Cote d'Ivoire, after
suffering a number of setbacks, is experiencing a
positive trend. The various parties have committed
themselves to the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement, and
the Forces nouvelles have declared a return to the
Government of National Reconciliation. The Security
Council is deliberating on the dispatch of a
peacekeeping mission to that country; we await an
early decision by the Council on that issue.

The Secretariat, the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) and the parties
concerned have achieved good results in their efforts to
address cross-border issues - such as small arms,
mercenaries and child soldiers - in a regional approach.

While fully acknowledging that progress, we
should be aware of the vulnerable side of the overall
situation in West Africa, which is due in particular to
geopolitical and historical reasons. The region's countries
are closely inter-linked, and turbulence in one country
will often spread to neighbouring countries and even
throughout the region. Therefore - as recommended in
the Secretary-General's report - the international
community, including the Security Council, should, in
addressing West African issues, adhere to an integrated
and holistic strategy and strive to resolve cross-border
issues while vigorously helping both the countries
concerned and the African Union, ECOWAS and other
regional and subregional organizations to enhance their
capacities for conflict prevention and resolution.
Greater economic support and assistance provided by
the international community to countries in the West
African region will be of equal importance.

Over the past few months, the changes in the
situation in West Africa - particularly the good
progress achieved in Liberia - have fully
demonstrated that the Security Council mission to the
region was timely and necessary and that the mission's
recommendations - presented on the basis of realities
on the ground - are quite feasible. We hope that the
Security Council will continue to follow up and
monitor the implementation of the recommendations in
order to ensure that this is comprehensive and
thorough. We also await a report by the Secretary-
General on cross-border issues.

