The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Bahamas, Barbados,
Canada, Ecuador, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Jamaica,
Nicaragua, Suriname, Trinidad and Tobago and Venezuela,
in which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Lelong (Haiti)
took a seat at the Council table; Mr. Lewis (Antigua and Barbuda), Mr. Petrella (Argentina), Mr. Moore
(Bahamas), Ms. Russell (Barbados), Mr. Fowler
(Canada), Mr. Valencia Rodriguez (Ecuador),
Mr. Martini Herrera (Guatemala), Mrs. Cornette
(Guyana), Miss Durrant (Jamaica), Mr. Paguaga
Fernandez (Nicaragua), Mr. Mungra (Suriname),
Mrs. Gittens-Joseph (Trinidad and Tobago) and
Mr. De Rojas (Venezuela) took the seats reserved for
them at the side of the Council Chamber.

The President: The Security Council will now resume
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Support
Mission in Haiti, documents S/ 1997/564 and addendum 1.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/l997/589, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
the Bahamas, Barbados, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica,
Ecuador, France, Guatemala, Guyana, Jamaica, Nicaragua,
Suriname, Trinidad and Tobago, the United States of
America and Venezuela.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/ 1997/568, which contains the
text of a letter dated 20 July 1997 from the Permanent
Representative of Haiti to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General.

The first speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Haiti, to whom I now give the floor.


