Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
would like at the outset to express its appreciation for
the efforts being made by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and to the members
of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
(UNDOF). I want them to remember this statement.

UNDOF personnel in the occupied Golan Heights
are on a part of our land that has been occupied by
Israel since 1967. The reason UNDOF forces are in the
Golan is the Israeli occupation of the Golan. I want this
fact to remain present in the minds of our colleagues.
We would therefore like to express our appreciation for
the efforts being made by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and by UNDOF personnel in
the occupied Golan Heights to observe the Agreement
on Disengagement and to maintain peace and security
in the Force's area of operations, which is, of course, in
implementation of its mandate.

UNDOF has always been, and continues to be,
the safest peacekeeping operation of all such
operations being carried out by the United Nations
throughout the world. Syria has supported and
facilitated the work of UNDOF and respected its
mandate since the Force was formed in 1974.

Moreover, Syria has maintained close ties with
officials of UNDOF and the United Nations Truce
Supervision Organization, as well as with DPKO, for a
period of approximately 40 years - the duration of the
Israeli occupation of the Golan Heights.

The periodic reports issued by the Secretary-
General since the Israeli occupation of the Golan began
in 1967 have expressed appreciation for Syria's
positive attitude in cooperating with UNDOF and its
personnel as well as in ensuring their safety and
respecting their mandate. On behalf of the Syrian Arab
Republic, we reiterate that we will do everything
necessary to maintain the safety of UNDOF's
personnel in order to ensure the success of its mandate.

Syria expresses its regret that the long-sought-
after just and comprehensive peace in the Middle East
that certain colleagues have mentioned has not been
achieved yet. Israel has not withdrawn from the
occupied Golan Heights, in implementation of
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 497 (1981) and
of all international initiatives in that respect, including
the Arab Peace Initiative and other well-known terms
of reference. It has also not complied with international
law. This has led, naturally, to the prolonged presence
of that force in part of our occupied land.

In that regard, we ask the Security Council to
play its due role by putting an end to the Israeli
occupation of our land and thus uphold the mandate
that it has given itself through its own resolutions and
fulfil its task of maintaining international peace and
security.

Ever since the start of the recent internal events
and developments in Syria, and especially after certain
extremists started using violence and bearing arms
against the forces of law and order and innocent Syrian
citizens, including peaceful demonstrators, it has
become clear to us and to many observers throughout
the world that some parties, including in this very
Security Council, are attempting to involve the
Council, on the pretext of weak excuses and
justifications, in internal developments that have
nothing to do with its role, responsibilities or mandate.

Without going into detail concerning the attempts
we have witnessed on the part of some Council
members to involve the Council in issues that are none
of its business, we must confess our bafflement over
the attempts - described to us by certain colleagues,
Whom we thank - of some of these parties to include
references to Syrian domestic affairs in a technical
draft resolution extending the mandate of UNDOF.
This is a technical issue that the Security Council has
addressed in a technical manner dozens of times over
the many years of the Israeli occupation of our Golan.

This exploitation of strictly internal developments in
Syria is aimed solely at putting political pressure on
Syria, and is another indication of how some member
States will not hesitate to continue to use the Security
Council as a tool to enforce their own policies. Syria
expresses its deep appreciation to the Council members
that did not get involved in these brazen tactics and
suspicious activities.

We note that the reforms announced by President
Bashar Al-Assad, which emanate from his belief in the
need to implement reforms that Will meet the demands
and aspirations of the Syrian people, will be applied on
the ground through the national dialogue conference,
the consultations for which will begin in the next few
days. We should keep in mind that some of these
reforms have now become a tangible reality on the
ground and enjoy the support and the appreciation of
the international community, as we have reported
consecutively to the Secretary-General and members of
the Security Council.

Since the formation of UNDOF in 1974, we have
continued to draw the attention of the Security Council
and the Secretary-General to the activities of Israel, the
occupying Power - and that is its legal title - and its
authorities. They have built settlements in the Golan,
which now number 44. They continue to build bypass
roads around Syrian cities in the Golan and to drain
Mas'adah Lake, on which thousands of Syrian farmers
depend for their living. They continue to oppress the
citizens of the Syrian Golan Heights, who refuse to
carry Israeli identification cards and reject the Israeli
occupation, and to undertake campaigns to arrest them.

In 1981, the Council unanimously adopted its
renowned resolution 497 (1981), which condemned
and rejected the Israeli occupying Power's decision to
annex the occupied Golan Heights.

Not all of this news, it appears, has reached the
ears of some representatives who have spoken today.
They have never even mentioned these issues in their
statements on United Nations resolutions and the
renewal of the UNDOF mandate over the past 30 years.
Our people's suffering in the occupied Golan Heights
deserved some reference a long time ago. Instead, these
speakers focused exclusively on the strictly internal
affairs of a founding State Member of this
Organization.

According to a report issued in Washington, D.C.,
yesterday, the recent wars waged by the United States
military have cost $4 trillion. These wars have led to
disasters in Iraq, Afghanistan and other areas of the
world. We now also hear of the scandal of NATO's
failure to respect the strict mandate of resolution 1973
(2011), and this scandal is there for all to see. These
facts, and not some internal domestic incidents that
could have taken place in any State Member of the
Organization, are relevant to the Security Council's
mandate.

My country has received 2 million Iraqi refugees,
who fled Iraq because of the American- and British-led
military invasion. But we have not put our brothers in
camps or asked them to live in tents. We welcomed
them as they awaited the liberation of Iraq so that they
could return to their own homes and land. Since we
first received these 2 million Iraqi refugees, no one in
the international community has even offered
humanitarian aid to assist us in bearing the burden that
has been thrust upon us by the British and United
States invasion and occupation of Iraq. We host half a
million Palestinian refugees as a result of the Israeli
occupation of the Palestinian territories, and half a
million Syrians displaced from the Golan.

Not one of those Who have spoken today to
express their concern at the internal incidents in Syria
has offered any form of humanitarian support to help
us meet these dangerous challenges, which are not of
our own creation. Moreover, no Hollywood stars have
come to visit the millions of refugees who have fled to
our country.

Yes, Syria's stability is important - very
important - to the Middle East, as one of our
colleagues has pointed out. Therefore, threatening this
stability is extremely dangerous to the region and
international security and stability, especially when
such meddling is done by countries harbouring
animosity towards us, based on principle and for
political reasons. These are the same States responsible
for the disasters of the Sykes-Picot Agreement of 1916,
the Balfour Declaration of 1917 and the division of the
region. These are important considerations that those
with a poor memory should bear in mind when seeking
a clear perception of what is happening in the world.

To speak of concern for pluralistic Syrian society,
as the representative of Germany did, is not at all
consistent with Germany's provision to Israel in recent
years of six submarines that can be equipped with
nuclear warheads. I will not go into further detail, as I
would have to refer to other speakers who have also
furnished Israel with nuclear technology, helped it to
build nuclear reactors, and defended its refusal to join
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons and to place its nuclear installations under
international supervision.

All of this is only part of what I would like to
discuss, but I would like to thank you, Sir, for having
given me the floor. I hope that the Council will focus
on real issues within its mandate instead of
encroaching upon the sovereignty of a State Member of
the United Nations and meddling with its internal
affairs.

