Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the
outset, I would like to thank Jordan for convening this
meeting on a very critical issue facing the world and
our youth.

Today, young people are in a paradoxical situation
in relation to Islam and the West. This critical situation
is rooted in two seemingly contradictory but inherently
complementary realities. On the one hand, we have
witnessed the expansion of extremism and terrorism,
which can be observed in some Western capitals as
much as in the villages and cities of some Islamic
countries. On the other hand, Islamophobia has been
spreading across the West and implanting hatred and
fear in the fabric of Western societies.

Where are the youth in the midst of this conflicting
and contradictory situation? Have they caused the rise
of this situation or are they simply its Victims? Who are
those who have created the situation and what interest
is to be served? What is the role of young people in the
equation? The Supreme Leader of the Islamic Republic
ofIran, in a message addressed to the young in the West,
called upon them to free themselves from that imposed
and destructive quandary. He added that today, modern
communication technology has blurred geographical
boundaries. The young must not allow themselves to be
confined within fabricated mental walls.
What are these artificial mental walls? They have
their foundation in destructive ideologies, which have
two attributes. First, they are tainted with ignorance,
superficiality and fanatical outlooks. Secondly, they are
also violence-oriented and based on terror and takfir,
that is, considering others or those who are different as
apostates. Those centres that propagate such ideologies
falsely under the name of Islam and spend billions of
dollars to spread them through satellite television and
social and traditional media are fuelling the spread
of ignorance and violence. They specifically prey on
youth and link them to their networks of extremism and
terrorism.

Today's world has witnessed a nefarious show of
violence in the Middle East and North Africa. If those
behind that show are not confronted, the danger they
create can increase exponentially and lead to the most
threatening global security crisis. It seems that the
process has given rise to Islamophobia in the West.
However, the financial, political and cultural centres of
such hate-mongering and takfiri ideologies are indeed
allied to the bases ofmight and money in certain corners
in the West. Such power centres use global media to
target Islam, to attempt to depict it as the greatest threat
and to emphasize the inevitability of the bloody conflict
between Islam and the West.

Those ideologies, those global terrorists and the
fear-mongering media do not represent Islam. They all
lie at the core of Islamophobia and the acts that target
Muslims. In the message of Iran's Supreme Leader,
youth are called upon to stay aloof from this unjustified
crisis and to distance themselves in a savvy and clear-
sighted way from the ideologies based on ignorance and
violence. Islam is a religion of compassion and wisdom,

and the way its Prophet lived demonstrates a peaceful
way of life, imbued with wisdom and empathy, which it
recommends to all. The earnest young people who seek
truth should break the mental barriers raised both by
Islamophobia and takfiri ideologies and set a new path
in the interaction between Islam and the West. Thanks
to those young people, the relation between Islam and
the West will be based on constructive interaction,
mutual respect and fairness. And that is exactly what
the Islamic Republic of Iran is looking for in terms of
global cooperation to combat extremism and Violence.

Iranians, especially young Iranians, have been the
most immune when it comes to the propaganda and
recruitment of violent extremism, which is a matter of
pride to us. I would like to take this opportunity to once
again reaffirm Iran's unquestionable commitment to
combating Violent extremism, especially in the context
of our fight against the most dangerous of terrorist
groups in our region, such as Al-Qaida, Daesh and
similar groups that have also been the most successful
in preying upon the young all over the world.

Finally, I wish to say that President Hassan Rouhani
of Iran introduced a comprehensive agenda for a world
against violence and Violent extremism, which was
adopted by the General Assembly as resolution 68/127
at its sixty-eighth session. The agenda provides a path
to combat violent extremism and empower young
people around the world, and its importance has never
been more clear.

