Mr. Araghchi (Islamic Republic of Iran): Let
me begin by expressing my appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for convening this debate to discuss
the situation in Iraq, which has taken a new and more
troubling turn in the past three months. I also thank
His Excellency Minister of Foreign Affairs Al-Jaafari
for his remarks, and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for his briefing. We hope that
today's meeting of the Council will help to increase
awareness and focus on the veritable and critical crisis
in the Middle East, which has major repercussions for
the whole world.

Violent extremism, mostly embodied these days by
the so-called Islamic State in Syria and the Levant (ISIL)
and its abhorrent brutality and shocking savagery, is
chief among the threats that ravage Iraq and Syria and
cast gloom over the horizons ofthe Middle East. I could
not agree more: that group is neither Islamic nor a State.
We utterly reject the stereotypes that attach the name
of Islam to the bloody and violent acts committed by
such a despicable group, which is nothing more than a
terrorist organization that has emerged from the chaos
of the past decade and the assistance it has received.

While we all have a common interest in defeating
the emerging danger of ultra-violent extremist and
sectarian groups, we need first and foremost to be
aware of the situation and mindset that gave rise to
them. The so-called ISIL is not a new phenomenon. It
and similar groups developed following the invasion of
Iraq and during the years of occupation and ensuing
instability. With the Syrian crisis and the support they
received from certain States and quarters within and
outside the region, they found a new breeding ground,
fabricated a new false cause and became a monster that
now threatens even its own creators.

In addition to military interventions, attempts to
socially engineer Middle Eastern societies - reflected,
inter alia, in the failed initiatives that originated in
and were sponsored by certain Western Powers - are
another aspect of the illusions held by certain outside
Powers over the past decade. The military adventures
and non-military interventions in the region, along with
the ensuing waves of slaughter and blood feuds, have
helped to radicalize vulnerable youth and have created
the perfect conditions for vicious bands of extremists to
turn to their advantage. I doubt that anybody disagrees
with me that extremism is much stronger and more
widespread in the Middle East today than it was in
2001.

In view of the foregoing, and based on the

experience built up over the past decade, we believe
that any real and genuine initiative to remedy regional
predicaments must originate from within the region
and be based on regional cooperation. Combating
extremism is not an exception to that rule. Looking
forward, we hope that all States in the Middle East have
fully realized by this point that extremism is as much
of a threat to them as it is to Iraq or Syria. Those who
thought otherwise need to reconsider their 11-year-old
policies and commit themselves to promoting stability
and thwarting extremism. The international coalition
against ISIL that is said to be in the offing has yet to
decide to pursue a serious strategy. In our view, to
defeat extremism, a comprehensive strategy should
address several key points.

First, it must fully comply with the norms and
principles of international law and the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations with respect to conducting
any military actions against terrorist groups.

Two, it must expand support for the Iraqi
Government as it fights ISIL, helping it to strengthen
the national unity and territorial integrity of Iraq and
encouraging its all-inclusive political system. That
approach requires discouraging centrifugal forces and
avoiding any attempt to tinker with Iraq's ethnic and
sectarian mosaic.

Three, it should encourage all States and tap
all capacities in the region to fight the war against
extremism and terrorism with the assistance of the
international community and it should work to unify
and coordinate policies. Any loophole or foot-dragging
will leave a vacuum that will be used by extremists.

Four, consistency in fighting ISIL is crucial,
wherever it is present - in Iraq, Syria, Lebanon or
elsewhere - and whomever it threatens. A successful
fight against ISIL requires helping the relevant central
authorities to deal with that menace. Any strategy that
undermines those authorities, including the Syrian
Government, which resisted ISIL for several years, or
that differentiates between segments of the population
in terms of protection, will be a recipe for defeat. It
was regrettable that the city of Sanjar was left to the
mercy of ISIL and that Amerli agonized for more than
two months under a ruthless siege that was apparently
due only to the fact that its people belong to a different
segment of the population.

Five, a peaceful settlement to the crisis in Syria can
be achieved only by encouraging a political solution to
the protracted war in that country and by rectifying the
mistakes made in the past.

Six, all regional States and international actors
must commit to denying extremists access to funds,
recruits and other means that they use to spread terror
across the region and beyond. That should include
resolute actions to halt the moral and financial support
for extremists that have flowed from some quarters
within certain countries in the region. That is important
especially in the light of the fact that groups such as
ISIL will not be uprooted by air strikes alone.

Seven, the Israeli occupation of Arab lands must
end, and Israel must not be allowed impunity for its
war crimes against the Palestinians, as was recently the
case. The reaction of some Western Powers to what can
only be called genocide by the Israeli regime against the
people of Gaza is a good rallying cause for extremist
groups such as ISIL.

Finally, it is important to counter Islamophobia,
which lumps together violent extremists and true
Muslims, directly lending credence to the message of
the extremists.

The Islamic Republic of Iran is the only country in
the region capable ofshowing unqualified determination
to help the Iraqi Government and coordinate with it to
assist all those threatened by ISIL, and we have done
so. We rose to the challenge early on and helped save
Baghdad, Erbil and Amerli from ISIL, and we were
there with advisers and equipment before any other
help arrived on the scene. Likewise, my Government
is ready to continue to assist the Iraqi Government and
other Governments threatened by ISIL.

