Mr. Haraguchi (Japan): I would like to express
my appreciation for your leadership, Sir, in convening
this meeting to address the situations in West and
Central Africa, which have become of grave concern to
the international community. It is timely, in our view,
for the Security Council to dispatch missions to those
regions to gain a precise understanding of the
situations and the gravity of the crises and to directly
address the question of what effective measures can be
taken by the United Nations.

Conflict resolution in Africa requires an enhanced
and comprehensive approach to ensure and coordinate
cooperation by various actors within the international
community. We hope that, upon returning from the
missions, the members of the Council will share with
all of us the first-hand knowledge and experiences they
have gained so that the international community can
effectively tackle the problems in the regions.

We welcome the efforts of the Security Council,
especially the adoption of the resolution today with
regard to the situation in the Ituri region of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which is one of the
main destinations of the mission to Central Africa, I
understand. It is our hope that the mission, through its
direct assessment of the situation on the ground, will
provide us with recommendations to consider carefully
whether there is a need to expand the peacekeeping
operation in the near future.

One of the most disheartening characteristics of
the conflicts we are witnessing in West and Central
Africa is their spillover from one country to another
and, as a consequence, the regionalization, as it were,
of those conflicts. Let me explain why I said
"disheartening". Peace and stability in a society are
essential for development. It is profoundly sad that the
African continent, where development is perhaps more
necessary than in any other region of the world, is most
frequently faced with the scourge of conflicts. Some
believe that conflicts erupt because of
underdevelopment and others maintain that
underdevelopment is a result of conflicts. I believe that
both arguments have their own points and it might not
be useful to judge which is more correct. It is a vicious
circle that we must do our utmost to stop.

It is out of this awareness that Japan is supporting
the ongoing disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process in Sierra Leone, for instance,
while at the same time providing financial assistance,
through the Economic Community of West African
States, to the all-Liberia round-table conference that
will be held next month in Ghana. Since the situations
in Sierra Leone and Liberia are closely interrelated, it
is our sincere hope that, by simultaneously restoring
stability in those two neighbouring countries, we can
prevent the spillover of the conflicts and enhance the
stability of the entire subregion.

Of course, the resolution of a conflict depends
ultimately upon the willingness and efforts of the
conflicting parties themselves - that is, they must
address their problems with a sense of ownership. But
the achievement of this goal can and must be fostered
through cooperation or partnership with the
international community. Just this month, the
Government of Japan announced its new Initiative for
Cooperation for Africa, the three main pillars of which
are consolidation of peace, human-centred
development and poverty reduction through economic
growth. Under the first pillar, we will support activities
for the consolidation of peace in the fields of
reintegration of ex-combatants into civil society,
demining, small arms and assistance to refugees and
internally displaced persons. These activities are
implemented through Grant Aid for Conflict
Prevention and Peace-Building and the Trust Fund for
Human Security.

I am pleased to note that in Angola and Sierra
Leone the prolonged conflicts have recently ended and
peace has been restored. If those two countries are able
to continue to promote their development as they have
done since the end of the conflicts, their experience of
success in building upon the peace will provide an
important lesson and incentive for other conflict-torn
countries in Africa. In this sense, Japan would like to
commend and support as much as possible the efforts
of those countries towards the consolidation of peace
and the promotion of development.

Last but not least, I would like to refer to the
point which the Ambassador of Bulgaria just stressed.
I, too, believe that the cooperation of the countries of
Africa is most appropriate and effective for the
resolution of armed conflicts on the continent. We
therefore strongly hope that the African Union,
regional organizations and ad hoc groups of friendly
African countries will pursue initiatives for the
resolution of conflicts in Central and West Africa.

