Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to associate myself with the warm tribute that
you, Sir, paid to our friend Ambassador Jorge
Navarrete and with the good wishes you expressed to
him. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his presence and for having framed so well the
exercise that we are now undertaking.

France fully associates itself with the statement
that the Ambassador of Spain will make later in this
discussion on behalf of the 15 members of the
European Union. I Wish nonetheless to make a few
comments before the Council in my national capacity
on the implementation of Security Council resolution
1373 (2001), to which France attaches great
importance.

The horror and magnitude of the terrorist attacks
that took place last 11 September in the United States
have had a lasting and deep effect on the life and the
action of the international community. By its quick and
resolute action, the United Nations managed to meet
this historic occasion. It emerges greater, stronger and
more united from this ordeal. From the outset, the
United Nations took a long-term approach to its action
against international terrorist acts, while taking into
consideration the global and multifaceted aspect of this
scourge.

Through resolution 1373 (2001) of 28 September,
one of the most important resolutions in its history, our
Council has committed itself resolutely to contribute to
preventing acts such as those of 11 September that
threaten international peace and security. To this end, it
has not hesitated to set out on an ambitious new path
that from now on commits all Member States of our
Organization to act. It is essential for everyone to
participate in the struggle against acts of international
terrorism if we are to progressively eliminate this
scourge.

The role of the Counter-Terrorism Committee in
following up on the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001) is fundamental. It is a clear signal of the will of
the Security Council to put its action against terrorism
in a long-term perspective. It also responds to the
concerns of the Council to involve each and every one
of us in this fight.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee was not
created to punish States, but, on the contrary, to
cooperate with them and, whenever necessary, to assist
them in developing national, legislative and
administrative means to enable them to fight terrorism
more effectively. Its work is characterized by complete
transparency, and its dynamic Chairman -
Ambassador Jeremy Greenstock, to whom I would like
to pay particular tribute - has spared no effort to make
it so.

As he has told us, more than 120 States have sent
the Counter-Terrorism Committee a national report on
the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). This is a
remarkable success, but it is not yet enough. States that
have not yet done so should send in their reports as
soon as possible.

A review of the national reports by the Counter-
Terrorism Committee, with the help of the independent
experts whom it has recruited, will make possible a
useful inventory of the national means that are in place,
but also to better identify the assistance needs of States
that are willing to combat terrorism but do not always
have the capacity.

As far as France is concerned, whether in its
national capacity or working with its European Union
partners and those of la Francophonie, it is determined
to contribute, in this area, every possible assistance to
States that might need it.

