Mr. Bolton (United States of America): I wish
the members of the Council a happy Saint Patrick's
Day. I am sure all members are familiar with the
famous American saying: Today we are all Irish.

We warmly welcome President Johnson-Sirleaf to
New York and to the United States. We also join others
in thanking her for coming here to address the Security
Council.

For some years now we, together with the
international community, have paid very careful
attention to the challenges of restoring peace and
stability in Liberia. Given the severity of its troubles,
we have monitored events in Liberia with concern and
apprehension. We have also done so with hope and
anticipation that Liberia would prove to be the model
of a nation beset with overwhelming problems that can
and will recover.

There is no question that Liberia's problems
remain enormous. But we are encouraged by signs that
Liberia is on the path of recovery and reform. All of us
want to be part of that success story. If committed to a
reformist path, Liberia can feel confident that the
international community will be there to help. For our
part, the United States pledges our support to assist
with Liberia's reconstruction.

The elections that took place in Liberia last fall
seem likely to be marked by history as a critical
milestone on the road to recovery. We congratulate
President Johnson-Sirleaf on her victory. In her short
time in office, we have been impressed with the
courage and determination she has already shown in
addressing Liberia's challenges, especially in such
areas as economic and civil service reform.

On Wednesday, President Johnson-Sirleaf
addressed a joint session of the United States Congress,
and our Congressmen were most impressed: they gave
her a standing ovation. I only regret that in our more
solemn and restrained practices in the Security
Council, we could not do the same for her here today.
By all accounts it was her expressed commitment to
create a better future for Liberia that so inspired her
audience in our Congress. The United States shares
that hope. We encourage the President to do all she can
to sustain Liberia's forward momentum of recent
months. We are confident that the President's
Government will engage in sound financial
management and full transparency, which are essential
to spur that momentum.

We also commend President Johnson-Sirleaf's
commitments to reforming the diamond and timber
sectors. We look forward to the day that Liberia fulfils
the requirements for the lifting of sanctions. As many
know, the United States is assisting Liberia's efforts to
reconstruct its forest sector on a transparent and
sustainable basis. We applaud President Johnson-
Sirleaf's adoption of an executive order cancelling
existing forest concessions and establishing a forest-
reform monitoring committee. We hope our optimism
is warranted and that remaining reforms will be in
place so that sanctions can be lifted as soon as
possible.

Lastly, the United States was encouraged about
reports that President Johnson-Sirleaf and Nigerian
President Obasanjo are discussing the issue of former
Liberian President Charles Taylor, who faces multiple
charges of war crimes and crimes against humanity at
the Special Court for Sierra Leone. We support the
efforts of President Johnson-Sirleaf and President
Obasanjo and other African leaders to bring Charles
Taylor to justice.

