Mr. Wlosowicz (Poland): We welcome today's debate.
This is the second time in a few days that the Security
Council, at a formal meeting, has reflected on regional
involvement in situations which pose a threat to
international peace and security. Last week we discussed
the regional efforts aimed at the maintenance of peace and
security in the Central African Republic. Today we are
marking the end of the United Nations authorization of the
multinational protection force operating in Albania. As we
stated in our intervention last week, the theme of the
regional initiative is becoming more and more popular; this
is a very welcome phenomenon. Today's debate makes us
believe even more that we, the members of the international
community gathered at the United Nations, should spare no
effort to make regional leadership function promptly and
effectively. In our View, the mechanism which has been
used in relation to Albania is a positive development, and
we should benefit from it.

The speed with which that country has been assisted
is indeed impressive. Our delegation has a particularly
clear recollection of the day Security Council resolution
1101 (1997) was adopted. At that time, Poland was
presiding over the Council's work. We recall the various
arguments reviewed by the members of the Council. But
most of all we remember the determination with which
the case was brought before the Council and with which
it was pursued.

Here I wish to express my Government's gratitude
to those Governments which actively contributed to
setting up the operation, and in particular to the
Government of Italy for the leadership it undertook. It is
evident that without the willingness of States of the
region, the whole operation would not have been possible.
Of course, there was much at stake. And after all, there
was considerable risk involved. But would we have not
risked more had we not decided to act promptly? The
answer to this question does not seem to be so difficult.
Unlike many others, this operation did not last long.
Yet it achieved a lot. We believe that, as was stated in the
final report to the Security Council on the operation,

"The presence of the multinational protection force
effectively blocked the risk of Albania sliding
towards anarchy or even internal political conflict"
(5/1997/632, appendix, para. 13)

and that it was very much due to its presence that
adequate and acceptable elections were possible.

We are satisfied with the information the Security
Council has received throughout the course of the
operation. Thorough, objective and regular reports are of
great importance in cases such as the one we are dealing
with today. It must not be forgotten that the Security
Council has to constantly follow the development of an
authorized or approved operation to be able to react
adequately at any stage.

Now, as the multinational protection force comes to
an end, Albania and its people face another challenge:
developing national prospects. This is a lengthy, complex
and demanding task which, we trust, Albania will tackle
with the utmost energy.

The withdrawal of the operation does not mean the
end of external assistance to Albania. Indeed, economic
and political cooperation should be intensified. We have
had many examples of such cooperation so far, including,

 

for instance, the activities of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the European Union
and the Western European Union. It is hard to overestimate
their value, and more cooperation will certainly be
forthcoming if the Albanian people themselves prove that
all international contributions are properly utilized.

In conclusion, may I again stress the importance of the
role and the capacity of a "coalition of the willing": a
coalition of those who well understand how important it is
not to be indifferent to developments on our globe,
especially when they threaten peace and security -
needless to say, no matter where.

