Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Peruvian presidency for holding this important
meeting and Mr. Thomas Markram for his very
insightful briefing. I would also like to welcome Dr.
Mamoun Morad to our meeting.

I shall raise three points today on the use of
chemical weapons in Syria, its importance with respect
to non-proliferation and our collective security, and the
imperative of the fight against impunity.

The chemical weapons attack in Khan Shaykhun
that took place one year ago to the day marked a new and
horrific stage in the plunge into the hell of the Syrian
tragedy. On 4 April 2017, with the use of sarin gas, the
Syrian regime revealed to the world its determination
to crush its opponents and its people by every means
possible, and to that end di not hesitate to use the most
terrifying weapons of destruction.

One year later, the violence continues in
Syria and the Syrian regime has not stopped using
chemical weapons, which almost a century ago the
international community resolved to ban forever and
which the Syrian regime itself had committed not to
use. Its responsibility has been established publicly
and unambiguously by the mechanisms we created
together to determine responsibilities. No attempt to
discredit and consign to oblivion the clear conclusions
reached by the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism (JIM) can change that reality. No one can
claim that they did not know.

I would remind those who seek to refute the
responsibility of the Syrian regime that it is not possible
at present to confirm that Syria declared all its stocks
and capacities in 2013. The ongoing use of chemical
weapons in Syria is an indisputable indication that
stockpiles of sarin and chlorine indeed exist.

Two things are clear- either Syria lied as it assumed
its obligations or it carried out a secret programme in
breach of those obligations. Of course, a combination
of those two theories cannot be ruled out. Therefore,
we can only reiterate our call on the Syrian regime to
respond to all of the many unanswered questions. The
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) inspection teams are rigorous and professional
in carrying our their mission and have been commended
by all States. We take note of the information provided
with regard to the upcoming destruction of Syria's last
declared chemical weapons productions facilities and
reiterate our full support to the OPCW.
The use of chemical weapons by anyone in any
circumstances violates the universal conscience
and the most basic norms of international law. Make
no mistake - the use of chemical weapons poses
a potentially lethal threat to the sustainability of the
international chemical non-proliferation regime. That
regime is one ofthe most developed and successful of all
the international non-proliferation regimes. Allowing it
to fracture without taking action would be tantamount
to endorsing the decline of the entire international
regime for the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, which we built together over several
decades, step by step, and which is the backbone of the
international security architecture and one of the key
achievements of multilateralism.

Allowing those who have contributed to the
re-emergence of such weapons to go unpunished breaks
the taboo surrounding their use and promotes their
proliferation. Regrettably, the use of a military-grade
neurotoxin on British soil just a month ago confirms
that our concerns are warranted. A taboo has been
broken in Syria, Salisbury and elsewhere. It poses a
direct threat to one of the key tenets of our collective
security. It is therefore urgent that we all reaffirm and
consolidate the absolute ban of such substances.

If we wish to return to a complete prohibition of
chemical weapons, we cannot allow those who use them
to go unpunished. Ifwe want to reaffirm and strengthen
the taboo against the use of chemical weapons,
impunity cannot be a moral or political option. The use
of chemical weapons against civilians is a war crime
and even a crime against humanity. Those responsible
must answer for their actions. The issue of determining
responsibility cannot be overlooked.

Evidence has been collected, in particular by the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic, established by the General Assembly and
tasked with facilitating investigations into the most
serious crimes committed in Syria. Such evidence will
be preserved and used in national and international legal
proceedings because, without justice for the victims,
there will be no lasting peace in Syria. Justice must be
a separate dimension in all political solutions, pursuant
to resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex). As I have already stated, although
the countries in the Astana process meet in Turkey,
Geneva is the only forum that can provide a lasting
solution to the conflict.

There is a serious risk of undermining the
non-proliferation region if we allow impunity to
prevail. That is why we will continue to fully engage in
all forums to combat impunity for the use of chemical
weapons. It is also for that reason that in January
France launched the International Partnership against
Impunity for the Use of Chemical Weapons. This open
and pragmatic partnership brings together States that
reject impunity for those involved in chemical attacks
or in the development of chemical programmes. It unites
all States that are concerned that the non-proliferation
regime and strategic stability could be undermined.
It was established to support the actions of all
international investigative mechanisms and forums. It
is a global partnership that applies to all instances of
the use of chemical weapons throughout the world and
by all actors, State and non-State alike. The partnership
is open and all States that abide by its principles are
invited to join.

Now that the taboo against the use of such weapons
has been broken, there is the risk of such weapons falling
into the hands of other actors, in particular non-State
actors. I recall that the JIM. concluded that mustard gas
was used twice by Da'esh. States that refused to punish
the perpetrators identified by the JIM. or to extend its
mandate also squandered an opportunity to send a clear
message to terrorists. It is up to all States to protect
themselves against terrorist groups and their possible
access to weapons of mass destruction.

The issue surrounding the use of chemical weapons
affects our core values and security. If there is one area
in which the members of the Security Council have the
moral and political responsibility to work together and
take action, it is this. If there is one area in which the
credibility of the Council is at stake and where tactics
and games have no place, it is this.

This year, as we commemorate the hundredth

anniversary of the end of the First World War, in which
the use of gas in combat had devastating effects, and
remember the tragedy of Khan Shaykun, on behalf
of France I make an urgent request that we set aside
our political differences and end the use of chemical
weapons in Syria. We owe it to the civilians who are the
primary victims of such weapons. We also owe it to the
future of the international non-proliferation regime for
chemical weapons, which is one of the keystones of our
collective security.

