Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): It is a pleasure to have with us once again
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Staffan de
Mistura. The briefing he has just delivered makes clear
that he has spared no effort to achieve the formation
of the constitutional committee after four years of
strong commitment to the peace negotiations in Syria.
I convey to him the gratitude of the Government of
the Republic of Equatorial Guinea for his four years
of important and intensive work in the quest for a
peaceful solution to a very complicated conflict. My
delegation would underline the importance of ensuring
that at the conclusion of his mandate, there will be no
interruption in this important task as it is handed over
to his successor, Mr. Pedersen.

As the end of the year draws near, expectations
about the convening of the first meeting of the
constitutional committee are higher than ever. Although
at the eleventh international meeting on Syria it was
not possible to make significant progress towards a
broad consensus on the formation of the committee,
the Republic of Equatorial Guinea took note of the fact
that at the meeting held on 18 December, the Astana
guarantors agreed to make the efforts necessary for the
first meeting of the committee to be held in Geneva in
early 2019.

Although the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
stresses the contribution of the Astana guarantors in the
framework of this decisive and delicate process, with
a view to creating the conditions necessary to prevent
violence in Syria, resolve humanitarian problems and
contribute to the repatriation of Syrian refugees and the
implementation of the political process on the basis of
resolution 2254 (2015), we nonetheless recognize that
the current stalemate is not benefiting in any way the
millions of Syrians who have been suffering from the
conflict since 2011.

My delegation is aware that the main reason Why the
process has become so sensitive is because the problem
of each segment of the future committee wishing to
promote its own interests. It is not inappropriate to say
so, as it is an open secret that each party wants its own
Government and its own opposition, and yet they want
the representatives of civil society to be acceptable to
all. It is therefore very difficult to reach an agreement
as to who is going to be a part of that section of the
Syrian constitutional committee.

We hope that the third list of representatives of
civil society, agreed upon by the Astana guarantors
and presented to the Special Envoy at the 18 December
meeting, will not detract from the shared objective
of establishing a constitutional committee that is
balanced, inclusive and trustworthy, in accordance
with the decisions of the Congress of the Syrian
National Dialogue held in Sochi and resolution 2254
(2015). In that vein, we call on the Special Envoy to
continue consultations with the Syrian Government and
the co-guarantors in order to come up with a list that
enjoys the greatest possible consensus of all parties.
The United Nations must continue to play the role of
facilitator, with full respect for the sovereignty, unity
and independence of the Syrian people. Furthermore,
my country's Government believes that cooperation
among the main allies of the national parties to the
conflict is key to the successful development of Syria.
It is clear that this conflict has no military solution, as
the passage of time has demonstrated.

My Government also wishes to stress the importance
of the contact mechanism of the United States with
the Russian Federation on Syria. We are certain that
both countries have an effective set of tools not only to
exchange views about the situation in Syria, but also, and
most important, to revitalize the political process with
the same aim: to take decisive steps forward towards a
political solution to the conflict, in accordance with the
objectives of resolution 2254 (2015).

Finally, Equatorial Guinea hopes that there

will be no further delays in the formation of the
constitutional committee and that the stalemate in the
negotiations will not lead to the failure of the Astana
process. We encourage the incoming Special Envoy to
continue exploring all opportunities to overcome the
roadblocks to the formation of the committee so that
the first meeting can be held early next year, as we have
repeatedly stated in the Security Council.

