Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom):
Madam President, I would like to join other speakers in
thanking you for organizing today's important debate.
Mexico has given outstanding leadership on this issue
in the Security Council, as demonstrated by your
presence today. We greatly appreciate that. I would
also like to thank Hilde Frafjord Johnson and Atul
Khare for their interventions and to thank in particular
Manju Gurung for her powerful and moving testimony.
I commend Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy for her
efforts. It is her commitment and leadership that have
led to much of the progress we have made on the
protection of children over the past year.

And there has been progress. Without the work of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and the Security Council Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict, more than 350 children in Burundi
would not now be with their families. Such success
underlines the difference that we collectively can
make. But where systematic and persistent violations
continue, we must make every effort to bring those
violations to a swift end. I would like to focus on three
points.

First, the United Kingdom firmly believes that
the greatest impact on the lives of children in armed
conflict can be made through the implementation of
country action plans. We welcome the new action plans
in the Sudan, the Philippines and Sri Lanka, as well as
the new country task forces for monitoring and
reporting, notably in Afghanistan. In the Sudan, the
United Kingdom will work alongside others to
implement security sector reform in Southern Sudan to
help the Sudan People's Liberation Army develop as an
accountable and disciplined body operating with
respect for human rights. In Sri Lanka, we were
heartened to see the recent release of all registered
child soldiers. The United Kingdom supports
UNICEF's vital work in ending the recruitment of
children in Sri Lanka and in facilitating the release and
reintegration of former child soldiers.

Non-governmental organizations and civil society
organizations have also contributed greatly to
information-gathering on children and armed conflict.
We urge all those parties that have signed national
action plans to honour their commitments and redouble
their efforts. Those yet to sign must engage with the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
commit to ending violations against children.

Secondly, as the Security Council acknowledged
in resolution 1882 (2009), children are subject not just
to recruitment, but also to killing and maiming and
rape and other sexual violence. The Secretary-
General's report (S/2010/ 181) contains valuable
analysis of these abhorrent violations. Reporting and
follow-up action should be further strengthened. We
are particularly concerned about attacks on education,
which are mentioned in the report. The country task
forces should enhance monitoring and reporting in that
particular area. Children must be able to learn, and
teachers must be able to teach, free from the threat of
rape or sexual violence.

Thirdly, we must make better use of the reporting
we receive here at the Council. The Security Council
Working Group should produce conclusions that are
robust and timely and that hold violators to account.

It is clear that, although there has been progress,
many challenges remain. As we know, many children's
lives remain at risk from conflict on a daily basis. In
Burma, the conflict continues to place children in grave
danger. We urge all parties to allow full access to the
United Nations task force and the International Labour
Organization. While we welcome the Government of
Burma's establishment of a committee to prevent
military recruitment of under-age children, still greater
efforts are needed to ensure that officers and
communities are aware of the law on the recruitment of
children and that complaints and cases are investigated.

The United Kingdom remains committed to
tackling the issue of children and armed conflict. We
will continue to work with our partners in the
international community to create a safer environment
for children around the world. Today's draft
presidential statement gives us a good basis from
which to do so, and we strongly support it.

