The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
3

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as

Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth

Affairs of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland.

I am grateful to the Secretary-General for his
briefing.

It is an honour to preside over this special
meeting of the Security Council on the Middle East.
The United Kingdom has convened this meeting for
two important reasons. The first is to call for
intensified international efforts to support political and
economic freedom in the Middle East while respecting
the sovereignty of Arab nations. That includes
meaningful assistance to Egypt, Tunisia, Yemen and
Libya and they strive to make a success of their
transitions. The second is to call once again for urgent,
essential Security Council action to stem the bloodshed
in Syria.

The Arab Spring, as it has become known, is
already the most significant event of the early twenty-
first century, with deep implications for international
peace and security. It is therefore right that it is
debated by the Security Council. Some people regard it
with fear and consternation, but in Britain we view it in
a strongly positive light. It raises the prospect of the
greatest enlargement of human freedom since the end
of the Cold War, and of a Middle East that in 20-years'
time could be made up of open, prosperous and stable
societies. If this scenario were also to include peace
between Israelis and Palestinians - a need underlined
by the events in and around Gaza over the past few
days - and include a negotiated settlement of the
nuclear crisis with Iran, then the case for helping it
become a reality is even stronger.

But if, instead, we turn away from the region, if
we downgrade our expectations and allow pessimism
to prevail, if we send a signal that repression and
violence will be tolerated, or if we allow Syria to
descend into civil war or to remain convulsed by
violence, then immense opportunities will be
squandered and some of the worst fears about the
region's future could be realized.

We can see today positive developments that
seemed unthinkable two years ago - such as in
Tunisia, the first democratically elected Parliament
since the 1950s, with 24 per cent of the seats held by
women; in Libya, a new Government after 40 years of
one-man rule; and in Morocco, freer elections under a
new Constitution. Some of those countries face
immense challenges, and there will be setbacks as well
as progress in the years ahead.

But that strengthens the case for helping Arab
nations to build their institutions, open up their
economies and create strong civil societies, where such
assistance is requested. Britain is doing its part in that
regard. Our Arab partnership initiative is supporting
projects in 10 different countries. The international
community can do more on an even greater scale,
through international financial institutions, the Group
of Eight and regional organizations. The European
Union has made a bold offer of support to the region,
which must now be implemented in full.

We believe that, as we build on those efforts, we
should be guided by three clear principles. The first is
that demands for human rights and freedom are
universal and will spread by themselves over time,
because they are fundamental human aspirations. That
is not a new concept; it was enshrined in the Preamble
to the Charter of the United Nations and in the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, adopted by
the General Assembly 64 years ago. It is a truth that
Governments ignore at their peril. And it is proven by
the experience of many countries.

The Arab Spring reconfirms what history warns,
that when Governments respond with an iron fist to the
irrepressible dreams, legitimate demands and
unconquerable hopes of their citizens, they are doomed
to fail in the long term. Repression is a policy of
failure, and it cannot build stability. All Governments
in the region should embrace peaceful reform and
make decisive moves in the direction of greater
political and economic freedom. If not, we may see
more of the violent ruptures that can follow when
people demand rights that no amount of coercion will
ever persuade them to abandon.

The second fundamental principle is that we
cannot dictate change from the outside, nor would we
want to. There is no one model of democracy, and so it
is for the people of each country in the region to
determine their future in accordance with their
different cultures, traditions and political systems. But
no Government anywhere in the world can justify
violence against its people or say that the fundamental
democratic principle - the right of citizens to chose
and to change their representatives - does not apply in
its country.

In Britain we will always stand for that vital
principle. And so we must also respect the choices that
Arab citizens make through the ballot box. That
includes being prepared to work with new elected
groups that draw their inspiration from Islam, while
holding them to the same high standards of
non-violence, respect for human rights and willingness
to respect the outcome of future elections that are
expected of others.

The third principle is that economic and political
reform go hand-in-hand. Economic success is essential
to support stability and prosperity. But, equally, there
can be no long-term stability without greater political
openness.

Finally, the Arab Spring will be the work of a
generation. We must show strategic patience in not
turning away from the region.

But all those good intentions will count for
nothing if we cannot stand by our values or meet our
responsibility in the most urgent crisis today. The
situation in Syria casts a long shadow over this debate.
In the eyes of the overwhelming majority of the world,
the Council has so far failed in its responsibilities
towards the Syrian people. It has failed to address the
brutal oppression of peaceful protesters by the Syrian
regime. It has not yet put its weight and authority
behind the efforts of the League of Arab States. It is
time for the Security Council to show unity and
leadership.

It should be possible for the Council to call for an
immediate end to the brutal repression and violations
of human rights. It should be possible for the Council
to demand an end to all violence and to call for
immediate and unhindered humanitarian access; to call
on the Syrian Government to implement its own
commitments to the League of Arab States by stopping
military action, withdrawing its forces from towns and
cities, releasing all political prisoners and allowing
access to the media; to endorse the work of the Arab
League and of Kofi Annan in his role as United
Nations-Arab League Joint Special Envoy; and to
support United Nations and Arab League facilitation of
a Syrian-led political transition. I call again on the
Council to adopt a resolution containing those essential
elements.

Beyond this Chamber, British experts are
working in Jordan, Turkey and Lebanon to help
document crimes against the Syrian people. I urge

other nations represented here to join us in that effort
so that the regime knows it cannot proceed down its
path with impunity.

Not all countries here regard the Arab Spring in
the same light, but we have a shared responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security, and an
immense common interest in working together. That
was the very reason the United Nations was first
created, and we should act together in that spirit now,
not only in stemming bloodshed in Syria but also in
long-term support to that vital region.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor the other members of the Security
Council.

