Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Vuk Jeremic', Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Serbia, and thank him for his statement. I also welcome
Mr. Farid Zarif and congratulate him on his
appointment. I thank him for his briefing and wish him
a successful tenure as Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). I
also thank Mr. Enver Hoxhaj for his remarks.

Brazil wishes that we could dedicate a larger part
of our statement today to positive developments during
the reporting period, such as progress on the issue of
stamps and trade flows. Unfortunately, recent negative
events have taken the forefront. Brazil is concerned
over the increase of tensions between Belgrade and
Pristina, in particular clashes between the population in
the area and the Kosovo Force and police forces. We
join the Secretary-General in calling on both sides, as
well as on the communities on the ground, to act with
restraint and patience as they seek a peaceful solution
to the crisis.

The underlying tensions that have translated into
these incidents are a reminder of the urgent need to
address the broader unresolved issues in the region. A
spirit of compromise must guide actions by all parties.
Brazil expects that discussions between Belgrade and
Pristina, which have been following a positive course,
will resume shortly in order to build confidence and to
promote progress that benefit the populations of the
area.

Brazil reaffirms its belief that resolution 1244
(1999) offers an adequate framework for a negotiated
settlement, under the auspices of the Security Council
and with the support of UNMIK and regional
organizations.

We remain concerned over the allegations of
inhuman treatment of people and trafficking in human
organs in Kosovo. We are encouraged by the
willingness of the parties to cooperate in the
investigation of these cases, which must be subject to

independent and credible scrutiny. In this regard, we
note the ongoing investigations being carried out by
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo,
and reiterate our interest in exploring options that take
into account the need to involve various jurisdictions
and the importance of ensuring consistency with
resolution 1244 (1999).

UNMIK's role is crucial to the stability of the
region. We commend the positive work the Mission has
undertaken to facilitate communications between the
parties and to create conditions for reaching agreement
on a number of issues. The Council should continue to
keep political developments in Kosovo under close
review and to encourage further dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina. Every effort must be made to
find creative solutions to the pending issues, while
maintaining peace in the region. The long-term benefits
of peaceful dialogue between the parties must be made
evident to all stakeholders.

