Mr. Kim Sook (Republic of Korea): I thank
Special Coordinator Serry for his detailed briefing. I
also appreciate the statements made by the Permanent
Observer of Palestine and the Permanent Representative
of Israel.

The absence of direct negotiations between
Israel and Palestine has been one of the most
significant conditions defining Middle East politics
for the past three years. We therefore wholeheartedly
welcome last week's announcement of the agreement
establishing the basis for resuming talks. We highly
commend the ongoing mediation efforts of the United
States Government, as personified by the relentless
engagement of Secretary of State John Kerry.

The international community has witnessed too
many past failures, however, to be overly exulted by
this news. In fact, there is no formula that has not
been proposed to resolve the long-standing Israeli-
Palestinian situation. The goal is not to simply
resume the negotiation process, but to finish what has
been begun. Both parties must therefore bring to the
negotiating table their strongest commitments, along
with the awareness that failed negotiations can worsen
their common future.

Although the specific criteria of the upcoming
talks are still unknown, it is a good sign that both
Israel and Palestine are assuming serious and positive
attitudes. We hope that the engagement of the Quartet
and of regional organizations will be made in a
manner that reinforces the efforts of the United States
Government. That is undoubtedly a very difficult task,
but as a revered Israeli politician once said, when doing
business with extreme difficulty, if we do not believe in
miracles, we are not realistic.

We have called on Israel to cease its settlement
activities and its demolition of dwellings in Area C.
We are also concerned over the occurrence of violent
incidents between settlers and Palestinian residents in
the West Bank. We sincerely hope that the resumed
negotiations will eventually resolve those chronic
issues. During the past week, clashes in the West Bank
have noticeably diminished, and the restrictions on
access into East Jerusalem have eased. Whatever the
cause, we hope that this trend will lead to the successful
launching of direct negotiations well beyond Ramadan.

At the same time, we must be mindful of the
potential explosiveness of the underlying tensions. We
strongly condemn the rocket attacks from the Gaza
Strip. The leadership, along with the people of Israel
and Palestine, must prove that those who bet on the
failure of a lasting peace can never win.

Furthermore, we strongly condemn all firing
across and within the area of separation adjacent to the
Golan Heights. The Syrian crisis itself has already had
wide-ranging negative effects on the region, but attacks
that could spark full-scale clashes would give rise to
a new level of violence. There is a potential risk that
uncontrolled shelling may evolve into serious clashes
if left unchecked. The Syrian regime must understand
that it will be the first to suffer from an expanded
regional war.
Last week's joint briefing (see S/PV.7000) by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights was yet another
grim reminder that the Syrian crisis remains headed
towards even more catastrophic results. Humanitarian
assistance cannot save Syria in the absence ofa political
solution. Nevertheless, we must continue our efforts to
ensure humanitarian assistance to the Syrian people in
such desperate need of help, especially those trapped
amid the fighting or under siege.

The continuing systematic violence against women
and children must come to an end. The world must prove
that those who violate human rights and international
humanitarian law will be brought to justice, no matter
what it may take or how long. In that regard, my
delegation once again calls for the referral of the Syrian
situation to the International Criminal Court. We also
look forward to the report of the Commission of Inquiry
to the General Assembly.

Once again, we express our gratitude to the
neighbouring countries who share borders with Syria
and are hosting Syrian refugees. We understand the
difficulties faced by those States that have closed or
are tightly controlling their borders due to security
reasons, but we call on them to re-open the borders on
a humanitarian basis. The international community
should answer the appeals of the neighbouring
countries, implement its pledges and, together with the
relevant international organizations, establish long-
term assistance plans in a coordinated manner.

It is also deeply troubling that another negative
impact of the Syrian crisis is an increase in hate speech,
which is arousing sectarian tension and violence
throughout the region. All regional leaders must exert
greater efforts and positive influence to prevent such
phenomena from growing.

With regard to the alleged use of chemical weapons
in Syria, we welcome the visit oer. Ake Sellstrom and
Ms. Angela Kane to Damascus. The Syrian Government
should accept the modalities by which transparent
investigations can be carried out according to the
guidelines and procedures approved by the General
Assembly. It is the position of the Republic of Korea
that independent and impartial investigations should
take place in all locations specified in allegations as
soon as possible.

As Under-Secretary-General Valerie Amos stated
before the Council last week, "we are watching the
destruction of not only a country, but also its people"
(S/PV. 7000, p. 2). We hope that the spirit of generosity
of Ramadan will lead to the cessation of violence.

