Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): Ijoin my colleagues in
the Security Council in reaffirming our commitment
to all issues addressed during the month of February.
However, I would like to focus on three items that
appeared on the agenda in February and to which
Kazakhstan is making a contribution: Central Asia,
Syria and counter-terrorism.

My first point relates to the United Nations
Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central
Asia. Although the situation in Central Asia is relatively
stable, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Petko Draganov has indicated various vulnerabilities
that make it fragile. Kazakhstan is therefore focusing the
attention of the Council on the importance of building
social and economic stability to promote long-term
sustainable development in Afghanistan. Investment is
being made in the education, health care, transport and
communications sectors. Other Central Asian countries
are also joining hands in that endeavour for a peaceful
and secure Afghanistan. As a country representing
Central Asia, Kazakhstan will pay great attention to
preventive measures to ensure peace and security in
Afghanistan and the region.

Secondly, with regard to Syria, Kazakhstan
supports the measures taken by the United Nations,
the Russian Federation, Turkey, Iran, with some Arab
countries, the United States, the European Union and
other international stakeholders, together with the
Syrian Government and its opposition. Seen as a neutral
bridge-builder, my Government has been trusted by
all sides of the conflict. My Government hosted the
meeting on Syria on 15 and 16 February in Astana to
pave the way for inter-Syrian negotiations in Geneva.
We were able to contribute to discussions on the release
of detainees and abductees, the exchange of prisoners
and bodies, the identification of missing persons, the
provision of unhindered and sustainable humanitarian
access, with the free movement of civilians and, finally,
the implementation of the ceasefire regime and the
setting-up of a joint operations group, with a view to
consolidating efforts. The involvement of Jordan, which
hosts hundreds of thousands of Syrian refugees, was a
move in the right direction and the Astana process is
therefore an important step forward.

Thirdly, with regard to counter-terrorism, as Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban
and associated individuals and entities, we convened
a meeting on 3 February at which the Committee
members discussed the comprehensive report of
the Ombudsperson on retaining a petitioner on the
sanctions list. The Committee has also considered the
nineteenth report of the Monitoring Team (S/2017/35)
and noted that, notwithstanding the sustained
military pressure from the international coalition and
Government troops in Syria and Iraq, the presence of
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and Al-Qaida
affiliates is a continuing threat to international security
in wider regions of the world, especially in South-
East Asia and West and East Africa. The report of the
Ombudsperson's investigation on the petitioner, as
well as the conclusions and recommendations of the
Monitoring Team, clearly indicate the fragmentation
and inadequacy of international efforts to defeat global
terrorism. Therefore, we fully support the Secretary-
General's proposals on the United Nations counter-
terrorism architecture aimed at guiding the States
Members of the Organization to better respond to
terrorist threats and challenges.

