Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I would first like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this debate. I would
also like to thank Special Representative Zerrougui
for her briefing and the important work her team is
doing to advance the protection of children in armed
conflict. And I thank Mr. Herve Ladsous, Ms. Yoka
Brandt and Mr. Gregory Ramm. We recognize that
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, UNICEF
and Save the Children, which they represent here
today, are very pertinent to the advancement of the
children-in-armed-conflict agenda, and I thank them
all for their informative and comprehensive briefings.

Rwanda believes that the adequate protection of
children is both the primary responsibility and the
moral obligation of Governments, and even more so in
situations of armed conflict. That noble objective should
be encouraged and supported in the Security Council's
work. In that context, we stand ready to support the
work of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict and of the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.

In 2011, the Rwandan Government established a
national commission for children in order to promote
children's rights and develop a plan of action to
protect children from abuse, violence and exploitation.
Children's summits are also organized every year to
ensure that children's voices are heard on issues that
concern them. A well-functioning system is in place
whereby children in orphanages are placed in families.
In addition, Rwanda has put in place child-protection
systems at the community, district and national level.
The judicial approach is child-friendly. Judges, police
and local authorities are trying to deal with abuses of
children.

We are concerned, however, that violations continue
against children in various conflict situations, and that
the number of persistent perpetrators has increased, as
evidenced in the most recent report of the Secretary-
General (S/2013/245). Rwanda calls on all parties to
cease violations against children and on Governments
to hold those responsible for such violations of
children's rights accountable. The Security Council
should partner States in order to ensure that justice is
rendered.

We welcome some positive developments,
particularly where State and non-State armed groups
cited for violations and abuses against children have
formulated action plans to halt their violations. We call
for those plans to be implemented and urge those who
have not yet done so to enter into negotiations with the
United Nations for the preparation and implementation
of concrete, time-bound action plans concerning all
violations against children. In that regard, the signing
of action plans by the Governments of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Myanmar and Somalia, in
addition to the progress made by other parties in
releasing children, is a good step.

Strengthening and increasing assistance and
national capacity-building is the important next step
in ensuring full implementation of the plans. In the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in particular,
the impact of the armed conflict there on children is
worrying. We call on all armed groups to immediately
cease all forms of violations and human-rights abuses
against children. We emphasize the indispensable
role of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the United Nations country team in monitoring and
reporting on grave abuses of children. In that regard,
we support supplying the Mission with adequate child
protection advisers.

Concerning the Central African Republic,
although violations against children decreased during
the reporting period, Rwanda is concerned about the
alarming reports that child recruitment and abuses
occurred throughout the first half of 2013. We call
on parties involved in those acts to exercise restraint,
release all child soldiers in their ranks and vacate
schools occupied by military forces or armed groups.

In Mali, we call for the immediate deployment
of an adequate number of child protection advisers
throughout the Mission to cover child protection
infractions. The United Nations should ensure strict
compliance with international humanitarian and human
rights law through the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, as well as
adequate training for all peacekeepers, including all
those involved with child protection.

In Syria, Rwanda notes with concern the
unacceptable death toll on children in the conflict
there, and reiterates its call on Council members to use
their leverage over the parties to the Syrian conflict
to ensure the protection of civilians and of children in
particular. Belligerents should be required to vacate
children's areas, schools and hospitals; measures should
be taken immediately by the parties to protect the lives
and dignity of those innocents caught up in the conflict.

Rwanda calls on the Secretary-General to strengthen
the child-protection capacity in all peacekeeping
and United Nations missions. In that regard, we
welcome the upcoming deployment of child-protection
capacity to the African Union Mission in Somalia. We
encourage the efforts of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General to create and enhance
partnerships with independent organizations such as
the European Union, the African Union and NATO.
Their involvement in conflict mediation, peacekeeping
operations and peacebuilding missions will strengthen
implementation of the guidelines relating to children
and armed conflict.

In conclusion, we believe that the protection of
children in armed conflicts necessitates continued
commitment and consultations between the United
Nations and the Governments concerned, which should
take on primary responsibility for the protection of
their citizens, including children. The Government
of Rwanda remains committed to the protection of
children and ready to share our humble experience in
that regard.

