First and foremost, I would like to thank France for inviting us to participate in today's supremely important debate on children and armed conflict. In the same vein, we commend Belgium for its dedication and a job well done as the Chair of the Working Group on Children in Armed Conflict at this challenging moment, which is strongly marked by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. We welcome the briefing on the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/525) by the Special Representative for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Virginia Gamba de Potgieter, as well as the briefing by UNICEF Executive Director Henrietta Fore. We believe that today's open debate is a great opportunity for States Members of the United Nations to reflect on the challenges faced since the adoption of resolution 1612 (2005) and look for new ways to promote compliance with the children and armed conflict agenda. Some 15 years after the adoption of resolution 1612 (2005), which strengthened the monitoring and reporting mechanism that set up a functional and structured system for verifying and reporting on the six types of violations committed against children around the world and which established the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict, armed conflicts currently continue to negatively affect children. In this regard, we note with deep concern that, according to the Secretary- General's report, the United Nations has verified more than 25,000 serious violations against children in 19 situations, more than half of which were committed by non-State actors and a third of which were committed by Government and international forces. Some 7,747 children were verified as recruited and used. Among these, 90 per cent were used by non-State actors. Likewise, in 2019, a total of 13,200 children worldwide were separated from non-State actors and armed forces. Fundamental challenges hindered the successful and sustainable reintegration of these children, of children at risk who were protected from recruitment through action plans or other measures, and of children released from detention for actual or alleged association with armed groups, including those designated as terrorist groups by the United Nations. The situation of child soldiers should receive special attention from the Security Council, as they are used in many cases directly or indirectly by armies, armed opposition groups and rebels as well as by terrorist and extremist groups, in breach of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child. Sending children to war is a violation of their most basic rights. First, in addition to putting their lives at risk, they are deprived of contact with their families and communities at a stage in their lives when such relationships are essential. Secondly, child soldiers no longer dedicate themselves to their studies, which compromises their personal and professional future. Moreover, the consequences can be drastic for their psychological, mental and academic development, which will make it difficult for them to readapt to society and sustain themselves in adult life. We understand that the COVID-19 issue poses new challenges for children in situations of armed conflict, which may lead to difficulties for the United Nations system, including the Office of the Special Representative and peacekeeping missions, to protect children, due to movement restrictions. In this regard, we would like to stress the importance of the Secretary-General's recommendation that the Security Council ensure that child protection provisions are included in all relevant mandates of United Nations operations, including peacekeeping and special political missions. We note with concern the growing trend of attacks against civilian personnel and medical facilities. These criminal actions must end, and, in due time, the perpetrators are to be held accountable. We call on Member States and the international community to carry on with everything in their power to help protect schools, students and teachers in situations of armed conflict and ensure that schools remain safe places, with strict respect for their civil character. Angola joined the Safe Schools Declaration, which was adopted at the Oslo Conference in May 2015, and endorses the Guidelines for Protecting Schools and Universities from Military Use during Armed Conflict, a process conducted by Member States, civil society and child-protection actors. It is also a State party to the Convention on the Rights of the Child. In conclusion, on a positive note, we would like to underline the progress made by the "Act to protect children affected by conflict" campaign, national political negotiations and peace processes. In some situations, conflict reduction has been beneficial for the protection of children in armed conflicts. We advocate the inclusion in peacekeeping and peacebuilding processes of specific commitments related to child protection, including requirements for the rapid release of children from armed forces and non-State armed groups, and their social reintegration. Preventing the outbreak of conflict is still the best way to protect children. The international community must continue to work towards adopting the most appropriate tools for effective preventive action. Meanwhile, the protection of children in armed conflict must remain at the heart of the international community's priorities and be addressed through a comprehensive strategy of active protection and humanitarian response.
