Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, for
his briefing today, his second one on this topic in less
than a week. We also thank the Office of the United
Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon and all staff
and force personnel of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL). We particularly thank the
Force Commander, Major General Stefano Del Col, for
his efforts to contain the current crisis and avoid any
further escalation in the region.

We also commend the Lebanese Government for
its efforts aimed at managing and resolving the crisis
since its emergence. The President of the Lebanese
Republic, General Michel Aoun, declared that Lebanon
remained committed to addressing the problem and
eliminating its causes, especially so that the crisis does
not realistically pose a genuine threat to peace and
security in the region. The President further stated that
he remained committed to implementing the provisions
set out in resolution 1701 (2006) and to maintaining
stability in the south of the country, while rejecting
any practices that could lead to further escalation on
the border.
Lebanon has been experiencing continuous Israeli
provocations for many decades, the last of which is
Israel's attempt to exaggerate the current incident
through the media and at the political and even military
levels by threatening to use military means to destroy
the tunnels. Meanwhile, Israel's violations of Lebanese
sovereignty continue unabated almost daily.

Today's debate provides us with an opportunity to
address the dangerous reality that Lebanon is facing,
as Israeli violations continue to increase and intensify.
The Israeli army continues to commit violations,
disregarding the safety of civilians and the fragile
stability of the region. Unfortunately, the constant calls
of the international community and the attempts of
UNIFIL have failed to put an end to those violations. If
the recent activities of the Israeli air force are anything
to go by, then we can fully expect those violations to
increase in the near future.

The provisions of resolution 1701 (2006) and, more
important, Lebanese sovereignty, are being violated
almost on a daily basis, as proven by the figures and
images provided by the Lebanese Government and
the reports of the Secretary-General. However, there
have been no calls for the convening of an emergency
meeting to discuss those Israeli violations, which we
believe are much more threatening than the topic of
today's debate. There is all the more reason to convene
many open debates to discuss those Israeli violations.
For instance, there have been 550 air space violations
committed by Israel over the past four months alone,
totalling 2,000 flying hours.

The Israeli violations have not been limited to
that. There have also been electronic monitoring and
espionage activities by Israel, using its infrastructure
along the Blue Line and devices it placed on Lebanese
territory. A telecommunications war has been waged by
Israel against Lebanon, with an increase in the number
of telecommunications towers and monitoring devices
put in place to spy on the Lebanese network, thereby
violating the privacy of Lebanese citizens.

We reiterate our condemnation of Israeli acts of
aggression against Lebanese sovereignty by land, air
and sea. We emphasize our support for Lebanon's call
on the international community to implement resolution
1701 (2006), based on resolutions 425 (1978) and 426
(1978), thereby putting an end to Israel's violations and
its continuous threats to Lebanon and Lebanese civil
facilities and infrastructure. In that regard, I refer to
the statement issued this morning by the Lebanese
Ministry for Foreign Affairs that renews its steadfast
position of being committed to the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

The Israeli violations we referred to did not
include its biggest violation, which is the ongoing
occupation of Lebanese territory. We stress Lebanon's
legitimate right to end the occupation and have its
territory restored, including the Shaba'a farmlands,
the Lebanese Kfar Shuba hills and the Lebanese part
of Al-Ghajar village. Lebanon has the right to resist
any aggression through legitimate means. We also must
make the distinction between terrorism and legitimate
resistance against Israeli occupation, which is a right
as set out in international charters and in the principles
of international law. Resistance is not considered a
terrorist act.

Although there is no permanent ceasefire primarily
because Israel insists on continuing its violations, we
welcome the continuous detente in UNIFIL's area of
operations, which is made possible as a result of the
close cooperation between the Lebanese Armed Forces
and UNIFIL towards the implementation of resolution
1701 (2006). That is clearly demonstrated by the
increasing number of their joint patrols. We call on all
parties to use current channels, including the Tripartite
Committee, to address all concerns and problems along
the borders. We also call on parties to continue their
cooperation and coordination within that Committee
in order to overcome any differences that could lead
to armed confrontations. In that regard, we commend
the achievements of the Lebanese Armed Forces
during the past period, both along the Blue Line and
throughout Lebanon.

We welcome the Lebanese army's efforts to
continuously enhance security along the borders by
asserting the authority of the Government over all
the territories of Lebanon. Those efforts would assist
the Lebanese Government in honouring Lebanon's
international commitments, including those made at
the Rome 11 conference to support the Lebanese army
and the Paris conference to support the Lebanese
economy. Both conferences reaffirmed the international
community's commitment to the stability and prosperity
of Lebanon. We renew our support to the Lebanese
Government in order to continue its disassociation
policy and avert any conflict in the region pursuant to
Baabda Declaration.

In conclusion, we renew Kuwait's full solidarity
with Lebanon, while providing our political and
economic support to its Government and all its
constitutional institutions, towards safeguarding the
national unity, security, stability and sovereignty of
Lebanon over all its territories.

