Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): This
morning, in the presence of the Secretary-General, we
are experiencing a moment of genuine emotion. The
Ambassador of Belgium will soon express the views
and the hopes of the entire European Union, but I
should like to make a few comments in my national
capacity.

First, I wish to express the real sadness we feel
today in saying good-bye for now to Kamel Morjane,
an outstanding Special Representative of the Secretary-
General. During the last 20 months, Kamel Morjane
has devoted all his efforts to advancing the peace
process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Together, this morning, we can measure the progress
made, thanks to him, since the end of 1999. Kamel
Morjane has demonstrated exceptional courage, daily
dedication, extraordinary political sense and tireless
will. Like all my Council colleagues, I would like to
pay a heartfelt tribute to him. Kamel Morjane is an
example for all of us. He has shown to the entire
Congolese people the best possible image of the United
Nations. Through him, I would like to express to all the
personnel of the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC)
the gratitude of France.

The peace process in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo today is on a sound footing. The ceasefire
between the parties to the Lusaka Agreement is being
respected and the implementation of this text has
begun. The disengagement and the redeployment of
forces is almost complete. The parties to the
Agreement are working on drawing up comprehensive
plans for the withdrawal of foreign forces and for
the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration,
repatriation or resettlement (DDRRR) of armed groups.
These plans must be finalized as soon as possible.
Another crucial aspect of the peace process - the
inter-Congolese dialogue - is also being prepared
under the leadership of the facilitator and his
representative in Kinshasa. The preparatory meeting is
planned for 20 August. The dialogue itself must be
held as quickly as possible, and preferably - I stress
this - on Congolese soil.

Moreover, and even if this point does not fall
directly within the competence or the action of Mr.
Morjane or MONUC, the serious issue of the
exploitation of the natural resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo must be mentioned here. Since
the publication of the report of the Panel of Experts last
April, this issue has been the subject of growing
awareness among the international community and is
emerging more and more clearly as one of the driving
forces of the conflict and of serious violations of
human rights. We hope that the publication of the
addendum to this report, in the fall, will attest to the
progress made in resolving this serious issue.

The peace process in Burundi, which is
inseparable from the settlement of the crisis in the
region, is also undergoing important developments,
thanks to the commitment and the perseverance of the
mediator of the Arusha peace process, Mr. Mandela.
However, current realities, unfortunately, are showing
us the extent to which this process remains a fragile
one, full of pitfalls.

We see that the crisis in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and in the region, where the Council went
on a mission in May, has undergone positive
developments that are opening up a real window of
opportunity. However, as was emphasized by Mr.
Morjane a few minutes ago, the dynamic of peace has
not yet reached the point of no return. Numerous
difficulties and certain major obstacles must still be
overcome.

Given the situation, which is still unstable, our
Council must have a clear vision of the tasks to be
fulfilled. In our View, we need first and foremost to
maintain and to intensify the gains. Respect for the
ceasefire requires an ongoing daily effort, and we
encourage all bilateral contacts between belligerents,
within the framework of the Lusaka Agreement, to
improve confidence between the parties. From that
perspective, the meeting to be held under the auspices
of the Secretary-General between President Kabila and
President Kagame is a first step in the right direction.

It is also Vital that MONUC be able to carry out
its necessary verification work. I am thinking in
particular of disengagement in Equateur Province,
where Mr. Bemba's Mouvement pour la liberation du
Congo (MLC) has moved only with delays, which
explains why MONUC has not been able to verify such
movement on the ground. MONUC must also attest to
the actual departure of the Forces arme'es congolaises
from the positions that they are still occupying in
Katanga, in contradiction to the Harare sub-plans. For
this reason and for many others, it is absolutely
necessary for all parties to cooperate fully every day
with MONUC. Ambassador Morjane rightly insisted on
this. In this regard, the Security Council cannot
accept~ today, tomorrow or yesterday - United
Nations personnel being subjected to pressures or
threats. Our Council is determined to act with the
greatest possible firmness on this issue.

The parties to the conflict must comply with all
their commitments and respect all their obligations.
One of the major obstacles today to the continuation of
the peace process is unquestionably the delay in the
demilitarization of Kisangani. The demilitarization of
this city, which the Council had demanded a year ago
in resolution 1304 (2000), today symbolizes the peace
process and reconciliation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Following Rwanda and Uganda, the
Rassemblement congolais pour la democratie (RCD- Goma) must now abide by this obligation without
further delay. What is at stake here is its credibility as a
partner in the peace process. The Security Council calls
on all those who have influence on the RCD-Goma, in
particular Rwanda, to convey this demand and to
finally achieve implementation of this decisive step of
the peace process.

The activities of armed groups in the eastern part
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as in
Rwanda and Burundi, form another serious threat to the
return of peace. The signatories of the Lusaka
Agreement are together preparing a DDRRR
programme. There is a need to begin tackling this
difficult issue immediately. The first stage consists of
interrupting and preventing all forms of support to
these groups and to begin implementing DDRRR
wherever possible. We have taken note with great
interest of President Kabila's offer to launch the
movement on a voluntary basis, with the 3,000 fighters
who are now quartered in two camps in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. MONUC is ready to help,
within its means, and this is why the donor community
must also provide its full support to United Nations
actions.

The economic and humanitarian situation remains
disastrous, despite the outstanding action in the field
carried out in particularly difficult conditions by the
United Nations agencies and the non-governmental
organizations. The reopening of the rivers will provide
a breath of air to the Congolese people by improving
the delivery of supplies to the cities. Here, too, all
parties must assist MONUC in re-establishing this vital
link among the Congolese. Beyond that, the
international community is ready to provide its full
assistance to support the progress of the peace process,
to ease the suffering of the Congolese people and to
assist the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo in implementing its ambitious economic
reform programme. All parties, moreover, must ensure
strict respect for human rights in the sectors they
control. Together with the Special Rapporteur, Mr.
Garreton, who is currently in the region, the Council
intends to continue to devote its attention to this
question. There can be no settlement or reconciliation
if human rights violations are not punished. There can
be no impunity; there must no longer be any impunity.

As I said earlier, the friends of Mr. Morjane -
who are the friends of peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and in the region - are very
sad to see him leave. However, the Security Council is
unanimously determined to continue to follow, in the
same impartial manner that characterized all of Mr.
Morjane's work, the course that he has charted: that of
the implementation, without any concessions, of the
agreements signed by the parties themselves and of all
the resolutions of the Security Council.

In due time, together with his successor - as
soon as he or she is appointed - it is that path that we
intend to follow in the service of peace and in the
interests of the people of the Congo and of the entire
region.

