Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): Mr. President, we
thank you for having convened this open debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, and we also
commend the Secretary-General for the comprehensive
report that has been presented.

It is encouraging to note that the number of
armed conflicts has decreased from 50 in 1992 to about
30 in 2004. We need to acknowledge, however, that the
tragic impact of issues such as indiscriminate killings,
mutilation, sexual violence, forced displacement and
loss of livelihood require our urgent attention and
highlight the importance of addressing the issue of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.

The international community, in our View, must
remain collectively engaged to address the issue of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict and to ensure
the necessary political support and other requisite
resources. We welcome the call made by the Secretary-
General for a more predictable humanitarian response
to complex emergencies through the proposed
upgraded Central Emergency Revolving Fund. We
believe that such reforms could help to enhance
response capacity, develop more predictable
humanitarian financing and strengthen humanitarian
coordination.

The United Nations can and should play a critical
role in that respect. General Assembly resolution
46/182, among others, highlights the important agreed
principles that guide the manner in which humanitarian
assistance should be provided. These include the
principles of humanity, neutrality and impartiality.
These principles, we are pleased to note, were also
endorsed by the 2005 world summit.

We wish to make the following remarks on some
of the issues covered in the report of the Secretary-
General.

First, the report highlights the problems created
by the continued recruitment of child soldiers. It also
puts an emphasis on protection from physical and
sexual violence, especially as concerns women and
children. In that regard, we support the call on all
parties to strictly comply with the relevant rules and
principles of international humanitarian, human rights
and refugee law. We also agree with the appeal to end
impunity and to prosecute those responsible for
genocide, crimes against humanity and other egregious
crimes perpetrated against civilians.

Secondly, the report of the Secretary-General has
also correctly recognized that a secure environment for
the protection of civilians, following a period of armed
conflict, requires the strengthening of national legal,
law enforcement and judicial systems. We wish to
stress that, in addition, it also requires that
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes be fully funded. We therefore welcome
the call made by the Secretary-General to reinforce the
inclusion of adequate reintegration measures in
peacekeeping and peacebuilding missions.

Thirdly, the international community agreed,
during the 2005 world summit, that each individual
State has the responsibility for the protection of its
populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity. It was also
agreed that, where appropriate, Member States would
be helped to build the necessary capacity to enable
them to fulfil their protection mandate.

It is from that perspective that we welcome the
report of the Secretary-General as well as this open
debate in the Security Council. We wish to emphasize,
however, that the 2005 world summit also called for
continued consideration within the General Assembly
of the issue of the responsibility to protect populations
from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity.

Fourthly, as in previous reports, the Secretary-
General again highlights the valuable role that regional
and other intergovernmental institutions can play in the
protection of civilians - a role that South Africa fully
endorses. We therefore agree with the appeal made by
the Secretary-General to enhance the capacity and
readiness of regional organizations to respond to the
protection needs of civilians. However, we would like
also to emphasize that a stronger involvement in the
protection of civilians and humanitarian assistance by
regional organizations such as the African Union
should not lead to an abdication by the United Nations
system of its own responsibilities. What is important,
in our View, is closer cooperation and partnership
between the United Nations and regional organizations.

Lastly, the observation made by the Secretary-
General in his report that peacemaking, peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and humanitarian response to complex
emergencies are mutually reinforcing is an important
one, which we fully support. Closer cooperation
between humanitarian and peacekeeping efforts is
supported by our delegation, although we also
recognize the need to respect the various mandates of
the different institutions. As a particular example of
how closer cooperation could assist in the protection of
civilians, properly mandated peacekeeping missions
could create a secure and safe environment for
humanitarian organizations to have full and safe access
to the affected populations.

In conclusion, recognizing that the emergence of
new challenges demands that the international
community actively and collectively address these
issues, it is the hope of the South African delegation
that this will continue to be done in a way that
increases respect for the principles of international
humanitarian law, human dignity and the legitimacy of
the United Nations.

