Mr. Stariczyk (Poland): Poland fully aligns itself
with the statement made on behalf of the European
Union in the present debate. The importance of the
item on today's agenda warrants, nevertheless, some
additional remarks presenting our national perspective
on the issue at hand.

Poland deeply regrets that Iraq has not abided by
the provisions of resolution 1441 (2002) and has not
voluntarily disarmed, which was a necessary
precondition for a political solution to the crisis.
Resolution 1441 (2002) provided Iraq with a final
opportunity to fully comply with the will of the
international community. It also contained a warning of
grave consequences in case of non-compliance, based
on Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter.

As we have repeatedly underscored since the
adoption of resolution 1441 (2002), we had hoped until
the last moment that the conflict would be solved by
peaceful means and that military action would be
undertaken only as a last resort.

The Government of Iraq has, however, decided to
disregard the provisions of resolution 1441 (2002) in
the same way as it has disregarded over the last 12
years the provisions of numerous resolutions adopted
by the Security Council.

Iraq has not implemented its obligations with
regard to disarmament, nor has it extended full
cooperation to the inspectors of the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Investigation Commission
and the International Atomic Energy Agency. It has
failed to destroy its stocks of weapons of mass
destruction, the existence of which was confirmed by
the United Nations inspectors. By failing to abide by
Security Council decisions, particularly those relating
to weapons of mass destruction, the regime of Saddam
Hussain constitutes a threat to international peace and
security. Under those circumstances, the conclusion
had to be reached that the peaceful means for the
resolution of the Iraqi crisis have been exhausted and
the use of force remained the only option. The
exclusive responsibility for that state of affairs rests
with the Iraqi leadership.

The intervention of the international coalition to
force Iraq's implementation of relevant Security
Council resolutions, including resolution 1441 (2002),
adopted under Chapter VII of the Charter, is not
directed against the Iraqi people. It has been
undertaken for the sake of eliminating Iraq's weapons
of mass destruction, which threaten international peace
and security. Failure to take action for the effective
disarmament of Saddam Hussein's regime would be a
serious political and military mistake. It would be
tantamount to tolerating breaches of the law and
persistent disregard of obligations to the United
Nations. It would lead to the further undermining of the
authority of the United Nations.

The paramount aim of the international coalition
is the destruction of Iraq's weapons of mass
destruction, as well as the establishment of the rule of
law in Iraq. The military operation will be terminated
immediately following attainment of the set objectives.
The Iraqi people will be able to benefit from the
country's resources, of which they are the rightful
owners. The whole nation and all constituents of Iraqi
society will enjoy full rights and will be able to
undertake the process of constructing a State based on
the principles of self-determination and liberty, without
distinction as to political or ethnic background, and
thus they will be able to determine their own future.
Iraq will be a full-fledged member of the international
community and a factor of stability for the whole
region. Realizing these objectives is the basic aim of
the coalition and international organizations. Poland is
ready to actively participate in this process.

For the sake of alleviating the suffering of the
Iraqi people, no effort should be spared to keep
military operations effective and short. We attach great
importance to minimizing the humanitarian effects of
the military operation, including the migration of large
parts of the population. The civilian population will be
provided with aid and essential care. This will be the
result not only of the efforts of the coalition itself, but
of the whole international community. Early
involvement of the United Nations in providing such
assistance would contribute significantly to reducing
the humanitarian impact of the present situation and, at
the same time, would send a clear message that the
Organization intends to become actively involved in
providing necessary assistance for the reconstruction of
the country. Our assistance will be the best
demonstration of solidarity with Iraqi society.

The ongoing operation is a serious test for the
international system of collective security. We expect
that the permanent members of the Security Council
will overcome existing divisions and will return to the
practice of discharging their mandate in a spirit of
shared responsibility. We also expect that the parties to
the conflict will abide by the norms of international
humanitarian law.

