We thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, Ms. Claudia Blum de Barberi, for honouring us with her participation in today's meeting. We extend our appreciation to Special Representative of the Secretary-General Carlos Ruiz Massieu for his briefing and to Mr. David Santiago Cano Salazar for his statement. The Dominican Republic reiterates its support for the peace process in Colombia and commends the Colombian people for their commitment to lasting peace in the country, especially at this time, when the world is facing the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. We recognize the challenges faced and the progress made in the period under review, in particular the measures taken by the Government and the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia to stop the spread of the virus and continue with the implementation of the new working methods for the reintegration areas created for the former combatants of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia- Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP). As we are all aware, transitional justice is essential for reconciliation and lasting peace. We welcome the progress made by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace and urge all those subject to its jurisdiction to continue to contribute to its truth- seeking efforts. Nevertheless, we regret the acts of violence that have been recorded in some areas of the country owing to the presence of illegal armed groups. We strongly condemn the ongoing attacks against human rights defenders, civil society leaders and former combatants of the FARC-EP, in particular women, including those of Afro-Colombian and indigenous origin, and we urge that special measures be put in place to meaningfully take into account their security needs. We encourage the parties to guarantee a safe and violence-free environment for the civilian population and ensure the prompt implementation of the action plan of the Comprehensive Programme of Safeguards for Women Leaders and Human Rights Defenders. The Dominican Republic underscores the need to continue efforts in the area of socioeconomic reintegration, particularly those aimed at improving security for the 9,500 former combatants residing outside former territorial areas for training and reintegration, including those living in collective reintegration areas. We emphasize the importance of strengthening and expanding the reintegration programmes and join the Secretary-General in urging all parties to make use of the National Reintegration Council and take concrete steps towards finalizing the reintegration road map. In this context, Mr. Cano Salazar's statement attests to how crucial the participation of young people in peace and security efforts is to the implementation of the peace accord. Accordingly, we would like to applaud him for his efforts aimed at supporting the reintegration of former combatants of the FARC-EP, including through social and economic reintegration programmes, which reflects the work being carried out by the United Nations Verification Mission in partnership with young people in support of the implementation of the youth, peace and security agenda. Finally, in the light of the COVID-19 pandemic, and the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire, we are cautiously optimistic about the response of the Ejercito de Liberacion Nacional (ELN), namely, to declare a one-month ceasefire for 11/31 the month of April. We urge ELN members to continue to take positive steps towards sustainable peace and security in conflict-affected areas. I will conclude by reiterating our support for the Government and the people of Colombia, and for the United Nations Verification Mission, in their pursuit of lasting peace and security in the country.
