Mr. Cappagli (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish at the outset to thank you, Madame President, for
having convened this open debate on the priority item
of the combat against terrorism and in particular the Al
Qaeda organization.

It is particularly appropriate for this meeting to
take place under your presidency. Spain has amply
demonstrated its commitment to eradicate this
scourge - a scourge that knows no borders and that
has many manifestations. One of the most recent
examples of that commitment is Spain's assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council's Counter-
Terrorism Committee, which Ambassador Arias has
been so effectively guiding.

The Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999),
Ambassador Heraldo Munoz, has submitted to us a
comprehensive report on the activities carried out by
the Committee this year and on its future work. He has
also informed us about the work of the Monitoring
Group and has conveyed to us his views on the national
reports submitted by States. We thank him for his
excellent presentation, and we congratulate him and the
members of the delegation of Chile for the work done
by the Committee.

Argentina wishes to reiterate its commitment to
the struggle against terrorism, to which it attaches
priority importance. My country twice suffered from
this scourge during the 1990s and knows firsthand of
the suffering and destruction brought about by this type
of act, especially among innocent civilians.

As an example of this commitment, my country
has submitted the relevant reports on the
implementation of resolutions 1390 (2002) and 1455
(2003), which describe the steps taken in compliance
with the provisions adopted by the Security Council.
We hope that all countries that have not yet done so
will submit their reports, since they are extremely
useful in that they show the status of implementation,
at the global level, of the obligations that we all have in
the struggle against Al Qaeda.

We carefully read the report prepared by the
Monitoring Group. In this regard, we take note with
concern of the fact that, despite the progress made in
the fight against Al Qaeda since 1999, that terrorist
organization continues to pose a threat to international
peace and security, as was exemplified in recent
months by a series of bombings in various parts of the
world.
We cannot but note our deep concern at the fact
that terrorist groups associated with Al Qaeda continue
to recruit followers; to raise funds from various
sources, especially informal sources; and to have
access to various types of weapons for their attacks.

Concerning the financing of terrorism, it is of
particular concern that international drug trafficking
continues to be an important source of income for
terrorist groups. Monitoring and control measures must
therefore be intensified so as to put an end to the
collusion and mutual support between drug traffickers
and terrorists.

We believe that the international community must
take appropriate measures to step up the fight against
terrorism in all its forms. In this context, the
recommendations of the Monitoring Group should be
carefully studied by the Security Council with a view
to improving the sanctions regime and filling in some
of the gaps that have been identified, particularly in the
areas of financing, recruitment, freedom of movement
and arms embargoes.

Argentina attaches particular importance to the
measures adopted by the Council with a view to
eradicating terrorism. In this regard, we consider it
important for the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) to work in close cooperation
with the Counter-Terrorism Committee, and we
congratulate Ambassador Munoz and Ambassador
Arias for their initiatives in that respect. We hope that
such cooperation will also extend to the subsidiary
organs of those committees - the Monitoring Group
and the panel of experts - which could exchange
information about their findings and conclusions.

The brutal attacks of 11 September 2001 showed
that Al Qaeda's terrorist threat is a global phenomenon
that knows no borders. Significant progress has been
made in dismantling the organization, but recent
attacks show that the task is not yet complete and that
we must not lower our guard. It is the duty of all States
in the international community to cooperate among
themselves and with the United Nations to ensure that
the goal of eradicating Al Qaeda and associated groups
is achieved. Argentina wishes to reiterate its full
readiness to cooperate to that end.

