Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): The international
community and the Security Council cannot and, I
know, will not turn a blind eye to Somalia at this
critical juncture. The range of piracy activities is
spreading to neighbouring countries, and the number of
reported piracy acts is growing, as is the number of
victims. The sophistication of the attacks has also
increased. The number of hostages taken by pirates is
both impressive and disturbing. The other victims,
perhaps less visible or not so frequently mentioned in
the news, are the Somalis themselves, condemned in
their daily lives to suffer the corrosive social impact of

piracy.

The United Nations, through its programmes and
funds, along with the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime and other international organizations and
donors, in coordination with the Contact Group on
Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, all have a role to play
in dealing with the subject at hand in its different
dimensions. They have to be further supported in
countering piracy and in addressing its root causes and
overall impact in Somalia. Increased funding,
including through voluntary contributions, cannot be
avoided. The cost of inaction would be much, much
higher.

It is for these reasons that I wish, like others, to
thank the Special Adviser of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Jack Lang, for his detailed, comprehensive and, I
must add, very disturbing report (S/2011/30). I also
thank our Somali colleague for his comments, and have
taken note of the points raised by the Assistant
Secretary-General. The Special Adviser gave us a
thorough and accurate overview of the situation on the
ground. Moreover, he presented us with a set of
proposals for overcoming the difficult challenge that
confronts us today in the issue of piracy off the coast
of Somalia - a challenge first of all for Somalia, but
also for the region and for the international community
as a whole.

Portugal stands ready to work on those proposals,
with the aim of preventing and punishing piracy in the
region. We are guided by the conviction that the
success of any strategy on this matter lies with the
empowerment of Somalia and the need for Somalia to
be entrusted in the near future with added capacity to
fight this phenomenon from within. We will look into
the realization of these proposals as potential tools for
promoting institution-building and the rule of law, and
for encouraging economic activity adequate to sound
and peaceful progress in the country.

We all know that the roots of piracy off the coast
of Somalia lie inland, not at sea. They are to be found
in the difficult living conditions that result from a
persisting situation of conflict and instability, weak
institutions for fighting impunity, and serious
development problems. Such circumstances make it
particularly difficult for Somalis to create alternatives
to an economy in which piracy's influence is
increasingly preponderant.

Despite the complexity of the subject, the Special
Adviser has managed to present us with a simple
approach. We must improve the solutions that are
currently being pursued. In this regard, we commend
the efforts being undertaken by the States of the region
and regional organizations, and call for their continued
engagement to this purpose. But we agree with the
Special Adviser that we must also embrace new
solutions of an economic, security and judicial-penal
nature. In this regard, we are ready to work in the
Council to help achieve a prompt outcome on the basis
of these proposals.

Concerning the new measures described in the
report, Portugal strongly supports the multidimensional
approach suggested, comprising three parts that are, in
our view, equally important - the economic, security
and judicial/correctional components, including the
need to invest in efficient programmes of social
reinsertion appropriate to the socio-economic situation
in the country, in order to allow the prison population
to find legal employment and build their future once
they have served their sentence. Special attention
should also be given in this context to the situation and
treatment of children, attracted or mobilized into
piracy, who end up caught in the net of justice.

Furthermore, we welcome with particular
interest, as a complement to the specialized courts in
Puntland and in Somaliland, the suggestion of creating
another specialized Somali court outside Somali
territory, now proposed for Arusha. It is an interesting
solution that builds on converging ideas and specific
proposals that my country has been developing and
debating within the framework of the Contact Group
on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia. It is a solution that
seems flexible and useful enough to help attract
international capacity support, capable of responding to
needs as they evolve on the ground, and also able to be
swiftly set up, since it relies on existing facilities. We
will continue to engage in this reflection and to offer
our experience to materialize such proposals in the
ensuing discussions in the Council.

