Mr. Pleuger (Germany): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Secretary-General and his team for
their tireless and determined efforts to resolve the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
understand that the new Special Representative,
Mr. Swing, has had a good start, and we would like to
congratulate him on that and wish him well. I would
like also to express our gratitude to Mr. Guehenno, to
Special Representative Ngongi and to High
Representative for Common Foreign and Security
Policy of the European Union (EU) Javier Solana for
their briefings.

Germany fully agrees with the assessment that
has just been given by the EU High Representative,
Mr. Solana, and we fully support the EU efforts to
support the peace process. We recognize that the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
in the Great Lakes region in general remains difficult.
The recent violence in Burundi in particular is very
worrying.

But there are positive developments and
encouraging signs as well. While the responsibility for
the success of the peace process ultimately lies with the
protagonists on the ground, we share the views
expressed by Mr. Guehenno and Mr. Solana that the
peace process has to be strongly supported and
accompanied by the international community.

From the outset, Germany has given its full
support to the recommendations of the Secretary-
General on adjusting the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) to confront the altered realities in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. As requested in
Security Council resolution 1484 (2003), we have
supported the deployment of a EU-led Interim
Emergency Multinational Force to stabilize the
situation in Bunia prior to the arrival of new MONUC
contingents. The draft resolution, which is presently
being negotiated in the Council, introduces an
ambitious but viable adjustment to the mandate of
MONUC.

We welcome the focus of military forces on the
problematic regions in eastern Congo and on Kinshasa,
in order to provide security for the Transitional
Government. We also support the expanded peace-
building components related to establishing a proper
police force, respect for the rule of law, justice, and
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR).

In our view, the problem of child soldiers should
be accorded special significance in the DDR process.
At present, we are examining the possibility of
providing support in this field and would be interested
in hearing about possible initiatives by the United
Nations Children's Fund or the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, Mr. Otunnu. We are very concerned about
reports that the recruitment of child soldiers in the
region continues unabated, in particular, and most
recently, the information that the majority of Forces
nationals de liberation (FNL) rebels killed in last
week's fighting near Bujumbura were only 11 to 15
years old.

We share the Secretary-General's view that
militia leaders such as Lubanga must be held
accountable for such acts and other gross abuses of
human rights and humanitarian law.

I would like also to draw attention to the fact that
the recruitment of child soldiers is a crime according to
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
(ICC). In that respect, we note with interest the
announcement made by the ICC Prosecutor, Mr. Luis
Moreno Ocampo, that his Office has designated the
situation in Ituri as a most urgent situation to be
followed, that he will use all the powers at his disposal
to prevent future crimes and combat impunity and that,
if necessary, he will seek authorization from a Pre-Trial
Chamber to start an investigation.

The political sensitivity displayed by the ICC
Prosecutor, as well as his circumspection in describing
the complementarity between his role and the role of
the Transitional Government, deserve particular
mention and approbation. In a policy paper presented at
a public hearing in The Hague, on 17 and 18 June
2003, the Prosecutor elaborated on the principle of
complementarity of Court action vis-a-vis national
action and drew two important conclusions with
immediate relevance to the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. First, that the Office of the
Prosecutor must monitor and assess efforts made by
national authorities; and secondly, that the Office of the
Prosecutor must cooperate with national jurisdictions
and use its best efforts to help State authorities fulfil
their duty to investigate and prosecute at the national
level.

Germany views the positions taken by the
Prosecutor as yet another indication that he will
exercise his important office in the most responsible
and fair manner. We reiterate our encouragement to the
Transitional Government and the ICC Prosecutor to
explore practical ways of cooperation.

We further believe that it would be appropriate
for the Council, which has been against impunity in a
very outspoken way, to appreciate these endeavours
and, against the backdrop of these developments, to
engage in a policy dialogue with Mr. Moreno-Ocampo,
concerning both the case at stake and other broader
issues. This situation illustrates that the Security
Council and the ICC are committed to very similar
objectives - or rather, to the very same objectives.

We welcome the imposition of an arms embargo
against all rebel groups operating in eastern Congo.
That is the right approach to restrict the military
resources of Congolese militias as well as to protect
neighbouring States from rebel attacks emanating from
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. This approach,
together with the activities of the Panel of Experts on
the Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other
Forms of Wealth of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, could prove to be more effective than the rather
isolated DDR programmes have been so far.

However, we wish that the draft resolution now
being negotiated could also establish an efficient
monitoring regime, and that the Security Council could
manifest its political will to impose punitive measures
on those who violate the embargo. We hope that this
aspect will be considered in future resolutions if it
cannot be included in the present one.

Reports about continuing weapons deliveries by
neighbouring States to the rebel groups, if confirmed,
will have a profoundly negative effect on our bilateral
relations with those countries.

Given the situation on the ground and the
challenges that the Transitional Government and the
international community are facing in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the challenges are enormous. If
we want to translate the vision of political and social
stability, of democracy, of the rule of law and the
respect for human rights, into reality, both the
Congolese and the international community, including
MONUC, have to live up to their responsibility.

