Mr. Henze (Germany): At the outset, I wish to
subscribe fully to the statement made by the Presidency
of the European Union. Allow me to add just a few
additional points that are of particular importance to us.

First, I would like to express particular thanks to the
Secretary-General for his profound, comprehensive and
well-balanced report. It is both impressive and inspiring.
The recommendations contained therein are action-
oriented and of great practical relevance.

The Secretary-General presented his report at a
crucial time of historical importance. Nine years after the
crumbling of the Berlin Wall, we are beginning to
develop and to adapt to new parameters in the field of
international relations as we leave the legacy of the cold
war behind. The Secretary-General describes in detail
what immediate impact this historical transition has had
on Africa in general and on some of the conflicts between
African countries - and inside some of them as well. He
rightly draws the conclusion that significant progress in
Africa will require sustained international attention at the
highest political level. Only then will we avoid
marginalization of this continent and the so-called Afro-
pessimism.

From a German perspective, the changes that have
occurred since the end of the cold war have had wide-
ranging implications. In terms of foreign policy, the most
important one is that we are no longer pre-eminently
preoccupied by what was previously called the "German
question". It is true, Africa has always been important to
us. My country is present in almost every African capital.
This allows us to maintain a permanent dialogue with the
Governments on all issues of common interest and
common concern.

Even more important is close cooperation for
development. The Secretary-General rightly points out in
paragraph 79 of his report that

"Development is central to the prospects for
reducing conflict in Africa."

 

Germany is meeting its obligations as a donor country.
From 1991 to 1996, my country spent roughly 22 billion
deutsche marks on bilateral and multilateral development
cooperation for sub-Saharan Africa. Our overall debt relief
for African countries amounts to DM. 9.7 billion. From
1994 to 1997, our bilateral and multilateral humanitarian
aid for the Great Lakes region alone - including our
contribution to European aid - amounted to DM. 583
million. In the crucial area of mine clearance, Germany has
since 1995 spent DM. 18 million for various projects mainly
in Angola and Mozambique.

On our political agenda, Africa and African affairs
have never ranked higher. We are devoting more rather
then less attention to Africa as a result of the end of the
cold war.

One of the most important conclusions to be drawn
from the Secretary-General's report is that a renewed spirit
of partnership is urgently required. The Secretary-General
points to the responsibility Africans ought to assume for
their own affairs on the one hand and to the obligations of
the international community on the other. Acknowledging
and respecting African ownership and offering and
accepting advice, support and cooperation must be core
values of this partnership.

To be able to consolidate this partnership we have to
overcome a widespread case-by-case approach in which we
mainly react when impressed by a full-fledged crisis. This
partnership must rather be at the centre of what I would
call an attempt to build a framework of interlocking and
mutually reinforcing multilateral institutions. I would like
to highlight just three important aspects of this more
general task.

First, the task starts here in New York, here at the
United Nations. Drawing on my own personal experience
during Germany's non-permanent membership in the
Security Council during the years 1995 and 1996, and
deeply impressed by the contributions made by our
colleagues from African delegations there, I am of the
conviction that this body needs to be reformed. We have to
overcome what the Secretary-General rightly describes as
a paralysis that threatens to undermine the credibility of the
Organization as a whole. The reform must, among other
things, put Africa in a position to shoulder the
responsibility of permanent membership.

Let me add at this point that recently we have been
observing with some concern that in some cases financial
considerations seem to play an important role in the
decision-making process within the Security Council. It
goes without saying that we all have to provide the
United Nations with the financial resources it needs to
carry out the tasks assigned to it.

Secondly, the Organization of African Unity and
subregional organizations in Africa ought to be
strengthened for the reasons extensively described in the
Secretary-General' 5 report. This applies particularly to the
improvement of their respective capacities in the areas of
conflict prevention, confidence-building and
peacekeeping. Germany is contributing bilaterally as well
as through multilateral channels - primarily through the
European Union - towards achieving this very important
goal. We agree entirely with the Secretary-General that
these efforts have to take place within the context of the
United Nations primary responsibility for matters of
international peace and security. If we point to the
importance of developing genuine African capacity in
these areas, we also do so due to the unique historical
experience of European countries since the Second World
War. Functioning multilateral structures such as the
European Union, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization and the Council of Europe have contributed
immensely to reconciliation, peace and prosperity in a
continent that for centuries was ravaged by ferocious
wars. In this context, we maintain our position that an
international conference on peace, security and stability in
the Great Lakes region, under the chairmanship of the
United Nations and the Organization of African Unity,
could have a positive impact on the situation in this
region.

Thirdly, Germany believes that the establishment of
a permanent international criminal court should be
pursued as a top priority, as the representative of the
International Committee of the Red Cross has just stated.
In paragraph 49 of his report the Secretary-General points
out the importance of effectively reacting to what he calls

"a dramatic and unacceptable deterioration in the
level of adherence to humanitarian norms in crisis
situations".

We will actively contribute to the forthcoming diplomatic
conference, in June and July of this year, for the
establishment of a permanent international criminal court.
A lot of work still has to be done if we are to overcome
the remaining legal and political hurdles. We are happy
that many African countries are actively participating in

 

the preparations for the establishment of such a court in
Rome.

Building and constantly strengthening such a
framework of interlocking and mutually reinforcing
multilateral institutions would, in our View, be the most
ambitious and also the most rewarding strategy to promote
durable peace and sustainable development in Africa.
Besides pursuing these rather long-range objectives,
Germany will continue its efforts to contribute to practical
measures of a more concrete nature. Let me give a few
examples to illustrate our recent activities in this regard.

Concerning the goal of stopping the proliferation of
arms, I wish to stress that under German national law any
export of weapons into zones of conflict or tension is illegal
and strictly prohibited. This provision is implemented in the
strictest possible way. We wholeheartedly subscribe to all
the recommendations of the Secretary-General related to
this aspect. In the General Assembly, we addressed the
problem of the illegal flow of small arms and light weapons
in the context of the General Assembly resolution on
consolidation of peace through practical disarmament
measures. We recently contributed to the Trust Fund to
support the work of the reactivated International
Commission of Inquiry on illegal arms flows to Rwanda.

The situation in the Great Lakes region was the theme
of a major conference of German ambassadors which took
place recently in Nairobi, chaired by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs. We will gladly make available the final
document of that conference to interested delegations.
Allow me also to highlight the international workshops
organized by the German Ministry of Foreign Affairs held
annually in Berlin, the last of which was devoted to the
Great Lakes region under the topic of improving African
and international capabilities for preventing and resolving
violent conflict.

We continue to support financially the diplomatic
efforts of the Special Representative of the United Nations
and the OAU for the Great Lakes region, Ambassador
Sahnoun, and the Representative of the Secretary-General
for the Great Lakes region, Berhanu Dinka, as well as the
mediation efforts of former President Nyerere in the
Burundi conflict.

As an important donor country, we have taken very
careful note of the points made by the Secretary-General in
his report on restructuring international aid, reducing debt
burdens and the opening of international markets to more
privately based economic exchange and partnership. We
look forward to more detailed discussions of these
questions within the United Nations and other
international institutions.

