Mr. Gutierrez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
wish to thank the Security Council, in particular the
delegation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, for the timely
convening of this debate and the drafting of the
concept paper (S/2011/l6, annex), which helps the
Council to give greater thought to key elements of a
more effective Peacebuilding Commission and
contributes to the organization and planning required to
implement the recommendations emanating from the
review process.
Peru attaches the greatest importance to adopting
comprehensive and multidimensional strategies for
peacebuilding in post-conflict situations. Such
strategies promote security, development and good
governance in close coordination with all United
Nations system agencies. The adoption of a needs-
driven or a demand-driven approach and the prevention
of a resurgence of conflict are crucial pillars in the
design of a comprehensive strategy. In that regard, we
believe that a needs-driven approach must take account
of the specificities of each case and of national
priorities, thereby facilitating a targeted response.

In his report on peacebuilding in the immediate
aftermath of conflict, the Secretary-General pointed out
priority areas in which peacebuilding work should be
conducted simultaneously. One of the key main areas
involves the importance of a cross-cutting and holistic
security strategy in which priority is given to
development and institution-building. The cross-
cutting strategy reflects the need to include early
peacebuilding efforts during the implementation of
peacekeeping processes.

In order to prevent a resurgence of conflict, it is
imperative to rebuild and bolster the institutional
capacities of the country in question. Institution-
building is an indispensable factor of sustainable
socio-economic development. A comprehensive
peacebuilding strategy, which must include provisions
for institution-building, should be based on national
ownership and a prior assessment of existing national
capacities. In that way, international support and
cooperation will fill the gaps where capacity is lacking
and strengthen the areas where there are weaknesses.
The implementation of the Agenda for Change and the
poverty reduction strategy in Sierra Leone could serve
as useful examples in evaluating positive aspects and
areas for improvement through a lessons-learned
approach.

In implementing the strategy, it is imperative to
establish mechanisms for inclusion to ensure the
maximum involvement of society and the public and
private sectors. Such an approach will mend the social
and political fabric as a framework for the rule of law
and will lay the foundation for the country's
reconstruction. In that regard, we should recall that
the empowerment of women and the gender
perspective are key factors in generating capacity and
in the peacebuilding process, as underscored in the
Secretary-General's report.

Particular attention must also be paid to job
creation and training for young people who are
unemployed or underemployed, and who are a high-
risk and potentially disruptive factor in the transition to
peacebuilding and institution-building. It is also
essential to sustain close and ongoing coordination
with local stakeholders and partners providing
international assistance, with particular emphasis on
regional cooperation, South-South cooperation and
North-South triangular cooperation. This will ensure
the implementation of a needs-driven strategy on the
ground and take account of the experience and
expertise of the partners.

Peru believes that determining the origin of a
conflict and the need for a transition towards peace and
for the rebuilding process - and therefore for early
peacebuilding efforts and a preventive dimension -
are aspects that must be taken into account when the
mandate of a peacekeeping operation is first
established. These considerations must be part of the
groundwork for a comprehensive peacebuilding
strategy, including in rebuilding and strengthening
institutional capacities.

The Security Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission, in particular its Organizational
Committee, have a crucial role to play in drafting
mandates for peacebuilding operations and in
formulating and implementing the aforementioned
comprehensive strategy. Mechanisms must therefore be
established so that the Peacebuilding Commission, as a
subsidiary body of the Council and the General
Assembly, can develop active and frequent
coordination with both the Security Council and the
General Assembly.

Finally, I reiterate the importance my country
attaches to the Peacebuilding Commission maintaining
its primary advisory and catalytic role within the
system, which ensures the consistency, flexibility and
effectiveness of the work of the United Nations in
peacebuilding processes and in implementing the
Secretary-General's action plan.
