Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): It gives us great
pleasure and encouragement to see you, Mr. Minister,
presiding over this meeting on the role of the Security
Council in conflict prevention. My delegation
expresses great appreciation for the initiative taken by
the Jamaican presidency of the Council to follow up
the debate on the subject, which has been high on our
agenda. We thank the Secretary-General for his very
focused statement this morning on conflict prevention,
in which he made some very clear and concrete
recommendations.

Conflict prevention is not an abstract concept. We
regard conflict prevention as actions seeking the
settlement of disputes by peaceful means, as per the
principles and provisions contained in the United
Nations Charter and international law. The prevention
of armed conflicts within sovereign States requires a
comprehensive set of actions addressing the root causes
or sources of those conflicts. A third scenario, in which
foreign countries get entangled in an intra-State
conflict, represents a complex imbroglio. Such a
situation is certainly avoidable if respect for the
principles and provisions of the Charter can be secured.
With these preliminary remarks, we propose to focus
on five issues relating to conflict prevention.

First, with regard to the role of the Council in
preventing inter-State conflicts, we all agree that under
the Charter the Security Council has the primary
responsibility in the area of peace and security. We
should also agree that the Council must assume that
responsibility, on time and in all situations.

When the subject was debated last November,
frustration was expressed about the lack of the crucial
element of political will. Bangladesh, at that time not a
member of the Council, spoke about the political,
humanitarian and economic imperatives of conflict
prevention. We underlined the importance of political
will and commitment, argued in favour of prompt and
effective action and pleaded for consistency in our
response to all situations.

Since last November, we have seen at least one
clear case of large-scale inter-State war. No one is
denying the right of any nation to legitimate self-
defence. But we are not convinced that a peaceful
settlement was impossible and we do not believe that
the means under Chapter VI were exhausted. Given the
magnitude of the death, destruction and suffering that
they entail, such wars defeat our collective pledge to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war.
This imposes grave moral and economic burdens on the
countries and peoples concerned and on the
international community as a whole.

The Council did send a mission to Asmara and
Addis Ababa in a desperate attempt to prevent the war.
We regret that the authorities did not agree to the
Council's call for a halt to military preparations and the
resumption of hostilities. There were questions on the
Council's role and there were reflections on the role of
the regional organization concerned. From early
March, Bangladesh pleaded for immediate intervention
by the Council in the situation between Eritrea and
Ethiopia. We failed to understand and appreciate the
difficulty involved in considering the issue and in
making a timely intervention. Was that the result of a
failure to assess the immediacy of the impending
resumption of hostilities, or a lack of political will?

Secondly, let me turn to intra-State conflicts. In
most cases of internal armed conflict, there is a
colonial or cold-war legacy. It goes without saying that
the Powers concerned have a special role and
responsibility. United Nations actions in these
situations may be strengthened by the initiatives and
interventions of such Powers in times of crisis as well
as by their addressing the long-term causes of conflict.
We may take Srebrenica and Rwanda as specific
cases. The two reports reveal the extent of the lack of
political will and commitment. We hope that all of us
will recognize our mistakes and assume our respective
responsibilities.

The reports on Srebrenica and Rwanda also point
out a number of organizational or institutional
deficiencies. An effective conflict-prevention strategy
will require significant improvement of the United
Nations conflict-prevention capacity. Clearly, there is a
need for improving the United Nations early-warning
and analysis capabilities and the coordination among
various departments, funds and agencies and for closer
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations. We are very happy to hear from the
Secretary-General this morning that the Department of
Political Affairs has been designated the focal point for
conflict prevention throughout the United Nations
system.

Thirdly, we believe that there is an emerging
consensus that durable peace can be achieved only by
effectively addressing the root causes or sources of
conflict. In his 1998 report on the causes of conflict in
Africa, the Secretary-General identified endemic
poverty, underdevelopment, undemocratic government,
weak or non-existent institutions and political and
economic discrimination between ethnic and religious
communities as major sources of conflicts. These are
within the competence of other organs and agencies of
the United Nations system, including the Economic and
Social Council and the United Nations Development
Programme in particular, and the Bretton Woods
institutions, the World Trade Organization, regional
organizations and arrangements and civil society,
including non-governmental organizations and the
private sector. The success of conflict prevention will
depend largely upon effective coordination among all
actors.

Bangladesh believes that democracy, the rule of
law, good governance, respect for humanitarian law
and human rights and sustainable development
constitute the basic foundation of international peace
and security. These, in our perception, are essential
components of conflict prevention.

The Group of Eight, in preparation for its summit
this weekend, have adopted a historic document
directly relevant to the work the Council. The
document, the Miyazaki Initiative for Conflict
Prevention, quoted by Ambassador Greenstock earlier,
deserves our support. We took forward to the effective
and full implementation of the commitments made by
them.

We support consideration of conflict prevention
in development assistance strategies. It is also
important to recognize the need to ensure a smooth
transition from emergency humanitarian assistance to
development in post-conflict peace-building.

In the context of long-term strategies, in building
the foundations of durable peace, we should not lose
focus on the peoples of the United Nations, who are the
ultimate actors in matters of peace and security. As part
of a long-term strategy, we would like to underline the
importance of building and sustaining peace by
inculcating a culture of peace.

As defined by the General Assembly resolution, a
culture of peace includes tolerance, understanding,
solidarity, respect for diversity and promotion of all
human rights and fundamental freedoms. We stress the
need for efforts by Member States, relevant bodies of
the United Nations system and other international,
regional and national organizations and civil society in
the effective implementation of the Declaration and
Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace adopted by
the General Assembly last September.

The fourth area on which we would like to focus,
is arms control and disarmament. Apart from the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, an area
of major concern is the excessive accumulation and
uncontrolled circulation of small arms and light
weapons. Given the destabilising impact of
proliferation and illicit trade in these arms, it is
incumbent on the international community to act
seriously on curbing the arms bazaar. In the specific
context of some of the ongoing conflicts in Africa, it is
critically important to break the nexus between
diamonds and arms that sustain the wars.

The fifth and final point we would like to raise is
where we go from here. In November last year, the
Council decided to follow up the matter and consider
convening a Security Council meeting at the level of
foreign ministers during the Millennium Assembly.
Given the enormous importance of conflict prevention,
we would strongly support the holding of the
ministerial meeting in September 2001. We are
requesting the Secretary-General to submit a report
containing his recommendations on conflict prevention
for consideration by the proposed ministerial meeting.
As I said earlier, this morning the Secretary-General
has provided some very clear and concrete
recommendations, particularly with regard to the
meeting at the foreign-minister level, the coordination
between the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council and the role of non-State actors. We
hope that the Council will be acting on those. We also
welcome the setting up by the Secretary-General of this
panel led by Ambassador Brahimi, and we hope that its
recommendations will focus on the conflict prevention
aspect as well.

To conclude, let me underline that a reformed,
strengthened and effective United Nations remains
central to the maintenance of peace and security, of
which prevention is a key component. The effective
discharge of the responsibilities would require
enhancing the capacity of the Organization in
preventive action, peacemaking, peacekeeping, peace
enforcement and peace-building.

The role of women in conflict prevention and
peacemaking needs to be increasingly recognised, and
we are pleased that Bangladesh's proposal on this
aspect has been included in the presidential statement
to be adopted later.

The success in reaching common grounds on
conflict prevention in the text of a presidential
statement marks an important step forward. It has been
our pleasure to be able to make a constructive
contribution to the exercise undertaken at your
initiative, Mr. President. Bangladesh is fully behind the
substance and spirit of the statement.

