Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish at the outset to thank Under-Secretary-General
Egeland for his briefing. We appreciate the enormous
efforts made by the United Nations agencies over the
years in the field of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict.

In recent years, the Security Council has paid
increasing attention to the protection of civilians, and
many resolutions and presidential statements have been
adopted on that theme. A legal framework on the issue
has been established that sets out specific requirements
with regard to the actions of the parties concerned. The
recently adopted Security Council resolution 1674
(2006) sets out the latest provisions guiding activities
in this field. However, against the backdrop of a harsh
reality, such achievements on paper are far from
sufficient. It is imperative that they be implemented.

Here, I would like to briefly emphasize the
following points. First, efforts to protect civilians in
armed conflict must not deviate from the principles
enshrined in the United Nations Charter and the
provisions of relevant international law. The primary
responsibility to protect civilians lies, first, with the
Governments concerned. The international community
and other parties, while providing support and
assistance, should not undermine the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the countries concerned.

Humanitarian agencies and non-governmental
organizations have often provided assistance in
extremely dangerous conditions and should be highly
commended. However, at the same time, they should
strictly abide by the principles of justice, neutrality,
objectivity and independence in their activities in order
to avoid becoming involved in internal disputes and
complicating the security situation and the political
process on the ground.

Secondly, the Security Council, when it carries
out its primary responsibility to maintain international
peace and security, should strengthen its efforts to
prevent or resolve armed conflict and address the issue
of protecting civilians by addressing the root causes.
Civilians, particularly those belonging to vulnerable
groups, always bear the brunt of conflict. When faced
with a sudden eruption of violence and conflict, they
have no guarantee of safety or dignity. In addition, it is
difficult to ensure that remedial measures are
immediately effective. It is only by addressing the root
causes of armed conflicts that we can create better
living conditions for civilians. The recently established
9

Peacebuilding Commission can play a special role in
that area.

Thirdly, resolution 1674 (2006) reaffirmed a
principle expressed in the outcome document of last
year's summit (General Assembly resolution 60/ 1): the
responsibility to protect populations from genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity. China believes that that is not the same as
the simple concept of the responsibility to protect,
about which many countries continue to have concerns.
The outcome document elaborated extensively on that
concept. In-depth discussion of the issue should
continue in the General Assembly so that differing
opinions can be heard and doubts cleared up. In that
role, the Security Council cannot and should not
replace the General Assembly.

Finally, we hope that our work on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict will be based on
resolutions such as resolution 1674 (2006), take into
account the specific characteristics and circumstances
of each conflict and seek to gradually achieve fruitful
results in the implementation of those resolutions on
the ground.

