Mr. Fesko (Ukraine): At the outset, I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening today's open
debate. Ukraine associates itself with the statement
made by the Observer of the European Union earlier
today.

Our country is committed to maintaining a
balanced and impartial position on the Middle East
peace process. We are willing to develop stable and
constructive relations with both Israel and Arab States.

On the issue of resolving the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, Ukraine supports the principle of the
coexistence of Israel and the Arab States living side by
side in peace and security. We support the Middle East
peace process and believe that peace in the region can
be achieved only if viable mutual concessions are made
at the negotiating table. Unfortunately, we are currently

observing the deterioration of the situation in the West
Bank and in East Jerusalem, where tensions continue
to rise.

Ukraine is deeply concerned about a long-lasting
worsening of the situation around the Al-Aqsa Mosque.
We call on all parties to show restraint and moderation
on this issue. We believe that it is important to avoid any
provocations that could lead to further confrontations
in a very tense regional context. It is important for
both parties to find the courage to respect the holy
places in accordance with the principles specified in
fundamental international documents, particularly
those ofUNESCO, and the agreements that regulate the
status of the Temple Mount complex.

We believe that direct negotiations between the
parties is the only way to achieve a peaceful solution,
and any unilateral steps will not solve the key problems
standing in the way ofa peace settlement. The strategic
outcome of the direct negotiations is to create two
States that will coexist in peace and security, based on
the expectations of the international community for a
stable, democratic and prosperous Middle East. Ukraine
reiterates its position that the Israeli-Palestinian peace
agreement should lie within the framework of the
unconditional fulfilment by the parties to the conflict
of relevant Security Council resolutions, the Madrid
principles, including land for peace, the agreements
previously reached by the parties and the 2002 Arab
Peace Initiative.

With respect to the situation in Syria, Ukraine
reaffirms its commitment to the universal principles
and basic norms of international law and advocates
strict respect for the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Syria. Ukraine strongly condemns the
ongoing violence and systematic violations of human
rights in the country. We consider that the Syrian
Government bears full responsibility for the present
condition of the country and for the sufferings of its
people caused by the bloody conflict. Fighting between
Government forces, non-State armed groups and listed
terrorist groups continues to result in death, injury and
displacement ofcivilians and the destruction ofproperty
and infrastructure. Parties to the conflict continue
to disregard their obligations under international
humanitarian law, specifically regarding the protection
of civilians.

Ukraine calls for an immediate end to the bloodshed

and for the greater use of political and diplomatic
means to resolve the conflict. In expressing solidarity
with the international community on the urgent need to
eliminate the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
as a global threat, Ukraine believes that sustainable
peace and stability in the region can be achieved only
through a political process aimed at establishing a
Syrian Government of national unity and restoring the
country's sovereignty and territorial integrity.

Ukraine is concerned over Russia's latest aggressive
movements in the Middle East, in particular in Syria.
While using the slogan of confronting international
terrorism as a cover, the Kremlin is yet again carrying
out its policy of breeding and exploiting instability
along with the backing of anti-democratic regimes.
In the light of Russia's continuing military aggression
against Ukraine, which is accompanied by direct
support and funding of terrorism in Ukraine's Donbas
region, Moscow's declared goal of fighting terrorism
in Syria appears especially disingenuous. The attacks
by the Russian Air Force in Syria, which have led to
civilian deaths but have not caused substantial damage
to ISIL, raise serious doubts over Russia's ability to
play a constructive role in the Syrian crisis settlement
process.

