Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): At the outset, Madam
President, allow me to congratulate you and the other
members of the Council on once again convening an
open debate on the important issue of children and
armed conflict. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2001/852) on
children and armed conflict and for the
recommendations he made in that report.

In today's wars, children have become
increasingly involved both as targets of violence and as
combatants. It is estimated that more than 500,000
children have been recruited as combatants in 87
countries. At least 300,000 are actively participating in
conflicts and are directly involved in combat in 41
countries. Although most child soldiers are between 15
and 18 years old, others are as young as 7.

The world leaders who gathered at the 1990
World Summit for Children committed themselves,
among other things, to taking political action at the
highest level to protect children from the scourge of
war and to take measures to prevent further armed
conflict. The Secretary-General has rightly observed,
and we entirely agree with him, that the best way to
address the problem of children in armed conflict is to
prevent armed conflict from occurring in the first
place. Hence his emphasis on the promotion of a
culture of peace and prevention.

Children have been used in support services and
even as soldiers throughout history. However, the rise
in intra-State conflict has exacerbated the conditions,
such as internal displacement, refugee flight and the
separation of families, that are most likely to pressure a
child to become a soldier. It is thus impossible to make
a distinction between a forced and a voluntary child
soldier. Some children join armed groups for food,
survival or to avenge atrocities in their communities;
others have been physically abducted for war by armed
groups.

Children commonly start out in support roles but
often end up on the front lines of combat, planting or
detecting landmines or participating in first-wave
assaults. Often plied with drugs and given promises of
food, shelter and security, child soldiers are at times
forced to commit atrocities against other armed groups
and civilian populations, including sometimes their
own families and communities.

The use of children in armed conflict is greatly
facilitated by an estimated 500 million small arms and
light weapons worldwide. These weapons are
inexpensive and are durable, small, lightweight, easy to
maintain and small enough for a 10-year-old to handle.
Illegal arms trafficking and poor monitoring of the
legal trade make it easy for nearly anyone to obtain
these weapons and to put them into the hands of
children.

That being the case, the protection of children in
armed conflict should be all encompassing. They
should be assured of their physical security, as well as
provided with legal protection under international law.
We cannot deny the fact that in many conflict
situations, the most vulnerable members of the
population, particularly women and children, are
targeted with impunity. My delegation is of the firm
conviction that there should be no leniency or amnesty
for crimes against innocent children. At the same time,
we have to be humane in dealing with children who are
manipulated by unscrupulous adults to take part in
armed conflicts, as in the tragic case of the children of
Sierra Leone.

My delegation also condemns in the strongest
terms the use of rape as a deliberate weapon in warfare.
The spread of a practice that degrades women and
children must not be tolerated. It must be condemned
in the strongest terms. We agree entirely with the call
by the Secretary-General for sexual violence against
women and children to continue to be prosecuted as a
war crime, and with the Statute of the International
Criminal Court, which designates rape as both a crime
against humanity and a war crime.

My delegation commends the excellent work
being carried out by the United Nations Children's
Fund (UNICEF), the Offices of the United Nations
High Commissioners for Refugees and for Human
Rights, as well as Ambassador Olara Otunnu, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, in drawing attention to the
problem and improving the condition of children
affected by situations of armed conflict. While we
appreciate their enormous efforts in working with
Governments to improve the lives of children
everywhere, we are concerned with what we perceive
to be gaps in the protection of children, particularly
those in the Middle East.

We are of the view that in order to have any
meaningful discussion of this subject, the issue of the
Middle East must be addressed. Between the paralysis
of the Security Council on the Middle East issue and
the focus by the Special Representative on situations of
armed conflict predominantly in Africa, the plight of
Palestinian children and children under foreign
occupation seems all but forgotten. It is a sad state of
affairs indeed when we ignore the suffering of these
children merely because we cannot find a political
solution to the problem of the Middle East. Should the
issue be one of lack of mandate, then my delegation
suggests that this be looked into and remedied without
delay.

One must not quibble over issues of mandate
when children become victims of an ongoing conflict,
as is clearly the case in the occupied Palestinian
territory, where out of some 800 Palestinians killed and
over 20,000 wounded since September last year, a very
high proportion comprises children. According to a
UNICEF official based in Arab Jerusalem, Israel has
arrested more than 600 children since September last
year, sometimes holding them in harsh conditions.

Another area of concern to my delegation is the
plight of children suffering under sanctions. Being the
blunt instruments that they are despite efforts to make
them more targeted, sanction regimes have the most
debilitating effect on children. Reports of United
Nations specialized agencies and non-governmental
organizations have highlighted the catastrophic effects
the comprehensive sanctions imposed on Iraq have had,
claiming the lives of more than 1.5 million people,
mostly children. It is shocking and scandalous that,
according to UNICEF, half a million children under the
age of five could have been saved had sanctions not
been imposed on Iraq.

Child and maternal mortality in that country has
increased many times over, ranking among the highest
in the world. If the United Nations does not want to be
further stigmatized by the dire plight of children in
Iraq, immediate steps must be taken to end their
suffering. My delegation has persistently called for the
immediate review and lifting of comprehensive
sanctions. We would urge that all future sanctions - if
they need to be invoked at all as a necessary measure
of last resort - should be imposed only after an in-
depth and careful study of their potential impact on
civilians, especially children.

My delegation welcomes the imminent entry into
force of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in
armed conflict with its tenth ratification, by New
Zealand on Monday, 12 November 2001. It is the
fervent hope of my delegation that the Optional
Protocol will hugely advance our fight to end the use of
children as soldiers. We recommend all Member States
to become parties. For our part, Malaysia is closely and
actively studying the provisions of the Optional
Protocol, with a view to its signature.

