Mr. Kay: First of all, I would like to congratulate
you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for this month, and to thank you for taking
the initiative to circulate many written questions in
advance of today's briefing. I hope my briefing in the
open meeting will cover a lot of those questions; others
will be answered in the closed meeting. I also thank you
for this opportunity to brief the Council on Somalia. I
am particularly pleased to be doing so with my friend
and colleague, Ambassador Sidikou. The partnership
in Somalia between the African Union (AU) and the
United Nations is unique, strong and essential for
success.

I would like to use this briefing, ifI may, to take
a hard look at the challenges ahead this year. When I
look ahead to 2015, I am both excited and worried. I am
excited because this year will be decisive in whether
and how Somalia can become a unified, peaceful and
federal State. I am worried, because the challenges and
risks are significant - delays and setbacks will have an
even greater impact this year than last.

The year 2015 should be the year of federalism and
delivery. The Federal Government's Vision 2016 remains
the plan. But timelines have shortened significantly,
largely as a result of repeated political crises. First, we
need to accelerate the momentum established in 2014
in the federalism process, particularly building the
capacity of existing interim regional administrations
and establishing new ones where they do not exist.
Within the next few months we need to see all the
interim regional administrations in place. I welcome
the intention to establish without delay an interregional
consultative forum in Somalia.

Secondly, with a constitutional referendum expected
in early 2016, the bulk of the constitutional review,
including important discussions on power and resource
sharing, will need to be completed this year.

Thirdly, key decisions and preparations for the
2016 referendum and elections must be made. The long-
delayed National Independent Electoral Commission
and the Boundaries and Federation Commission need
to be established and operationalized urgently. We must
continue to support and build the Federal Government's
leadership and capacity, but inclusive political processes
will be the key. Somalia's regions must play a full part
in State-building and peacebuilding processes, and
minority and marginalized groups need to be included
in them. Women's participation and leadership at the
local and national level must be promoted. I note with
concern that words and good intentions have not so far
translated into action when it comes to selecting women
for senior roles. Traditional elders and political leaders
have a responsibility to make sure this happens.

Political infighting of the kind we saw last year
could derail the whole project. The most recent crisis
has delayed all key Government business for over three
months and left Parliament divided and distracted. I
welcome the appointment of the new Prime Minister,
Mr. Omar Abdirashid Ali Sharmarke, but I am
disappointed that it has not yet been possible to reach
agreement with Parliament on a new Cabinet.

Once a Cabinet has been approved, future crises
need to be avoided. To do this, Federal leaders and
institutions, including Parliament, have a responsibility
to improve their working practices, transparency and
engagement with each other. Those with the greatest
power and influence have the greatest responsibility
to find workable compromises. They will be held
accountable by Somalis and international partners for
further instability and delay.

The importance of the political process this year
will raise the stakes in Somali politics. I worry that
tensions will rise as the 2016 elections get closer.
Somalia's people and nascent institutions will be
breaking historic new ground this year, as the country
moves down the road to federalism and democracy.
It is up to the country's political leaders to guide this
process responsibly, build confidence among all groups
and put aside narrow interests. A spirit of compromise
is the hallmark of strength not weakness.

The sacrifice, courage and dedication of the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the
Somali National Army have had a decisive impact on
security in Somalia. The United Nations Support Office
for AMISOM. (UNSOA) has played an exceptionally
effective part in this success in 2014 and deserves
recognition, as does the European Union (EU) for its
role in meeting much of the costs of AMISOM. and its
deployment of the EU Training Mission to Mogadishu.

The campaign against Al-Shabaab will continue
to advance in 2015. AMISOM. and the Somali
National Army will continue to counter Al-Shabaab's
asymmetric approach. They need the right capability to
defeat this threat. Combating terrorism also requires a
more coherent regional approach, both within Somalia
and in the Horn of Africa more broadly, to undermine

Al-Shabaab's cross-border capability, finances and
intent. Security for Somali civilians must improve.
Al-Shabaab is not the only threat they face. Between
the United Nations, AMISOM. and federal and regional
authorities we need to recognize and respond to the
continuing potential for local inter-clan disputes to lead
to conflict.

I am grateful for the Council's attention to the
need to secure main supply routes to liberated areas.
A great deal depends on it. Secure access will improve
and enable military operations, allow independent and
impartial needs-based humanitarian supplies to be
delivered and, crucially, allow resumption of normal
commercial activity.

Stabilization has to work this year. We need
creative ways to accelerate delivery that strengthens
the legitimacy of local administrations. Collectively we
shall need to accept and manage the risk involved in such
programmes. I look forward to greater implementation
of the Federal Government's stabilization strategy,
particularly local reconciliation and peacebuilding
activities. To do this, we need more secure movement
within liberated areas.

Promoting the rule of law is an important part
of the peace dividend in newly recovered areas and
a key part of State-building more broadly. This year
we need to help extend basic access to justice sector
institutions - police, justice and corrections - to the
regions.

In 2015, we also need to set the foundations for
a sustainable Somali defence sector. Implementing
commitments made in September at the London Security
Event will be key. Coherent support to 10,900 Somali
National Army personnel in joint operations with
AMISOM, the development of a plan for the defence
sector, coherent national security architecture and
militia integration into national security forces are the
challenges. All this must be politically realistic - guided
by and with the grain of the federalism process. It must
also be financially sustainable.

Somalia remains one of the most dangerous places
in which the Council has mandated operations. I pay
tribute to the work and sacrifices of AMISOM. and
Somali troops over the last year. We were all saddened
by the loss of life in the 25 December attack inside
the Mogadishu International Airport area. I thank
the Council members for their heartfelt statements of
support and solidarity.
I am also most grateful for the professional
work of the United Nations Guard Unit, provided by
Uganda. In 2014, it allowed us to expand our presence
in Mogadishu. Without it, we could not achieve the
mandates the Council set for UNSOM. and the United
Nations Support Office for AMISOM. But, as we have
expanded, the Guard Unit has been stretched to the
limits ofits capacity. In 2015, the demands on the United
Nations will only increase. We shall need to expand
our presence in the regions to support stabilization
and Vision 2016. That will require a further expansion
of the Guard Unit. I hope the upcoming joint African
Union-United Nations benchmarking review can
address this issue, among other things.

The United Nations, the African Union (AU), the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD),
the European Union and other international partners are
working ever more closely together to ensure coherent
support to make progress in Somalia. IGAD will
continue to play a critical role in political processes,
particularly at the regional level.

Delivering progress this year will require even
closer collaboration and accountability between the
Federal Government and international partners. The
Copenhagen High-level Partnership Forum, held in
November 2014, reaffirmed that the Somali Compact
remained the right framework for that purpose.
Partnership and mutual accountability need to be
translated into concrete actions and must be extended
to all areas, including aid flows, human rights and
public financial management.

Somalis need to see the coordination and financing
mechanisms established in 2014 deliver in 2015.
Jointly agreed sectoral flagship programmes must be
funded and implemented. I appeal to Member States
and other partners to contribute to the United Nations
Multi-partner Trust Fund.

Somalis also need to see an improvement in human
rights and the protection of women and children this
year. I welcome Somalia's recent ratification of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child. We must also
build the key institutions, particularly the national
Human Rights Commission. Promoting and protecting
human rights must underpin and become a core part
of what existing federal and sub-federal institutions
deliver.

Meanwhile, we must not be complacent about the
humanitarian situation. In 2014, thanks to early warning
and early action, we were able to prevent a deterioration
of one ofthe most dire and enduring humanitarian crises
in the world. But Somalia is still teetering on the edge.
In 2015, we must see concerted action by the Federal
Government and international partners to pull it back
from the brink. That means both an ongoing life-saving
emergency response and implementing longer-term,
durable solutions.

The year 2014 saw important progress in key areas:
the campaign against Al-Shabaab, the State-formation
process and the establishment of some key institutions.
That progress was the result of partnership among
Somalis and between Somalis and the international
community. I am heartened that international partners
remain united and committed to peace, security and
development in Somalia.

Over the past four months, Somalia's increasingly
secure return to the community of nations has been
marked by an unprecedented series of high-level
visits, including by the Secretary-General, along with
the Presidents of the World Bank and the Islamic
Development Bank; the AU Commissioner for Peace
and Security; the Secretary-General and representative
of the League of Arab States; and, most recently, the
Turkish President. The IGAD Council of Ministers
meeting in Mogadishu on 10 January 2015, which was
the first since 1985, was a major sign of commitment
and confidence. I welcome the recommendation to hold
an IGAD summit in Mogadishu in 2015. It is clear that
peace and security in Somalia matters to the region,
Africa and the world.

Despite all the bumps in the road, I still get a
palpable sense from Somalis I meet across the country
that progress is both urgent and possible. We now
have more work to do this year than last. The Somali
Compact and Vision 2016 remain the right frameworks.
The High-level Partnership Forum meeting planned
for May in Mogadishu will be a critical opportunity to
adjust our plans, if necessary, to meet our targets by
September 2016.

For Somalis to have lasting peace, they need to
build a sustainable and inclusive State. Politics this
year must be more inclusive than it was last year,
at both the national and regional levels. The main
responsibility lies with Somali political leaders in and
outside Government, in the regions and in Mogadishu.
I pay tribute to their hard work and daily courage. The
United Nations and other international partners stand
firm in our own commitment. I remain inspired by the
dedication and bravery of the United Nations family in
Somalia, and I thank the Council for its unflinching
support.

