Mr. Seifi Pargou (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
thank you, Madam President, for organizing today's
open debate. I also thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2019/509) and the briefers for their input.

Armed conflicts have serious irreparable impacts
on children. Protecting them from the scourge of
conflict is not an option; it is an obligation. Saving
children means saving the future, future generations
and their peace and prosperity. However, the question
is one of how that noble objective can be achieved.
There are different ways to fulfil it. However, none of
them can be as effective as putting an end to current
conflicts and preventing their re-emergence, as well as
the emergence of new conflicts.

For example, so long as the occupation of Palestine
continues, each and every year more and more children
will be killed, injured, arrested and detained by Israeli
forces. As reflected in the Secretary-General's report,
some of the Palestinian children killed by Israel were
as young as 18 months old. Similarly, most of them
were shot by live ammunition to the upper body, while
reportedly posing no imminent threat to Israeli forces.
The deliberate mass killing and injuring of Palestinian
childrenbylsrael is, no doubt, a clear manifestation ofwar
crimes and crimes against humanity. However, despite
that fact, Israeli forces have never been blacklisted in
the reports of the Secretary-General, which seriously
undermines their accuracy, credibility and impartiality.
The sense of impunity has only emboldened Israel to
kill more children, with more brutality.

A similar pattern of double standards is evident when
the report considers the situation of children in Yemen,
where most of the child casualties were attributed to
air strikes by the coalition. But, in reality, there is no
coalition. It is only Saudi Arabia that continues killing
Yemeni children. It proves that deleting Saudi Arabia
from the top of the list of violators of the rights of
children in the Secretary-General's report has resulted
only in the killing of more Yemeni children by Saudis.
Is it not time to end that approach? A glance at the
practices of the Israelis, the Saudis and Da'esh forces
in Syria and Iraq reveals that there is a real race taking
place among the child killers as to who can kill more
children. We strongly condemn all such inhumane acts,
which are gross violations of international law.

At a time when the situation of children in armed
conflict is alarming, we need to redouble our efforts
to prevent the trend and all violations of children's
rights. That is a common responsibility that should be
pursued responsibly by all. Together, we can and need
to save the lives of our children in armed conflicts and,
thereby, contribute to peace in our time and prosperity
for generations to come.

