Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation wishes to thank Mr. Alvaro de
Soto for his informative briefing.

Last month, for the first time, the Security
Council convened an historic meeting of ministers for
foreign affairs on the situation in the Middle East. That
indicates the importance that the Council attaches to
that situation and its resolve to revitalize the Middle
East peace process. Regrettably, however, more than a
month later, the Middle East peace process remains
stagnant, without any significant progress. That lack of
progress is a cause of deep concern and worry.

The Arab-Israeli conflict is the oldest item on the
Council's agenda and the only one that has been drawn
the sustained attention of the international community
over a long period. The absence of a solution to the
Arab-Israeli conflict has not only affected the lives of
the peoples in the countries of the Middle East -
including Palestine, Israel, Lebanon, Syria, Jordan and
Egypt - but has also touched the hearts of peoples
throughout the world. The achievement at an early date
of a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the
Middle East, and two States, Palestine and Israel,
living side by side in peace and security are the shared
objectives and aspirations of the international
community.

Over the past half-century, there has been no lack
of efforts to resolve the Arab-Israeli conflict. The land-
for-peace principle set out at the Madrid Conference,
the relevant Security Council resolutions, the road map
and the Arab Peace Initiative have been positive and
useful attempts in that regard.

At this point, the root cause and the way out of
the conflict require that the parties demonstrate
political courage, overcome interference, gradually
establish mutual trust, relaunch the peace talks as soon
as possible and implement the commitments that they
have both made. To that end, the two sides should
adopt a forward-looking approach and make the
necessary compromises and concessions. Peace cannot
be achieved through suicide bombings or hostage-
taking; nor can it be achieved through separation walls,
economic sanctions or unilateral attempts to prejudge
the issues related to final status.

While the parties concerned are making efforts,
the international community must not sit idly by, but
should take action to help the parties move forward
towards their common goal. In that connection, we
welcome the Quartet's decision last month to hold
regular meetings with the parties and the countries in
the region and jointly monitor the developments on the
ground and try to find the road to development. We
hope that the Quartet, as the primary mechanism for
resolving the Arab-Israeli conflict, will play a
proactive role in that regard. At the same time, the
Security Council, as the primary organ responsible for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
should undertake innovative efforts in playing its role
and shouldering its responsibilities.

The decades-long Arab-Israeli conflict has caused
many mothers to lose their sons and many wives to
lose their husbands. The former land of peace and
serenity, flowing with milk and honey, has become a
land flowing with blood and tears. We can no longer
remain silent. We must let the seeds of peace take root
in the fertile soils of the Middle East to create a better
life for future generations. That is our historic
responsibility. We hope that peace in the Middle East
can be achieved as soon as possible.

