Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): This is
an important opportunity for the Security Council to
discuss Somalia. I would like to thank the Secretary-
General for his latest report (S/2011/549) and for the
briefing from his Special Representative Augustine
Mahiga. We greatly appreciate the work of the Special
Representative, his team and all the United Nations
agencies active in Somalia. I would also like to
welcome to the Council this morning His Excellency
Prime Minister Abdiweli Mohamed Ali of Somalia. I
thank him for his important comments. I would also
like to thank Mr. Boubacar Diarra for his contribution
to the debate today.

I would like to make four key points - on the
humanitarian situation, the political situation, security
and the United Nations presence in Mogadishu.

First, the situation faced by many Somalis today
is one of almost unimaginable suffering. Twenty years
of civil war and its consequences have left an appalling
legacy, one that is being most acutely felt by the
Somali people - with 4 million needing emergency
assistance and 750,000 facing famine. Tens of
thousands have already died. Thousands more have
been displaced. The United Kingdom stands shoulder
to shoulder with the Somali people at its time of acute
need.

We have already provided $80 million of support
for the relief effort in Somalia, providing relief to over
1 million people. It is vital that we, the international
community, do all that we can to support those parts of
Somalia where suffering is the worst. I call on others to
give timely and generous support. The crisis will not
end in the short term. It will go on into 2012. We need
to ensure that our relief efforts are similarly sustained.

Secondly, what greater incentive could there be
than the prospect of famine stalking the land for
Somalia's political leaders to demonstrate their
commitment to deliver a better future for the Somali
people? To that end, the United Kingdom welcomes the
adoption of the road map to end the transition, as well
as the work by Ambassador Mahiga to facilitate its
adoption. However, we should remember that the road
map was required precisely because of the lack of

1 1-49644

progress on the transitional tasks. The parties to the
road map therefore need to ensure that the key tasks set
out in it are delivered on time and that the transition
comes to a successful conclusion in August 2012. That
will of course require the support of the international
community, and we are ready to give it. But above all,
it requires the political will and commitment of
Somalia's leaders. I welcome the Prime Minister's
encouraging comments this morning on that score.

I urge the Transitional Federal Institutions of
Somalia to demonstrate that they are furthering
reconciliation efforts across the country. We expect the
Transitional Federal Institutions to demonstrate
improved accountability and transparency, in particular
around the allocation and management of resources, to
remain united and to refrain from any further internal
disputes. There should be no doubt that the Security
Council will stick to its commitment to making future
support contingent on progress against the road map.

Thirdly, I would like to welcome the recent
successes of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and the Somali National Security Force in
Mogadishu. I pay particular tribute to the continued
commitment and bravery of the Ugandan and
Burundian troops. Al-Shabaab's almost complete
withdrawal from Mogadishu is a mark of their success,
but it also raises new challenges for AMISOM. As
ever, it is vital that we give AMISOM. the support it
needs to deliver greater protection to the people of
Mogadishu. The United Kingdom contributed over
$5 million earlier this year, and now provides more
than 50 per cent of the funding for the United Nations
Trust Fund in Support of AMISOM. My Government
calls on other international partners to step up and
make contributions without caveat to the AMISOM
Trust Fund.

Finally, I welcome the continued efforts to
increase the United Nations presence across Somalia,
and in Mogadishu in particular. The United Nations has
a vital role to play in supporting the Transitional
Federal Institutions with expertise and technical
assistance in delivering on their road map
commitments. It will need to do so in a coordinated
and integrated manner, working as one with the other
United Nations agencies and partners both in Nairobi
and on the ground in Somalia. I would also like to
welcome moves by other members of the international
community to increase their presence in Mogadishu,
and reiterate my Foreign Minister's commitment to

opening a British embassy in Mogadishu once local
conditions allow.

Now more than ever, the United Nations, the
international community and the Transitional Federal
Institutions must come together to demonstrate our
collective commitment to ending the transition and to
building stability in Somalia. The lives of thousands of
ordinary Somali men, women and children depend on
it. We cannot let this opportunity slip, and we cannot
fail the Somali people at their time of need. We must
hold ourselves and each other to account and deliver
real progress over the coming months.

