The Secretary-General (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank the presidency of Equatorial
Guinea for having organized this high-level debate on
the activities of mercenaries as a source of insecurity
and destabilization in Africa and in particular, pursuant
to the concept note before us (S/2019/97, annex), in
Central Africa. I welcome the presence of the President
of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea at this meeting.

(spoke in English)

The use of mercenaries dates back through the
ages. From antiquity to the medieval era to the present
day, those who fight for financial reward or other
material compensation have been a near constant on the
battlefield. The shadowy nature of the practice makes
data hard to come by, but reports suggest a surge in the
use of mercenaries and other foreign fighters.

While the numerical picture may be murky, the
impacts of mercenaries today are all too clear. The
presence of mercenaries and other foreign fighters
worsens conflict and threatens stability. Some
mercenaries go from war to war, plying their deadly
trade with enormous firepower, little accountability
and complete disregard for international humanitarian
law. Mercenary activities undermine the rule of
law and perpetuate impunity. They abet the illegal
and inequitable exploitation of a country's natural
resources. They provoke large-scale displacement and
intercommunal tension. Even Machiavelli, famously
tolerant of questionable behaviour, wrote in The
Prince that mercenaries are "disunited, undisciplined,
ambitious and faithless".

The nature of mercenary activities has evolved
over the years. Today, they are exploiting and feeding
off other ills, such as transnational organized crime,
terrorism and violent extremism. In Africa, the focus
of today's discussion, mercenary activities remain
a serious concern. We have seen illicit activities and
trafficking by terrorist and mercenary groups operating
in the Sahel, as well as the alleged involvement of
mercenaries in post-election violence in Cote d'Ivoire
in 2010.

Mercenaries and other foreign fighters have
committed innumerable violations of human rights
and humanitarian law against civilians in the Central
African Republic. They have also suppressed movements
of herders along traditional routes, such as the border
with Cameroon. In retaliation for repeated attacks,
pastoralists have hired other armed groups or rebels to
protect themselves and their livestock, thereby fuelling
the cycle of Violence. Equatorial Guinea itself has
reported serious attempts against, its own Government.
Indeed, last year, Ambassador Anatolio Ndong Mba of
Equatorial Guinea underscored to the Council the need
for "vigilance and control of groups that sow insecurity
and instability" (S/PV8J56, p. 10). Meeting these
challenges requires action on many fronts.

First, we must bolster the legal regimes, globally
and nationally. Only 35 States are parties to the
International Convention against the Recruitment,
Use, Financing and Training of Mercenaries, adopted
by the General Assembly in 1989 (resolution 44/34).
Equatorial Guinea recently acceded to the Convention
and will become the 36th party later this month. Only
three current members of the Security Council have
done so. I call on those States that remain outside the
Convention to accede to or ratify it without delay.

The legal framework also includes important African
instruments, including the Organization of African
Unity Convention for the Elimination of Mercenarism
in Africa and the Central African Convention for
the Control of Small Arms and Light Weapons, their
Ammunition and All Parts and Components That Can
Be Used for Their Manufacture, Repair and Assembly.
The United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
and the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace
and Disarmament in Africa will continue to support
implementation of these standards, which will help
advance the African Union's Silencing the Guns by
2020 agenda.

Strengthening the legal regime also means bringing
more precision to it. The international legal definition
of a mercenary is very narrow, and therefore poses a
challenge to effective investigations and prosecutions.

Secondly, we need to increase bilateral, regional
and international cooperation. Cooperation on
border management will be crucial to stemming the
largely unhindered flow of weapons and foreign
armed actors throughout Central Africa. Such steps
could include mixed border commissions, joint
border security monitoring mechanisms and regular
intelligence-sharing between national defence forces.

Cooperation will also be essential for building
the capacity of national institutions responsible for
justice, security and human rights to carry out these
Vital functions and to implement the relevant legal
instruments. A State must be able to exercise a monopoly
on the use of force within its territory, with armed
forces and police capable of protecting people while
upholding the rule of law. The strategic partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union, the
Economic Community of Central African States and
countries of the region is vital. I thank African Union
Commission Chairperson Moussa Faki Mahamat for
his excellent cooperation. The United Nations Standing
Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central
Africa is a further part of the picture, and Interpol is
among the other organizations with an important role
to play.

Thirdly, we need to examine the political,
economic, social and psychological factors that give
rise to mercenary activities. The United Nations
Working Group on the Use of Mercenaries has
recommended a wide range of steps, including
combatting exclusion, improving civic engagement,
ensuring good governance, delivering equitable public
services, and ensuring protection for minorities and
other vulnerable groups.

Enhanced efforts to create opportunities for
young people will be critical to reducing the lure of
mercenaries and the threat of radicalization. We must
also do more to empower women and to address the
gender dimensions of mercenary activities. Our work to
achieve the Sustainable Development Goals can help us
in all of these areas 4 yet another reason to accelerate
those efforts.

The United Nations stands ready to continue to
support Governments in tackling mercenary activities,
including by deepening our dialogue with the relevant
regional organizations and national institutions. I urge
all countries to cooperate with the United Nations
Working Group, including those that the Group wishes
to visit. Together, let us strengthen our work across
the spectrum of this challenge, from prevention to
prosecution, and from mitigating the impacts of
mercenary activities to addressing the root causes that
give rise to them.

