Mr. Berger (Germany): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Abou Moussa
for his briefings. I also thank Mr. Antonio and
Mr. Louis Sylvain-Goma for their statements.

First, I would like to respond to the report
(S/201l/693) on the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA).
Secondly, I will add some remarks on the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA).

With regard to the LRA, which continues to pose
a serious threat to regional security, we concur with the
View that a multifaceted and balanced approach is
needed to tackle the problem. Military efforts carried
out in compliance with international humanitarian and
human rights law are required, as are non-military
efforts, including better coordinated and enhanced
humanitarian aid and development measures. Germany
has given humanitarian assistance since 2009 to
internally displaced persons, refugees and other
vulnerable communities in LRA-affected areas in
South Sudan, the Central African Republic and the
north and east of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We stand ready to continue our support. We
commend the efforts of the United States to work with
the regional militaries, but it is understood that the
countries of the region need to take the lead in
resolving the LRA problem.

We encourage the regional Governments to
strengthen their cooperation at the State, military and
community levels and to assume the primary
responsibility to protect civilians. Enhanced
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, as well
as disarmament, demobilization, repatriation,
reintegration and resettlement (DDRRR) efforts,
should also be given priority in order to encourage
defections from the LRA. In that context, amnesty
based on international standards, reintegration and the
rehabilitation of rank and file ex-combatants should be
pursued in a targeted and coordinated manner.

We hail the establishment of standard operating
procedures by the Uganda People's Defence Force for
the reception and handover of women and children
separated from the LRA to ensure their care and
repatriation. The national security forces of the region
should implement similar procedures, in cooperation
with the relevant United Nations agencies. Children
and women remain most vulnerable. Continuous
human rights violations by the LRA, especially
affecting children and women, remain of deep concern
to us.

More focus and support should be given to the
LRA-affected areas in the Central African Republic,
where local military and United Nations capacity is
limited. At the regional level, the leadership role of the
African Union (AU) in coordinating efforts against the
LRA is crucial. We advocate the swift appointment of
the AU special envoy for the LRA to strengthen
regional cooperation and donor support.

We also encourage the African Union to take
forward its military planning for the AU initiative and
to share information on the design of the military
component and its purpose. We welcome the efforts
undertaken by the United Nations to work in support of
the African Union and its efforts to enhance
cooperation among the United Nations missions,
United Nations offices and all relevant actors in the
region.

We notably support the intensified inter-mission
cooperation between the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) and the United Nations
Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) to repatriate former
LRA elements and MONUSCO's successful
contribution to DDRRR efforts.

Enhanced regional radio stations and community-
led networks in the LRA-affected areas are important
steps to improve the protection of civilians, which is
paramount in the response to the LRA. In that context,
we also appreciate the strengthening of United Nations
peacekeeping capacities, within the missions' mandates
and capabilities in strategic locations, as already
envisaged by Special Representative Hilde Johnson in
connection with the deployment of UNMIS troops to
Western Equatoria state, South Sudan.

Ensuring efficient information-sharing between
the missions and the relevant partners must be a
priority. We encourage the United Nations to identify
further opportunities to help address the LRA threat in
a more coherent and comprehensive manner. We
welcome UNOCA's role as the United Nations political
focal point for the LRA. More specific information on
UNOCA's role in coordinating activities against the
LRA would be useful. This request also figures in the
draft presidential statement submitted by the delegation
of the United Kingdom, which we fully support.

Focusing finally on UNOCA's overall mandate
and first activities, I would like to reiterate our support
for the Regional Office and its contribution to conflict
prevention in Central Africa. The broad range of
requests for assistance from the region stresses the
need to prioritize UNOCA's work programme and to
concentrate on specific activities. It will remain crucial
to build on existing expertise and mechanisms and to
work closely with all relevant actors in order to avoid
duplication. Priority should be given to contributing to
early warning and early political action; to
strengthening the capacities of the Economic
Community of Central African States, including in the
areas of mediation, capacity-building and skills for
addressing cross-border security threats such as the
LRA; and to supporting United Nations missions and
agencies to intensify their regional cooperation.

We consider it to be Vital for member States of
the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) to further strengthen the subregional
organization and to foster their regional cooperation.
We hope that the next ECCAS summit, to be held in
N'Djamena in January 2012, will contribute to that
end. We commend the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General's support to ECCAS in that regard.

