Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): Madam
President, allow me at the outset to congratulate you
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council this month, and to thank you for having
convened this meeting to discuss cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations.

The founding fathers of the United Nations were
committed to including in Chapter VIII of the Charter
language aimed at supporting the efforts of regional
and subregional organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security. That is because they
were fully aware of the fact that international peace is
an indivisible whole and that it was imperative to create
effective partnerships between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations on issues
relating to the maintenance of international peace and
security. Accordingly, one recommendation of the joint
United Nations-African Union panel established by
resolution 1809 (2008) was to set up a mechanism for the
sustainable financing of African Union peacekeeping
missions supported by the United Nations.

Part I of that report focused on methods to promote
the strategic relationship between the United Nations
and the African Union and invigorated joint action
channels between the Security Council and the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union in a manner that
rises to the level ofpartnership and direct coordination,
including decision-making and responsibility-sharing
according to the mandate of each body.

In the context of the cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union, we commend
the ongoing consultation and exchange of Visits between
the two since the creation of the African Union Peace
and Security Council was created in 2004. However,
we still look forward to improved coordination
and closer cooperation, especially in relation to the
support provided by the United Nations to the 10-year
capacity-building programme designed to build and
promote African Union capacity in the various fields of
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding.

With regard to peacekeeping, we would like to
highlight the cooperation between the Secretariat
and the African Union Commission in the context of
the United Nations-African Union Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID), which has proven its value
and effectiveness since the former African Union
Mission in the Sudan was transformed into a hybrid
joint mission between the two organizations on
31 December 2007, pursuant to resolution 1769 (2007).
Thus, the mission became an example and model of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security. In that context, we
would also refer to the joint report of the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission and the Secretary-
General of June 2007, which stated that UNAMID is a
mission with a predominantly African character, with
the United Nations providing financial, technical and
logistical support, including advice and expertise in
various areas that embody cooperation between the two
organizations.

In the same vein, in discussing cooperation
between the African Union and the United Nations,
I would like to highlight another example of the
value of cooperation between the African Union and
international organizations. The regional mediation
mechanism known as the African Union High-
Level Implementation Panel on the Sudan, headed
by Mr. Thabo Mbeki, plays a very important role
in promoting peace within the Sudan and between
the Sudan and South Sudan. That is a constructive
example of cooperation that should be strengthened
and promoted. Such mechanisms should be accorded
sufficient time to finish settling all outstanding issues
between the two countries.

In conclusion, I would like to second and support
the affirmation, made by a number of speakers before
me, that regional and subregional organizations are
more specifically qualified to achieve peace and
security in their regions because of their knowledge
of the culture, nature and specific characteristics of
the areas of conflict within their respective regions.
Accordingly, we appeal to the Security Council to
cooperate with those organizations and provide them
with enough capacity to address those conflicts.

Finally, we support the presidential statement
adopted today (S/PRST/2013/12) and its emphasis on
supporting the growing role of regional and subregional
organizations, which complements the role of the
United Nations in maintaining international peace and
security. We also commend and support the presidential
statement's mention of promoting the capacity of
national justice systems in order to contribute to
accountability.

