Mr. Danon (Israel): Israel congratulates you, Sir,
on assuming the presidency ofthe Security Council this
month. We welcome and convey our best wishes to the
new members of the Council.

It is with grave concern that I again raise the
issue of the threat we in the Chamber all face. That
threat comes from Iran. We all saw what happened in
Iranian towns and cities. Brave people - young and
old alike - marched in the streets, demanding a better
life. They chanted, "Not Gaza. Not Lebanon. I give my
life for Iran". The Iranian people know that when the
regime tries to steal their lives, it does so by stealing
their resources. That is why they rose up against their
Government. We salute their moral fight.

But I am not here to address the Council only
about the noble struggle of the Iranian people. I take
the floor to talk about the dangerous activities of the
Iranian regime, which become deadlier each day. We
have cautioned the Council about Iranian extremism
time and again. We have warned the Council about
Iranian tentacles of terror spreading far and wide. We
have repeatedly shown clear evidence of Iran's build-up
in Lebanon through its proxy Hizbullah. We have also
seen that many countries choose to remain silent while
Iran sneaks into Israel's backyard. Iran has invested up
to $35 billion in Syria. Irepeat - $35 billion.

We have spoken about the terror that Iran spreads
throughout the world. We have warned about Iran's
military advancement in our region, but words are not
enough. I will now share with the Council classified
information that clearly shows the extent of Iran's
military build-up in Syria. We are releasing that
information so that the world understands the growing
Iranian threat.

Today, there are 82,000 fighters directly under
Iranian authority in Syria. They include 3,000 members
of Iran's infamous Revolutionary Guard Corps, 9,000
fighters from Iran's proxy Hizbullah, and 10,000
members of violent Shia militias recruited from across
the Middle East, including from Iraq, Afghanistan and
Pakistan. In addition, Iran directly commands 60,000
local Syrian fighters. These are hard facts that cannot
be disputed. Iran's military actively trains militant
extremists from all over the world, and uses Syria as its
strategic base. The Iranians themselves claim that the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) is on the run
in Syria. Why do they continue to send in their forces?
Why do they continue to recruit extremists to be killed
on the battlefield in Syria? Why does Iran build bases
to house those fighters for the long-term? The answer
is clear. They do so to further destabilize Syria and our
region, further threaten Israel and further terrorize the
entire free world.

Iran's dangerous behaviour does not end with the
fighters it brings to Syria. It is also building missile
factories in Syria and its presence turns the innocent
people in surrounding areas into human shields. Iran
is turning the entire country of Syria into the largest
military base in the world. In fact, it is trying to
destabilize every aspect of Syria. The Iranian regime is
doing this so that it can maintain control over a country
that has been destroyed. It needs that control so that it
can destabilize the entire region. One thing is clear. The
Shiite crescent has reached our doorstep. Iran is ready
to strike at a moment's notice. General Mohammad
Ali Falaki, of the Iranian Revolutionary Guard, has
confirmed that alarming fact, describing the Guard's
forces throughout the Middle East as one unified army,
created to protect Shiite power, defend the Supreme
Leader and attack Israel from the North, not from
a string of Iranian terror cells but from a full-blown
Iranian military frontier. From Israel's perspective, our
northern border is one northern front, with Iran's proxy
Hizbullah on the one hand and Iran in Syria on the
other. We can no longer distinguish between Lebanon
and Syria.

Let me be clear. Israel has taken no side in the
Syrian civil war. We support the 1974 Agreement on
Disengagement, but we will always defend ourselves.
We will always take any action necessary to secure our
borders and protect our citizens. The Shiite crescent
stretches far beyond Israel. It is larger and more powerful
than ever, and it is aiming for the entire world. The
entire international community should be concerned
about Iran, because even though Iran is starting with
Israel, it is the rest of the world that is next. An Iranian
presence in Syria will evolve just as ISIS did. It will
spill quickly into Europe and then across the globe.

Iran nearly doubled its trade with Europe in the
past year. Major European corporations have signed
multibillion-dollar deals since 2015. One European
country has signed a $720 million solar-energy deal
with Iran. Another has pledged nearly $600 million
in credit to its companies doing projects in Iran. That
is a mistake. The world may be taking advantage of
the lifted sanctions now, but it cannot ignore where
the money is going. Since the signing of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action in 2015, Iran has only
increased its military spending. In 2014, 17 per cent
of Iran's Government spending was on the military,
but last year, in 2017, the number jumped to 22 per
cent - $23 billion spent on missiles, arms and other
weapons ofwar. In 2018 Iran's military budget will only
continue to grow. The money that the regime earns from
its economic deals with other countries will be spent
on ballistic-missile tests, nuclear development and the
promotion of worldwide terror. In the past two years
Iran has conducted 25 ballistic-missile tests, in direct
defiance of resolution 2231 (2015). Its evil destruction
funds will go straight to Syria and after that will be
used against the rest of the world. While the world is
making a profit, Iran is building an empire.

Let us take a closer look at Iran's spending. It
allocates nearly $1.5 billion to its proxies in Yemen,
Lebanon, Syria, Iraq and Gaza, as well as in Judea and
Samaria. That is right. We are facing Iran to our North
and our South. Iran sends more than $800 million a
year to Hizbullah alone, and Hizbullah uses that money
to terrorize northern Israel and southern Lebanon.
Through Hizbullah, Iran has violated multiple Security
Council resolutions by funding terror organizations"
operations on our border. They store illegal weapons
in towns and villages and exploit non-governmental
organizations in order to mask their evil plans. Iran
has sent more than $100 million each to the Houthi
rebels in Yemen, to the Palestinian Islamic Jihad and
Hamas, and to Shiite militias in Syria and Iraq. The
lifting of the sanctions in the wake of the nuclear deal
has released $100 billion in frozen Iranian assets, and
the Iranian regime is now exploiting that money, using
it to increase its slush fund for terror.

The Shiite crescent is alive and well. We must not
let Iran turn it into a Shiite horizon. Iran has a simple
but criminal plan. First, it wants to destroy Israel.
Secondly, it wants to destabilize and terrorize the
region. Thirdly, it wants to threaten the entire world.
When Iran takes control, we are all in danger. Some of
those here may be looking the other way right now, but
soon enough the Iranian guns will be pointing directly
at them. The path forward is clear. The Security Council
knows what must be done. Resolution 2231 (2015)
must be fully implemented. Iran cannot be allowed
to continue funding worldwide terror, pursuing its
dangerous missile programme and growing its military
presence abroad.

I have laid out troubling new facts about Iran's
military presence in Syria. None ofus should sit idly by
in the face of its aggression. We must all stand strong
in defence of our shared values. Now is the time for the
Council to unite and to firmly and effectively confront
this menace to international stability.

