Mr. Keating (New Zealand): It is a great pleasure for
me to sit here at this table under your presidency, Sir. I
know full well that the Council is in extremely good hands,
and we wish you all the very best for the remainder of your
term.

I would also like to request the delegation of
Rwanda to convey to our friend and colleague, the
Ambassador and Permanent Representative of Rwanda,
our congratulations and thanks for what he did; his hard
work during the month of December was much
appreciated.

Like the Ambassador of Brazil, I would like to
extend my congratulations to the new members of the
Council. We are very pleased to see them all taking over
their very important responsibilities. They have our
support, and in some ways also our sympathy.

I do not intend this morning to set out the full range
of New Zealand's views on our collective efforts to
maintain international peace and security. My Foreign
Minister did that in the General Assembly general debate
last September, and what he said at that time seems to me
to be still relevant. Instead, I want to make some
preliminary comments on the Secretary-General's
"Supplement to An Agenda for Peace". I hope that you,
Sir, and the members of the Secretariat will forgive me
for the fact that I have not come here with a prepared
statement.

I think that some of the important reforms that we
have made in the processes of the Council in the past
year or so have been predicated on the fact that there
ought to be a better dialogue between the members of the
Council and the Members of the United Nations that are
not members of the Council. It seems to me that, if we
are to have a candid dialogue, we need to be able to
come here to the Council and have an exchange of views.
We certainly should not come with a closed mind and an
inability to respond to the points that have been made in
the course of discussion.

In referring to the Secretary-General's "Supplement
to An Agenda for Peace", I would like to begin with his
conclusion because I think it is very important and I
endorse every word of it. He says that hard decisions are
needed. Now, they are not needed because we have
failed; I believe that real progress has been made. Hard
decisions are needed because we have begun to succeed.
The United Nations has begun to work in the area of
international peace and security in the way it was
designed to do.

It seems to me that, for most of the past 50 years,
the United Nations has been crawling. In the past few
years, we have begun to learn to walk and even, perhaps,
to run a little bit. Naturally, there have been a few

 

stumbles. That is life. But let us not pay heed to those who
have spoken in this debate to advocate that the United
Nations should go back to crawling because that is what it
knows best. We stand firmly with the Secretary-General
when he says:

"There is no reason for frustration or pessimism"
(S/1995/1, para. 105).

We should go forward with confidence and courage.
Let me turn to the part of the Secretary-General's
Supplement on preventive diplomacy and peacemaking.
This is a fundamental task set out in the Charter of the
United Nations. I find it somewhat curious that in this very
important and substantial section of the Supplement the
Charter is not mentioned at all. The Secretary-General notes
in paragraph 25 that the objective is to find ways of
enabling the United Nations to perform better the roles
envisaged for it. I think that there is an anomaly in the fact
that when we look at the Charter and at what it says about
preventive diplomacy and peacemaking we find that there
is absolutely no mention at all of a role for the Secretary-
General in those areas. Instead, we find a very substantial
Chapter - Chapter VI - which gives primary
responsibility to the Security Council in matters which, in
our terminology of today, can only be described as
preventive diplomacy and peacemaking.

I would be the first to endorse the very significant
contributions that successive Secretaries-General have made
to preventive diplomacy and peacemaking, and I would be
the first to insist that those should continue. But I do think
that it is curious that the Security Council's role in
preventive diplomacy and peacemaking is somehow
submerged. It does not appear in the document and it does
not appear in the literature. I think that the Security Council
has a very important role to play in preventive diplomacy
and peacemaking, and I would note in this context that one
of the principal conclusions the Secretary-General has
reached is that one of the things that are frustrating his
efforts in preventive diplomacy and peacemaking is the lack
of a norm by which States should accept the good offices
of the United Nations.

Let me say in response to this that I agree that there
should be a norm, but when you look at the Charter you
see that there is already such a norm, set out in Article 37.
Article 37 is in fact more than a norm - it is a legal
obligation on all States Members of the United Nations. If
it proves impossible to resolve a dispute or conflict in a
face-to-face manner, there is an obligation to bring that
matter to the Security Council. So the norm for the
involvement of the United Nations is already there in our
Charter. I believe that what this demonstrates is that we
need to look for some new kind of partnership between
the Council and the Secretariat in which they both see
themselves as being engaged in a cooperative effort to
implement the principles that are already set out in the
Charter.

As the members of the Council are well aware, there
has been for quite some time a degree of concern and
apprehension amongst the non-members of the Council,
which gets expressed from time to time in the General
Assembly, that the Security Council should put more
effort into action under Chapter VI rather than Chapter
VII. Speaking personally, I believe that the Security
Council has actually been doing that and doing a lot of it
very successfully. But because it is not recognized in the
way I have described, it is perhaps missed.

How would such a partnership between the
Secretariat and the Security Council work? It seems to me
that the model perhaps could be the work that was
undertaken last year in the mission which the Security
Council sent to Burundi. I do not think that there is any
doubt at all that the Security Council played a very
important role in preventive diplomacy and peacemaking
when the mission went to Burundi at a very critical time.

I think also that my own personal experience on a
mission to Somalia reinforces this conclusion. Preventive
diplomacy and peacemaking were not part of the original
mandate of the mission that went to Somalia, but
certainly there was an unexpected outcome from that
mission. Before we left, we were informed in a briefing
by the Secretariat that it was to be expected during our
time there that the parties would both unilaterally
announce the formation of competing governments. I
think there is no doubt that the presence of the mission in
Somalia had a very important impact in persuading the
parties to hold back from what would have been a
disastrous outcome, both for the United Nations and for
any prospects of reconciliation. Now, four or five months
later, that restraint still prevails.

I think that it is also instructive to note that this
partnership can work not only here in New York, but also
on the ground. It was certainly the experience of those of
us who went to Somalia that the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and his political civilian advisers
greatly valued the presence in the field of another organ

 

of the United Nations to work with them at a critical time.

I think we can, and must, replicate these two examples
in other areas, and I have one practical suggestion that
members of the Council might like to reflect on. Over time,
a practice could perhaps develop whereby, when the
Council takes up an issue under its preventive diplomacy
and peacemaking mode, it might look to appointing, either
formally or informally, one Member State that clearly has
no interest in the issue in question to act as what other
organs of the United Nations might call a rapporteur or a
coordinator - or what might be called a godfather. That
Member State would take responsibility for a particular
problem the Council is dealing with, and it might also work
with the Department of Political Affairs to ensure that the
Council's handling of its role in preventive diplomacy and
peacemaking is appropriate and timely. If a mission is
called for, then a mission can take place.

I am conscious of the fact that many Members of the
United Nations would feel very strongly that, if the Council
were to become more involved in preventive diplomacy and
peacemaking, its members should always remember their
roots - that they are Members of a broader Organization.
I believe that it is possible for the Council to play this role
and to involve the States of a region that would have a
special interest in its handling of an issue.

Again, I should like to give an example from the work
of the mission to Somalia. I believe that a very important
event during that mission was the convening, in Nairobi, of
a meeting between the Council mission and the
representatives of the countries of the region. We were able
to brief them on what the Council was doing and to receive
their views on how we should handle the situation upon our
return to New York. So I think it is possible for the
Council to play a much more active role in peacemaking
and preventive diplomacy.

I should like to turn now to the question of peace-
keeping. I was very struck by what the Secretary-General
said in paragraph 36, that peace-keeping and peace
enforcement

"should be seen as alternative techniques and not as
adjacent points on a continuum, permitting easy
transition from one to the other."

I thought long and hard about that sentence, and I
concluded that, while I agree that this is the idea], it does
not correspond to what happens in the real world.

We should always be striving to make the real world
conform to our ideals, but I want to give an example of
why I think the real world is different. Let us look at
what confronted General Dallaire in Rwanda. General
Dallaire had a very critical problem; he had to respond to
a situation of desperate human need. Did he protect the
civilians in the stadium or did he not? In the real world,
there is always, I think, transition from peace-keeping to
peace enforcement, where occasionally force will need to
be used without consent.

Take the case of Bosnia. Again, I feel the Secretary-
General's analysis is a little faulty. I think this is a case
where the Security Council did listen to what the
international community was saying. Some would say it
did not go far enough, but the Security Council did
respond, and it did give a partially forceful mandate.
I believe that human history suggests that decisions
to go to war - to use force - are rarely taken in a
clinical way, and the recent history of the United Nations
suggests that we will not be immune from that tendency.

Finally, I should like to make a comment about
command and control. The Secretary-General says that
the Security Council has tended to engage in micro-
management. I think that that is a straw man; I think the
Security Council does not even engage in management,
let alone micro-management, of issues in the field. The
Security Council does require a detailed understanding of
the operational conditions in the field, and this is not only
a question of information.

On the question of information, we know that the
fog of war argument does not always hold up, because
there are large amounts of information available in the
Secretariat: witness the digest that we used to receive, but
not longer receive. But there is a broader question, a
question of political accountability between the
Secretariat, which is the administrative organ of the
United Nations, and the policy organ of the United
Nations, which is the Security Council and on occasion
the General Assembly.

Efficiency is important, but all democratic structures
must make a trade-off between bureaucratic efficiency
and political efficiency. If we make bureaucratic
efficiency an absolute, this results in "bureaucratic
capture". I believe that in all modern democracies being
politically efficient means a quite detailed level of
intrusion into the decision-making that is being done by
those charged with implementing policy, a detailed

 

intrusion by those responsible for the political implications
of the action being taken. That is certainly the case in my
country, and I know it is the case in many of the other
countries represented here in this Chamber. I do not think
that the United Nations should be any different.

A final word about sanctions: sanctions have proved
themselves to be an important tool in the armoury of the
United Nations, and I think the report slightly underrates
the significance of this. I can see that there is a very strong
argument for Members of the United Nations impacted by
sanctions to support the concept of a mechanism to
investigate the economic implications. I believe that there
is merit in considering this issue, but it should not be
looked at in isolation. We must bear in mind that there are
other issues relating to sanctions that should be studied at
the same time. Enforcement is one of them. Sanctions
committees are constantly made aware of the fact that
action in the field is being affected by events that are
outside United Nations control.

I think if we were to have a study of a mechanism, it
should also study the question of enforcement and who
pays for enforcement, because, in the view of my
authorities, a "user-pays" element in the administration of
sanctions regimes is long overdue, and I believe that the
Security Council could well encourage the study of such a
"user-pays" system.

I do not want to leave the impression that with these
comments, which have been somewhat critical of the report,
we are any less supportive of the excellent work that has
been done by the Secretary-General in following up "An
Agenda for Peace". As those who have worked with us in
the past know, there has been no stronger supporter in the
Security Council of the Secretary-General, his staff, the
Department of Peace-keeping Operations and the
Department of Political Affairs, and I intend that New
Zealand will continue to maintain that level of support for
the United Nations in its role outside the Security Council.

I thank you, Mr. President, for the excellent
opportunity you have provided us to express some views on
the "Supplement to an Agenda for Peace", and we wish you
well.

