The President (spoke in French): As this is the
first meeting of the Security Council for the month of
August, I should like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute, on behalf of the Council, to His Excellency
Mr. Wang Guangya, Permanent Representative of
China to the United Nations, for his service as
President of the Security Council for the month of July
2007. I am sure that I speak for all members of the
Council in expressing sincere appreciation to
Ambassador Wang for the great diplomatic skill with
which he conducted the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in the Middle East

Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolution
1701 (2006) (S/2007/392)

Letter dated 26 June 2007 from the Secretary-
General to the President of the Security Council
(S/2007/382)

The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Israel and Lebanon, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Carmon
(Israel) and Ms. Ziade (Lebanon) took seats at
the Council table.


The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2007/392, containing the report of the
2

Secretary-General on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1701 (2006). Members also have
before them document S/2007/382, which contains the
text of a letter dated 26 June 2007 from the Secretary-
General to the President of the Security Council,
transmitting the report of the Lebanon Independent
Border Assessment Team.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council recalls its previous
resolutions and statements on Lebanon. It
welcomes the report of the Secretary-General of
28 June 2007 (S/2007/392). It reaffirms its strong
support for the sovereignty, territorial integrity,
unity and political independence of Lebanon
within its internationally recognized borders and
under the sole and exclusive authority of its
Government. The Council encourages efforts
towards national reconciliation and political
dialogue. It reiterates its full support for the
legitimate and democratically elected
Government of Lebanon, calls for full respect for
the democratic institutions of the country, in
conformity with its constitution, and condemns
any effort to destabilize Lebanon. The Council
also reiterates its full support for the efforts
carried out by the Lebanese army to ensure
security and stability throughout Lebanon and
reaffirms that there should be no weapons or
authority in Lebanon other than those of the
Lebanese State.

"The Security Council reiterates its
attachment to the full implementation of all
provisions of resolution 1701 (2006) and urges all
concerned parties to cooperate fully with the
Security Council and the Secretary-General to
achieve a permanent ceasefire and a long-term
solution as envisioned in the resolution. It also
takes note of the Government of Lebanon's letter,
in which it reaffirmed its commitment to the role
of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL) and asked for the renewal of its
mandate. The Council reaffirms its full support
for UNIFIL, condemns all terrorist attacks against
it and calls on all parties to abide by their
obligation to respect the safety of United Nations
personnel. It also emphasizes the need for
UNIFIL to enhance its investigative capacity in
07-44935
response to the attacks. The Council welcomes
the tripartite arrangements referred to in the
report, notes the commitments to reach an
agreement on the northern part of Ghajar and
encourages the parties to cooperate with UNIFIL
to visibly mark the Blue Line. It expresses its
deep concern at the increase in Israeli violations
of Lebanese airspace and appeals to all parties
concerned to respect the cessation of hostilities
and the Blue Line in its entirety.

"The Security Council, in this context,
expresses grave concern at persistent reports of
breaches of the arms embargo along the Lebanon-
Syria border. It expresses concern at any
allegation of rearming of Lebanese and
non-Lebanese armed groups and militias and
reiterates that there should be no sale or supply of
arms and related materiel to Lebanon except as
authorized by its Government. In this regard, it
expresses concern about the recent statement by
Hizbullah that it retains the military capacity to
strike all parts of Israel, and calls on all parties to
refrain from statements and activities that could
jeopardize the cessation of hostilities. The
Council takes note of the detailed information
conveyed by the Government of Lebanon about
the dangerous activities of armed elements and
groups, in particular PFLP-GC and Fatah-
Intifada, and reiterates its call for the disbanding
and disarmament of all militias and armed groups
in Lebanon. It underscores the obligation of all
Member States, in particular in the region, to take
all necessary measures to implement paragraph
15 of resolution 1701 (2006) to enforce the arms
embargo.

"The Security Council welcomes the
recommendations of the Lebanon Independent
Border Assessment Team (LIBAT) and looks
forward to their implementation. It requests the
Secretary-General, in consultation with the
Government of Lebanon, to assess their
implementation and to regularly update the
Council on this issue in his regular reports on the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006),
including, as appropriate and in coordination with
the Government of Lebanon, on the basis of
follow-up field visits. The Council welcomes the
assistance provided by donors to help the
Government of Lebanon to secure its borders and
07-44935
encourages further such assistance, including by
continuing to provide equipment and border
security experts. Underlining that Syria and
Lebanon share responsibility for controlling their
border, it notes that the Government of Syria has
stated that it has taken measures, reiterates its call
on that Government to take further measures to
reinforce control at the border, and looks forward
to additional proposals in this regard in light of
the Secretary-General's visit to Syria. The
Council also calls for enhanced cross-border
cooperation to secure the Syrian-Lebanese border.

"The Security Council emphasizes the need
for greater progress on all the principles and
elements required for a permanent ceasefire and
long-term solution identified in resolution 1701
(2006). The Council expresses deep concern that
Hizbullah has not returned the two Israeli soldiers
it abducted, or even provided proof of life, and
calls for their immediate and unconditional
return. It further encourages efforts to urgently
settle the issue of Lebanese prisoners detained in
Israel.

"The Council expresses deep concern at the
presence of unexploded ordnance in southern
Lebanon and renews its support for the request of
the Secretary-General to Israel to provide to the
United Nations detailed data on its use of cluster
munitions in southern Lebanon.

"The Security Council, bearing in mind the
relevant provisions of resolutions 1559 (2004),
1680 (2006) and 1701 (2006) on the delineation
of the Syrian-Lebanese border, looks forward to
the reactivation of the Syrian-Lebanese boundary
committee. It takes note of the solid progress
made by the cartographer towards a provisional
determination of the geographical extent of the
Shab'a farms and welcomes the intention of the
Secretary-General to engage in further
discussions with the parties on the Shab'a farms
area, including on its territorial definition, that
will strengthen a diplomatic process aimed at
resolving this key issue in accordance with the
relevant provisions of resolution 1701 (2006). It
also reiterates its appreciation for the process
launched by the Secretary-General to investigate
the implications of the interim proposal contained
in the seven-point plan of the Government of
Lebanon regarding the Shab'a farms area.
3

Recalling paragraph 62 of the report of the
Secretary-General, the Council underlines that
progress should also be made on all the other
issues identified in operative paragraph 10 of
resolution 1701 (2006). In this regard, the
Security Council requests, pursuant to resolution
1701 (2006), that the Secretary-General continue
to develop, in liaison with relevant actors and the
concerned parties, proposals to implement the
relevant provisions of the Taif Accords, and
resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1680 (2006),
including those relating to disarmament.

"The Security Council stresses the
importance of, and the need to achieve, a
the

comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the
Middle East, based on all its relevant resolutions,
including its resolutions 242 (1967) of
22 November 1967 and 338 (1973) of 22 October
1973."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2007/29.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 11.40 a.m.
07-44935

