Mr. Darwish (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, we would like to congratulate
you, Sir, on your country's assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. We would
like to express our appreciation for the great efforts
made by the Permanent Representative of South Africa
and his delegation during his friendly country's
presidency of the Council during the previous month.
That presidency was characterized by South Africa's
firm commitment to noble principles and values and its
great legacy of struggle against racism and racial
discrimination and the affirmation of the rights of
peoples in accordance with the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations and the bases of
international law. I should like also to express our
thanks to Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, for his briefing to us this morning.

This meeting of the Security Council to review
the situation in the Middle East this month coincides
with the sixty-first commemoration by my country of
the end of French colonialism on its soil - colonialism
from which we suffered immensely.

It is well known to Council members that the
Middle East, for many decades, has suffered from
colonialism, division, occupation, invasion, injustice,
repression, suppression, the falsification of facts,
instability and the use of force against its peoples.

The continued Israeli occupation of the Arab
territories in Palestine, the Golan and southern
Lebanon; its refusal to respond seriously to the Arab
Peace Initiative; and the fact that it continues to beat
the drums of war is clear evidence once again of its
continued aggression against the rights of our peoples
and underscores the fact that Israel does not believe in
peace.
In response to the fact that successive Israeli
Governments have shirked the requirements of a just
and comprehensive peace through the use of flimsy
pretexts and excuses that do not hold up in the face of
facts, the Arab leaders, at their summit meeting last
month, relaunched the Arab Peace Initiative. Israel
responded to the Arab Peace Initiative with trickery
and prevarication and set out conditions that practically
amount to a complete rejection of that initiative.

Allow me on this occasion to inform the Council
of some of the most important elements contained in
the Arab Peace Initiative which has been rejected by
Israel since its adoption in 2002. Israel continues to
prevaricate in order to render it null and void. The Arab
Peace Initiative underscores the Arab commitment to a
just and comprehensive peace as a strategic option and
the fact that a comprehensive peace process cannot be
partitioned. In accordance with the principles of
international legitimacy, the Arab Peace Initiative
emphasizes that a just and comprehensive peace in the
region can be achieved only through a complete Israeli
withdrawal from occupied Palestinian and Arab lands,
including the occupied Syrian Golan, to the 4 June
1967 border, and on the basis of a just and agreed upon
solution to the problem of Palestinian refugees, in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 194 (III)
of 1948.

The Arab Peace Initiative rejects all forms of
forced settlement of Palestinian refugees and
emphasizes the establishment of a sovereign,
independent Palestinian State, with Jerusalem as its
capital. In implementation of the decisions of the
Riyadh summit, the Ministerial Committee for the Arab
Peace Initiative met in Cairo on 18 April, where the
ministers adopted a plan to present the Arab point of
View on ways to implement the initiative. They
emphasized that the Arab commitment to a just and
comprehensive peace and to the settlement of the
Israeli-Arab conflict also requires a commitment by the
Israeli Government in order to bring about such a
peace.

In that connection, it is imperative for Israel to
take the necessary confidence-building measures and to
begin a serious negotiation process on all tracks within
a specific timeframe, on the basis of the Arab Peace
Initiative and the decisions of relevant international
authorities and building on what has been achieved
previously in the peace process.

The Arab ministers called for the convening of an
international meeting, held under the auspices of the
United Nations and with the participation of the
relevant regional and international parties, to launch a
direct negotiation process on all tracks, in accordance
with the agreed terms of reference and with a specific
timetable.

Successive Israeli Governments have been
afflicted with the illness of aggression and have
rejected the hand of peace when it was extended to
them. Israel has continued to carry out a policy of
aggression, assassination, continuous escalation and
provocation. The aggression against Lebanon last July
and the assassination by Israeli death squads of
Palestinian leaders and citizens, in addition to the
continued detention of a large number of members of
the Legislative Council of the Palestinian Authority,
including the Speaker of the Council and a large
number of Palestinian ministers, shows clearly the
Israeli Government's contempt for international law,
internationally binding resolutions and the principle of
respect for the democratic will of peoples.

Israel continues to violate the truce agreement
reached five months ago between the Palestinian and
Israeli sides, committing daily killings and destroying
Palestinian property and infrastructure. Israel continues
to use Palestinian citizens as human shields, in addition
to continuing the inhumane siege that it has imposed
on the Palestinian people and continuing to build the
separation wall, in flagrant violation of the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice, United
Nations resolutions and international law.

Since it occupied the Arab Syrian Golan, Israel
has continued to use various means to confiscate land,
Judaize the population, destroy the people's sense of
national identity and expel them from their land, cities,
Villages and farms. Those Villages and towns numbered
244 in 1967. Israel has dedicated resources and
capacity to establish settlements and attract settlers
from all over the world - people who have no
relationship whatsoever to the occupied territory - all
to deprive the people of the occupied Syrian Golan of
their lands, their livelihoods, their fundamental
freedoms and their human rights. Israel has attempted
to annex the Syrian Golan and impose its laws,
jurisdiction and administration upon it. But
international legitimacy, as represented in the relevant
United Nations resolutions, has declared its rejection of
that decision. The Security Council, in its resolution
497 (1981), decided that the Israeli decision to annex
the Syrian Golan was null and void and without
international legal effect.

Israel continues to bury its nuclear waste and
plant mines in the occupied Syrian Golan, despite the
fact that they pose a serious threat to the lives of Syrian
citizens and to their environment. Israel also continues
to imprison many Syrian citizens in the occupied
Syrian Golan under inhumane conditions, treating them
in a manner that contradicts all international laws and
conventions. My country calls on the Security Council
to take serious measures against Israel to force it to
release the Syrian prisoners it holds, some of whom
have been detained in Israel's prisons for more than 25
years.

I would also like to point out that, on the morning
of 18 April 2007, a 15-member Israeli motorized force
raided the house of the Syrian citizen Ghassan Rabah
in the occupied town of Majdal Shams. As a result of
the brutal treatment that he received, he was
subsequently transported to the hospital, along with his
wife. On the same morning, Israeli occupation forces
arrested the engineer Faris Majid, also of Majdal
Shams, after raiding and searching his house. He was
subjected to the same brutal treatment at the hands of
the Israeli occupying forces.

Syria has chosen a just and comprehensive peace
as a strategic option to restore the Golan and the other
occupied Arab territories. Israel must understand that
such a peace requires that it withdraw from the
occupied Golan to the line of 4 June 1967 and from all
other occupied territories.

Before I conclude, it is imperative that I respond
to comments made by some delegations with regard to
certain references made at this meeting to claims -
particularly on the part of Israel - concerning
transborder weapons movements, because such claims
can only elicit scorn and have no connection to reality.
Syria has expressed at the highest levels its
commitment to implementing resolution 1701 (2006).
The Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, referred to
this very clearly yesterday at his press conference in
Damascus. Syria has taken all the necessary measures
on its borders to fulfil its obligations under that
resolution. Moreover, in his most recent report, the
Secretary-General emphasized that Syria is committed
to doing its part to implement the resolution.
Israel continues its violations of resolution 1701
(2006), which have been documented in many reports
from the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon. But
the matter does not stop there; the Lebanese authorities
have uncovered Israeli weapons and Israeli spy
networks in Lebanon. They have also uncovered agents
of the Israeli Mossad who have committed political
assassinations in Lebanon. All of this is in flagrant

violation of resolution 1701 (2006), aggravates the
Lebanese situation and harms the friendly relations
between Syria and Lebanon.

This morning, Mr. Pascoe - whom we thank for
his briefing - stated that the Israeli violations of
Lebanese airspace, carried out under the pretext of
responding to another violation, are unjustified. What
would members say, if there were no violations to
which to respond, as proven by the evidence and facts.
In that regard, we would like to note that the Lebanese
authorities at the highest levels - including the
President, the Prime Minister, the Deputy Prime
Minister, the Minister of Defence and other senior
officials - here at the United Nations a few weeks ago
and elsewhere, have denied that there have been any
instances of weapons smuggling across the Lebanese-
Syrian border. That is also emphasized by the
Secretary-General in paragraph 29 of his report
(S/2007/147). In that connection, we would like to
point out that the Lebanese Minister of Defence
recently stated that not even a mosquito could get
through the Lebanese-Syrian border.

Syria has doubled the number of guards along its
border and has been conducting patrols around the
clock. In addition, it has strengthened the earthen
berms along the border to prevent any kind of
smuggling. We recall that Syrian security officials,
following up on their efforts to prevent weapons
smuggling to Lebanon, found a truck, bearing Iraqi
license plates, containing smuggled weapons bound for
Lebanon. We have provided the Secretary-General with
evidence and other information concerning that
incident, and we provided the Security Council with
detailed information about it in a letter dated 26 March
2007. In that connection, we would like to inform
Council members that the meetings of the joint
Lebanese-Syrian committee are continuing. The
committee has held two meetings, and a third will be
held at the end of this month to discuss controlling the
border between the two countries and preventing any
form of smuggling across it.
In conclusion, I wish to point out that Prime
Minister Olmert recently stated that the decision to
commit aggression against Lebanon had been taken
four months before it began in July 2006. Moreover, a
former representative of one of the five permanent
members of the Security Council has admitted that his
country prevented the Council from immediately
imposing a ceasefire during that aggression and during
the large-scale military manoeuvres now being
conducted by Israel in the occupied Syrian Golan. That
serves as clear proof that Israel is pursuing its
aggressive policies and will lead the region only into
deeper tension, destruction and instability.

Syria calls on the Security Council to assume its
responsibilities, as stipulated in the United Nations
Charter, to maintain international peace and security in
the region and throughout the world and to pressure
Israel to implement Council resolutions, particularly
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973); to withdraw
from the occupied Arab territories; and to establish a
just and comprehensive peace in the region based on
the 2002 Arab Peace Initiative and the Madrid terms of
reference, which guarantee the return of the occupied
Arab territories, to the borders of 4 June 1967. Syria
07-31853
does this in the belief that this is the only means of
ensuring peace and security for all in the Middle East.

