Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We are grateful for the convening of this meeting
and the briefings of Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga,
Mr. Bedializoun Moussa Nebie, Mr. Koen Vervaeke
and Ambassador Kacou Houadja Leon Adom.

Peru notes with deep concern the persistence
of the crisis in the Central African Republic, despite
the efforts made by the international community
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA). The progress made in the political sphere
has not yet been reflected in security improvements or
alleviating the serious humanitarian situation. Most
of the country is living in a state of conflict due to,
among other factors, the precarious situation of the
State, the illegal exploitation of natural resources by
armed groups, the illicit trafficking of weapons and the
incitement to violence, including inter-ethnic violence.

We regret that that violence is affecting the civilian
population, humanitarian personnel and MINUSCA,
and that the number of internally displaced persons and
refugees continues to increase, in a country where more
than half of the population is in need of humanitarian
assistance. Given that situation, we deem it necessary
for the Security Council to continue supporting the
authorities of the Central African Republic in their
efforts to assert State authority and achieve peace and
national reconciliation. At the same time, we believe
that the mandate of MINUSCA, which is about to be
renewed, should prioritize the following three points.

First, it should provide support for the political
process. The Mission should help implement the
African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation in the
Central African Republic and support the authorities in
organizing and conducting the 2020 and 2021 elections.
We emphasize the importance of linking the African
Initiative with the peace agreements reached in places
such as Bangassou, Bangui and Bouar, as well as
promoting greater citizen participation in the political
life of the country, especially women and young people.

Secondly, it should support the security strategy.
Political progress depends to a large extent on the
ability of the armed forces and police to protect the
civilian population. We consider it of the utmost
importance to reinforce the support that MINUSCA
has been providing in that area, in cooperation with the
European Union. We also consider it necessary for the
political process to prioritize the full implementation
of security sector reform and programmes on
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and
on reducing communal violence. In that regard, we
also underscore the role of local, subregional and
regional cooperation to effectively address the complex
situation in the Central African Republic. In particular,
the mixed commissions should serve to strengthen the
border controls required to deal with illicit trafficking
in persons, natural resources and arms.

Thirdly, I turn to institutional strengthening.
Achieving sustainable peace requires national
institutions and capacities equipped to prevent and
resolve disputes peacefully, guarantee access to justice
and accountability for crimes committed and, on that
basis, promote national reconciliation. To that end, we
stress the importance of MINUSCA's contribution to
the establishment of the truth, justice, reparations and
reconciliation commission in the context of a national
transitional justice strategy that, inter alia, will make it
possible to assist the victims of sexual violence and the
recruitment of children by armed groups. We recognize
the efforts ofthe Central African authorities to establish
and operationalize their national judicial institutions,
especially the Special Criminal Court.

The solution to the crisis requires a long-term
multidimensional approach to address the root
causes of the conflict. In that regard, we highlight
the Government's efforts embodied in the National
Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan. We also highlight
the work of the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa and the Peacebuilding Commission in
conflict prevention and resolution and institutional
development and strengthening.

I conclude by renewing our commitment to building
sustainable peace in the Central African Republic and,
as a troop-contributing country, our strong support
for MINUSCA, and by stressing the importance of
the renewal of its mandate for the Central African
population and the stability of the subregion.

