Mr. Nahayo (Burundi) (spoke in French): On the
occasion of the presentation of the fifth report of the
Secretary-General (S/2009/270) on the United Nations
Integrated Office in Burundi (BINUB), the
Government of the Republic of Burundi takes this
opportunity to thank the Organization for its tireless
ongoing assistance to my country in finally
overcoming its socio-political crisis. The Government
of Burundi also expresses its gratitude to Mr. Youssef
Mahmoud, Executive Representative of the Secretary-
General for Burundi, for his continued engagement in
implementing BINUB'S mandate.

My Government appreciates the recognition
expressed in the fifth report on BINUB of the progress
that has been made in most areas towards the ultimate
stabilization of the country. Examples of such progress
include the creation of the Independent National Electoral
Commission, the implementation of the political
agreements with the former rebel movement Parti pour la
liberation du peuple Hutu-forces nationales de liberation
(Palipehutu-FNL), the Government's commitment to the
disarmament policy, the reintegration of returnees, the
establishment of the conditions necessary to reach the
completion point under the Heavily Indebted Poor
Countries initiative, the improved cooperation between
the media and the National Communication Council, the
release of some prisoners previously held in provisional
detention, and the collection and destruction of thousands
of small arms and light weapons previously held by the
civilian population. I could cite further examples.

The Government also shares several of the
concerns set out in the report with regard to human
rights and the protection of children, the status of
women, the persistence of corruption and providing
security for the population. Nevertheless, the
Government believes that it is unfair to say that it is
not doing anything to improve the situation in those
areas. The Government has put in place, or is in the
process of doing so, appropriate mechanisms in all
those areas. The process of establishing the
Independent National Human Rights Commission is
also under way. Contrary to the report's assertion, the
Government is in the process of incorporating the Paris
Principles into the draft law prior to submitting it to the
Parliament for consideration and adoption.

I should like to make two observations with
regard to homosexuality, whose criminalization under
Burundi's new penal code has galvanized various
partners. On the one hand, it is not up to the executive
branch to issue edicts to the legislative branch with
regard to the provisions of the law, as some partners
have called upon the Head of State to do. The principle
of the separation of powers must be respected. On the
other hand, the position of Parliament, an institution
that embodies the aspirations of the people of Burundi,
on this issue clearly illustrates how cultural diversity
can lead to divergent choices with respect to the
adoption of certain international legal instruments and
their acceptance by the people, even when authorities
are disposed to incorporate universal principles into
national law. In spite of that fact, human rights can still
be taken into account in dealing with this matter.

With regard to the situation of women, the penal
code's criminalization of sexual and gender-based
Violence has established an environment conducive to
combating such crimes. All national partners must now
be educated about the importance to society of
combating such offences. Civil society has already
embarked upon that process. The programme to raise
awareness among security and defence personnel, as
well as the disarmament of civilians, should allow for
progress in combating sexual violence. However,
success will not be possible unless the families and
relatives of victims ultimately understand that keeping
silent under the pretext of protecting their honour will
in fact encourage impunity.

With regard to the protection of children, the
Government has established a task force to protect
minors. However, we have not yet succeeded in
securing resources. Also in that regard, the efforts of
the judicial system and the police should be
complemented by those of civil society. With regard to
albinos in particular, intensive efforts by the police and
the legal system have resulted in the arrests of some 10
persons implicated in the murder of albinos. The
prosecutor has already called for severe penalties for
those persons.

With regard to former FNL child combatants, 340
children who were formerly associated with the Forces
09-36337
nationales de liberation have been released to their
families from the Gitega demobilization centre,
situated in the central part of the country. Those
children are to receive long-term support in order to
ensure their permanent reintegration into their
communities of origin. The Government would like to
recall that it was even prepared to demobilize and
reintegrate the 40 other children associated with
dissidents. Unfortunately, having been misled, they
refused to come to the assembly point in the hope that
they would ultimately be admitted into the police or the
army. The Government was in the end able to explain
to them that it was in their interests to be demobilized
and reintegrated into civilian life. Given that the Gitega
demobilization centre is occupied by FNL adults, the
Government has relocated those children to Magara, in
Bujumbura Rural province, so as to begin demobilizing
them in order to return them to their families.

The Government of Burundi takes this
opportunity to inform the Security Council that the
issue of political prisoners has been resolved. The
confusion in the report in that regard is due to the facts
that some prisoners were released before they were
claimed by the former rebel movement Palipehutu-FNL
and that some had been registered under aliases.

The Government is aware that corruption hinders
development, as it deprives the State and local
authorities of necessary resources to implement
programmes for the public good. It is for that reason
that the Government has established an office of the
State Inspector General, an accountability court and an
anti-corruption task force and court. We will soon set
up a private body responsible for collecting all State
revenues. It goes without saying that it will be
necessary to strengthen the capacity of all those bodies
and to educate the people in order to persuade
Burundians to stop tolerating acts of corruption. A
programme to support anti-corruption mechanisms is
being developed in the context of our priority
peacebuilding plan. Although anti-corruption bodies
have already begun their work, it will be necessary to
strengthen their effectiveness through the cooperation
of the people, who should condemn this scourge of
which they are the victims.

The report also expresses concern about ongoing
insecurity. The Government of Burundi shares that
concern. To that end, we have launched a policy to
disarm civilians and to raise awareness among defence
and security forces so as to eradicate armed Violence.

The Minister for Public Security regularly reports on
the punishments meted out to its agents who are found
to have committed acts of violence or human rights
violations. Recently, on 3 June 2009, the national
intelligence service, also known as Documentation,
held an open-house event to share with the public its
new professional code of ethics and associated training
programme. Clearly, however, such administrative
efforts will not be enough. In order to prevent crime,
the police will require adequate equipment to enable
them to respond in a timely manner and the genuine
cooperation of the people.

Following 14 years of civil war, during which
some rebel movements splintered and fought each
other, trust between civilians and law enforcement
personnel cannot be established overnight. Moreover,
the inclination to always see political motives behind
acts of violence is extremely corrosive. It would be
useful to take a sociological approach to crime in
Burundi. Now that the last rebel movement has joined
the peace process, the Government hopes that the
security situation will improve noticeably.

I would like to say in passing that the Government
cannot contain its bitter surprise at certain baseless
allegations made in the report, which in essence claims
that the Government is continuing to waver with respect
to the non-applicability of amnesty for genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes. That issue has already
been resolved. The report also asserts that our National
Security Council does not exist, even though it has now
been fianctioning for more than half a year. In addition,
the report says that the Government of Burundi has yet to
request electoral assistance, although our country's
President made that request of the Secretary-General on
11 May 2009. Moreover, a serious report such as this
should correctly identify such national institutions as the
National Communication Council - rendered in the
French version as the Conseil national des
telecommunications - and the National Commission for
8
Land and Other Assets, which is referred to as la
Commission nationale des biens fonciers et autres biens.

A substantial section of the fifth report of the
Secretary-General is devoted to the technical
assessment mission that was carried out in Burundi at
the beginning of March 2009. The Government had
requested that the mission's proposals be discussed
before the publication of the report, but this request
was not taken into account.

The fact is that, four months after the mission, the
reality on the ground is no longer the same. The best
proof of this is the decision by South Africa to put an
end to its facilitation activities after a well-executed
mission and an agreement with the Regional Initiative
for Peace in Burundi, the African Union, the Executive
Secretariat of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region, all the special envoys and the
Peacebuilding Commission.

At this stage, the Government simply takes note
that it will be consulted by the Secretary-General with
regard to the United Nations presence beyond the
expiration of the BINUB mandate in December 2009.
In the meantime, the Government of Burundi remains
grateful for the support of the United Nations and
would like to see this continue, as will be agreed.

Allow me, before concluding, to also thank the
Regional Initiative, the African Union, the Executive
Secretariat of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region, the South African Facilitation, the
special envoys and the Peacebuilding Commission for
their contribution to the progress achieved in the peace
process in Burundi.

