Mr. Kiganahe (Burundi) (spoke in French): On
behalf of the Government of the Republic of Burundi,
which it is my honour to represent here, I should like
first to congratulate France on its presidency of the
Security Council this month and to thank the its
predecessor, Denmark, for its excellent work in May.

After two years of intense negotiations, the
people of Burundi, in August 2000, reached the Arusha
Peace and Reconciliation Agreement in order to put an
end to the deep-rooted causes of the continuous state of
violence, insecurity and political instability. Following
an in-depth analysis of the historic causes of the
conflict, the parties to the negotiations in Arusha
agreed, inter alia, to the request of the Transitional
Government for the establishment by the Security
Council of an international judicial commission of
inquiry into the genocide, war crimes and other crimes
against humanity. The commission would be mandated
to investigate and establish the facts for the period
from the country's accession to independence to the
signing of the Arusha Agreement, to qualify the
crimes, to bring to justice those responsible, and to
submit its report to the Security Council.

The Burundian parties to the negotiations also
agreed that the Government of Burundi should request
the Security Council to establish an international
criminal tribunal to bring to justice and punish the
guilty should the report establish that acts of genocide,
war crimes and other crimes against humanity had
occurred.

Lastly, the parties to the Arusha negotiations
agreed to create a national truth and reconciliation
commission to investigate and establish the truth about
the grave acts of violence committed during the
cyclical conflicts that cast a tragic pall over Burundi
from independence to the signing of the Arusha
Agreement, to classify crimes other than genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes, to establish
accountability, to identify both the perpetrators and
victims of such crimes, to propose means of
arbitration and reconciliation, and to clarify the
history of Burundi, going back as far as possible in
order to educate the people of that country about
their own past.

At the request of the Transitional Government,
the Security Council in May 2004 dispatched an
assessment mission to Burundi to consider the
advisability and feasibility of establishing an
international judicial commission of inquiry. We meet
here today to consider the report submitted by the
mission.

I should like to thank the Security Council for
having acceded to the request of the Government of
Burundi and for having thereby made a substantial
contribution to the implementation of the Arusha
Agreement. The Government of Burundi has also asked
me to congratulate the members of the Kalomoh
mission on the quality of their report and the wise
proposals they have submitted to the Security Council.

Having described the political developments of
recent years and indicated the shortcomings of the
mechanisms proposed in Arusha, the mission report
recommends the establishment of a single commission
to establish the truth and of a special chamber within
the court system of Burundi to establish accountability.

For its part, the Government of Burundi approves
that new approach, which is justified on two crucial
counts. The first is the fact that the distinction between
the national truth and reconciliation commission and
the international judicial commission of inquiry had
not been clear. The ratione temporis and ratione
materiae competences, as well as the investigating
powers of the two commissions, were identical. There
was thus a clear risk of overlap between the two
commissions.

Secondly, the structure of the judicial system in
Burundi is generally unable to handle the complex
cases of genocide, crimes against humanity and war
crimes. The juridical bases of the combined truth
commission and the special chamber would be
provided in both cases by a national law and an
agreement between the United Nations and the
Government.

In the light of the Kalomoh commission's
conclusions, the Government of Burundi has asked me
to make the following communication to the Council.

The Government of Burundi supports the
recommendations, which, in its view, meet the dual
concerns of the political negotiators in Arusha and of
the people of Burundi as a whole, first, to establish the
truth and, secondly, to bring the guilty to justice and
punish them. Furthermore, the Government of Burundi
believes that, beyond the quest for truth and justice, the
issue of reconciliation should be placed at the heart of
the question of peace and national unity. The new
version of the truth commission does not, in our view,
highlight sufficiently the aspect of reconciliation,
which is essential for overcoming the consequences of
the divisions of the past. For that reason, the
Government of Burundi would request of the Security
Council that these discussions and those that will
follow give priority to the aspect of national
reconciliation. We will therefore need to make a
determination as to the nature of the structure that will
be responsible for this mission.

With respect to the judicial mechanism that will
be charged with assigning responsibility, the
Government supports the description which is given of
it in the mission's report and wishes to point out that
there is a need to accelerate the reform of the judicial
system that is now under way in order to enable it to
discharge the new mission entrusted to it. The final
document should therefore clarify the relationship
between the truth commission and the court system's
special chamber.

The Government of Burundi also believes that the
Security Council should specify the financing
modalities for the twin mechanism for clarifying the
facts and determining responsibility. Indeed, the very
credibility of the system that would be put in place will
depend on its enjoying continuous and sufficient
funding throughout its operation.

Finally, the Government of Burundi hopes that
the negotiations aimed at establishing the practical
modalities for implementing the report's
recommendations will send a strong signal - one that
is awaited by our people, who so strongly desire truth
and justice. Therefore, in order to raise the awareness
of the people of Burundi, who will be the beneficiaries
of such mechanisms, it might be desirable to undertake
a broad-based consultation involving all sectors of
society in order to sound out the people of Burundi and
encourage them to support the new truth and justice
mechanisms with regard to war crimes, crimes of
genocide and other crimes against humanity.

Following the creation of the institutions that
emerge after the elections, mixed-composition
teams - representing the Government of Burundi and
the United Nations - will be established to determine
the nature of the tasks ahead and a programme of work
before the agreed mechanisms are put in place.

The Government of Burundi is grateful to the
Security Council for all the efforts it has made in order
to ensure the success of this process. The people of
Burundi remember the support and attention that they
have received as well as the wise advice which the
Security Council has given the political leadership in
Burundi, particularly during the various missions to the
country.

Our thanks go also to the Secretary-General for
his unflagging attention to the cause of peace in
Burundi. Throughout this process, the Government of
Burundi has always felt, through the very detailed
reports that he submitted to the Security Council, his
support and encouragement. I should like to take this
opportunity to invite him, on behalf of the Government
of Burundi, to come to our country to witness the
positive results of his untiring efforts.

