Ms. Power (United States ofAmerica): The growth
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), the
Nusra Front and other associates of Al-Qaida represents
a grave threat to the people of Syria and of Iraq, as well
as to the region and the larger international community.

Through its rapid and brutal advance across
northern Iraq, ISIL has secured heavy weapons and
used them to push back the Iraqi and Peshmerga forces
who are trying to defend towns and cities. It has seized
some of the country's precious natural resources and
taken control of critical infrastructure. ISIL now has
the ability to block the flow of electricity and to control
access to the water supplies on which people depend.

ISIL and the Nusra Front have used Syria's civil
war and Iraq's instability to claim territory, into which
they attract others who are bent on violent extremism
and from which they can potentially launch attacks
across the region and to other parts of the world. That is
the new front of the terrorist threat, with a devastating
human cost. ISIL's recent attacks in Ninewa have
displaced an estimated 200,000 people, bringing the
total number of internally displaced persons in Iraq
since January to a staggering 1.4 million.

The stories that have emerged from ISIL'S bloody
wake are the stuff of nightmares. Christians have been
driven from their homes with the threat of "convert
or die". Earlier today, I met with a bishop who was in
Iraqjust after the fall of Mosul. He described one ISIL
attack on a hospital. A Christian patient who refused
to convert was shot in the head. Two who agreed to
convert, denounced as infidels, had their throats slit.

Yazidis have been buried alive, beheaded or killed
in mass executions. Thousands were forced to flee to
Mount Sinjar, where many ultimately perished from
thirst or exposure to the elements. The Iraqi Ministry
of Human Rights estimates that 500 Yazidi women and
girls have been abducted. There are reports of them
being raped, trafficked and killed.

ISIL and Jabhat Al-Nusra continue to carry out
similar atrocities in Syria with seeming pride, posting
gleeful images to the Internet. ISIL also continues to
confiscate much-needed humanitarian aid bound for
thousands of civilians in eastern Syria. They have no
shame whatsoever.
Today's resolution 2170 (2014), which the United
States is proud to co-sponsor, represents the Council's
strong and unified position that all Member States
must disrupt the terrorist financing and foreign fighter
recruitment networks that are fuelling the violence
perpetrated by ISIL, the Nusra Front and other associates
of Al-Qaida in the region. By imposing sanctions on six
individuals, the resolution demonstrates the Council's
sense of urgency and its willingness to take concrete
action against those who carry the guns and those who
supply them.

Unchecked, the current terrorist financing and the
foreign fighter recruitment networks will only prolong
the terror that we have seen unleashed in the region. The
numbers of foreign fighters in Syria and Iraq, as well as
their source nations, are unprecedented. Reportedly, as
many as 12,000 have participated in the conflict, and
the return of radicalized and battle-hardened jihadists
to their home countries or other vulnerable destinations
has the potential to widen the scope of the violence. The
resolution should help to stem the flow of money and
people, and I urge all Member States to expend every
effort to help achieve such goals.

The United States is proud to have taken
unprecedented steps to protect and assist the Yazidis
who were trapped on Mount Sinjar. Today, we join with
others on the Council in calling on all parties to prevent
or to stop the widespread or systematic attacks directed
against any civilian populations because of their ethnic
background, political views, religion or beliefs. We
believe that Iraq's future political success will depend
on preserving its unity and on maintaining its vibrant
diversity.

We were encouraged by Prime Minister Al-Maliki's
decision to support Prime Minister-designate Al-Abadi.
That peaceful and historic transition of power
demonstrates that Iraq is on its way to developing the
kind of fully inclusive Government that it will need if
it is to unify all Iraqis in the fight against ISIL. The
international community must support Iraq to that end.

