Mr. Gomersall (United Kingdom): The mind cannot
easily erase the tragic events of 1994 in Rwanda. Rwanda
has taken significant steps forward since then, and it is a
tribute to the people and Government of Rwanda that the
Secretary-General's recent report talks of the climate of
relative normality and stability which now
prevails.

The United Nations and the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Rwanda have played an important part in
helping to restore confidence and stability in Rwanda, and
it is right that the Security Council should pay tribute
today, on the expiry of the final mandate of that Force, to
all those who have served in it. The draft resolution before
the Council also addresses aspects of UNAMIR's
withdrawal. We attach particular importance to the
continued protection which UNAMIR will provide to the
personnel and premises of the International Tribunal until
the withdrawal is complete. We also attach importance to
early clarification from the Secretariat of the precise
arrangements for protection of the Tribunal which will be
put in place after that withdrawal.

Another question addressed in the draft resolution is
that of UNAMIR equipment, some of which may be left
in Rwanda. It is very important that United Nations rules
be followed in this area, but within those rules we hope
that flexibility can be shown and ways found to benefit
Rwanda.

The central purpose of the draft resolution, however,
is to place the weight of this Council behind the
Secretary-General's proposal, now agreed by the
Government of Rwanda in the welcome letter of 1 March
from Foreign Minister Gasana, to the continued
maintenance of the office of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in Rwanda. We have also heard the
welcome words of the Permanent Representative of
Rwanda today, expressing his Government's cooperation
with the Secretary-General's office.

There is much that the United Nations can and
should continue to do in Rwanda to assist that country in
facing the challenges of reconstruction, national
reconciliation and the return of refugees. We foresee the
United Nations office playing a central role in this work.
We think it important that it include the present United
Nations radio station. We encourage the Government and
people of Rwanda to cooperate closely with the Special
Representative and his staff as they pursue the goals set
out in the draft resolution.

While stability in Rwanda is the responsibility of the
Government of Rwanda, the neighbouring States have
their responsibilities as well. We therefore encourage all
States in the region to cooperate closely with each other,
particularly in the return of refugees, to help bring about
a real prospect of lasting peace and stability in the Great
Lakes region.

