Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): Let me
thank the President for convening this meeting, as
well as Mr. Jenca for his important briefing to the
Security Council.

We associate ourselves with the statement made
by the representative of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries.

More than 50 years have passed since the start
of the Israeli occupation of Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem. In that time, we have seen
continuous violations of the most fundamental rules
of international law, including breaches by Israel
of its legal obligations as an occupying Power under
international conventions.

The illegal plans and policies aimed at Judaizing
the Holy City, distorting its national Arab identity and
at altering its demographic composition, in addition
to isolating it from the rest of Palestinian territory,
continue, as does the illegal expansion of settlement
activities in the Palestinian territories. Thas has taken
place despite the numerous Security Council resolutions
that have condemned Israeli practices and confirmed
their illegality, the most recent being resolution 2334
(2016). Faced with that fact, the international community
has remained incapable of making the occupying force
comply with its resolutions. It is disconcerting to see
the disdain shown by the occupying Power for the
Council and its resolutions, which are supposed to
be enforceable under Article 25 of the Charter of the
United Nations.
We reject all Israeli unilateral steps aimed at
changing the facts on the ground and compromising
the two-State solution within the pre-1967 borders.
We reiterate that the desired peace must include an
end to the occupation, which has already lasted for 50
years, in accordance with resolutions of international
legitimacy, the principle of land for peace, the Quartet
road map and the 2002 Beirut Arab Peace Initiative.
These are based on the terms of reference that call
for the withdrawal of Israel from all the Palestinian,
Syrian and Lebanese territories to the borders of 4 June
1967, including addressing all final status issues in
order to allow the Palestinian people to enjoy their
political rights.

The State of Kuwait welcomes the agreement
among our Palestinian brothers in Fatah and Hamas,
and we pay tribute to the efforts made by the Arab
Republic of Egypt to arrive at that agreement. National
reconciliation among our Palestinian brothers is a
historic achievement and an important step in the
right direction to end the division that has harmed the
Palestinian cause. The agreement is also a prologue
to unifying the ranks of the Palestinians so that they
will be better equipped to face the challenges that
the Palestinian question is confronted with. It will
contribute to the fulfilment of the aspirations of the
Palestinian people.

As Kuwait will soonjoin the Security Council as an
elected member for the period 2018-2019, we would like
to stress that we will continue to support the Palestinian
question and to bring pressure to bear on Israel, the
occupying Power, so that it desists forthwith from
policies that run counter to international legitimacy and
international agreements, including the 1949 Fourth
Geneva Convention. We will continue to work to ensure
that Israel respects and implements Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolution 2234 (2016), as well
as to make progress in a process led by the international
community, in particular the Security Council and the
five permanent members, as well as the Middle East
Quartet. In that way, our efforts would be helpful in
establishing a time frame to complete the negotiations
between the Palestinian and Israeli parties in order to
arrive at a two-State solution.

