The President: I thank Mr. Pillai for his briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for External Relations of Angola.

I am honoured to preside over today's debate, and
on behalf of the President of the Republic of Angola
and Chair of the International Conference of the Great
Lakes Region, His Excellency Jose Eduardo dos Santos,
I will share with the Council some ideas on the subject
under consideration: the prevention and resolution of
conflicts in the Great Lakes region. I welcome the
Secretary-General's presence and participation in this
meeting, which is a demonstration of his commitment
on an issue that has been the object of his persistent
efforts to find solutions to the inextricable conflicts
that have plagued the region for too long.
The Great Lakes region faces many challenges and
is undergoing great stress. Its high levels of economic
growth have not led to broad-based development or
tangible improvements in the well-being of its citizens.
Poverty, inequality and inequity are commonplace,
fuelling social tensions and unrest and shattering social
cohesion. Pockets of deadly conflicts persist. Their
causes revolve around economic, institutional, regional
and global geopolitical factors that have been extremely
costly in socioeconomic and human terms, engendering
a vicious cycle of violence. The nexus between natural
resources and conflict is paramount in formulating
adequate responses and mitigation measures. In that
regard, the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, with one of the greatest concentrations
of precious minerals and metals in the world, poses a
multidimensional challenge to economic and human
development in the affected countries and the region
as a whole.

There is a need to put the Great Lakes region back
on a path of sustainable development. Strong leadership,
political will, working institutions and State-building
are key for ensuring the effective participation of
citizens and communities in socioeconomic and
political choices, for the decentralization of service
providers and for transparency in public-sector and
finance management.

Sustaining peace is an important objective that
must be achieved through open dialogue among all the
parties concerned. Angola has been deploying sustained
efforts to contribute to that endeavour. The African
Union, the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region, the East African Community and other
subregional arrangements should provide the required
support. A crucial part of that equation is integrity
and genuine involvement on the part of all internal
stakeholders, combined with commitment by external
partners in implementing regional projects, based on a
shared, long-term vision and on the expectations of the
peoples of the region.

Angola's objective in holding this debate is to
shift the traditional narrative, which focuses on
armed conflict, the plundering of resources, egregious
violations of human rights and a general incapacity to
find sustainable solutions to the problems affecting
the region. The drivers of conflict are clearly identified.
Our aim is to have a forward-looking approach by
identifying game changers, thereby permitting the
transformation of those drivers of conflict into drivers
of peace and social and economic development.
In that connection, we warmly welcome the
launching of the Regional Strategic Framework for the
Great Lakes Region, in support of the implementation
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region,
which establishes a clear link between peace, security
and development and commits to strengthening regional
cooperation and deepening regional integration.

The road map set up in the Regional Strategic
Framework establishes nine priorities for regional
action, which Angola fully shares: efforts to neutralize
the negative forces; confidence-building measures;
promoting correct electoral processes; strengthening
peace and security oversight mechanisms;
addressing the issue of Rwandan refugees; promoting
socioeconomic development and regional integration;
initiatives to mobilize women, youth and civil
society; fighting impunity, improving accountability
and strengthening the rule of law; and leading and
coordinating the international community's support
for the implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework.

The eastern region of the African continent, which
comprises the Great Lakes region, is one of the fastest-
growing economic regions in the world, with a 6.2 per
cent growth rate in 2015. A meaningful part ofthe growth
is driven by endogenous and potentially sustainable
structural factors, namely, rising demographics, the
prominence of youth, a growing middle class with an
increasing purchasing power, rapid urbanization and
growing infrastructure needs, as well as an expanding
intra-Africa trade.

In addition, the Great Lakes region has shown a
certain degree of resilience, taking into account that
a significant part of the region's exports are linked to
commodities subject to falling prices. Moreover, the
region is one of the most densely populated areas in
Africa,andinvestmentsareneededtoturnthatpotentially
huge market into a demographic dividend. The Great
Lakes region's rich natural endowments - especially
mineral and metal resources, water for irrigation
and hydroelectric power generation, arable land and
population size - are important structural factors on
which to base its integrated development. The report
of the Economic Commission for Africa, Conflicts in
the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo: Causes, impact
and implications for the Great Lakes region, defines
regional integration as a crucial developmental link,
seeing such integration as leverage for peacebuilding
and post-conflict reconstruction. To realize such
potential, the human capital base and infrastructure
need to be upgraded, as do the quality and capacity of
its institutions, the legal and regulatory frameworks,
the levels of transparency and accountability, and
the depth of social and political debate, consultation
and collaboration.

The International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region (ICGLR) Regional Initiative against the Illegal
Exploitation of Natural Resources is one concrete
instance of concerted action aimed at such an endeavour,
calling for redoubled efforts and extended support to
the ICGLR and the Regional Initiative. The Kimberley
Process was a landmark initiative in that direction.

The Great Lakes Private Sector Investment
Conference, held in Kinshasa on 24 and 25 February,
represents a key milestone in this process, and I am
confident that its outcomes will serve as a canvas on
which to implement most of the required actions. The
Investment Conference indicates that the region is
ready to champion a vision of long-lasting peace and
prosperity and to welcome responsible and sustainable
long-term investments in line with the framework of
hope: the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Region. The Framework emphasizes the importance
of shared responsibility, whereby peace, security
and socioeconomic progress are the responsibility
of all - citizens and institutions within and outside
the Great Lakes region. It is therefore our duty to
ensure that we deliver on the promises to bring about
a brighter future embedded in the outcomes of the
Investment Conference.

In his words at the Conference, Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon urged all of us to act when he said,

"The people of the Great Lakes region count on
you to fully contribute to the goal of transforming
the region It is the pathway to peace and stability."

Our key role, as members of the international
community, is to ensure that those positive changes
are sustained and transformed into permanent gains.
I strongly believe that the Great Lakes region has
everything required to achieve a new destiny and follow
an equitable and sustainable development pathway.
Finally, I hope that I have provided some insights
as a contribution to our debate in the Council, and I
thank everyone for their kind attention.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.

