Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, I congratulate the delegation of France on
assuming the presidency ofthe Security Council for the
month of October. I wish you, Sir, and your delegation
every success during your term of office, during
which you can count on the support of the delegation
of Uruguay.

I thank Mr. Filippo Grandi, United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees for his comprehensive
briefing, in which he laid out a very timely and detailed
account of the most urgent and difficult to manage
situations. It is crucial that we be aware of the views
of the High Commissioner when addressing many of
the conflicts on the agenda of the Council. I agree with
him that briefings such as this must take place at least
once a year.

Unfortunately, the world is witnessing record
numbers of refugees. The majority of the 65.6 million
people who have been forcibly displaced throughout
the world, including refugees, asylum seekers and
internally displaced persons, fled their homes as a
result of various conflicts. The statistic of 65.6 million
people represents nearly 19 times the population of my
country, and that number is only a point of reference.
Beyond the statistics, which seem overwhelming, we
should try to grasp the actual lives that lie behind
those numbers. It is no coincidence that the countries
that generate the highest number of refugees are on the
agenda of the Security Council: Syria, Afghanistan,
Somalia, South Sudan, the Sudan, the Central African
Republic, Burundi and Myanmar.

Accordingly, the direct relationship between
conflicts and the number of refugees worldwide is
indisputable. It is the responsibility of the entire
international community, and especially that of the
Security Council, to focus on preventing conflicts so as
to avoid a continued increase in the number of refugees
and internally displaced persons. Preventing conflicts
and adopting policies aimed at achieving long-term
stability will make possible halting the increasing
number of refugees and internally displaced persons.

At the Summit on Addressing Large Movements of
Refugees and Migrants, held during the seventy-first
session of the General Assembly in New York last year,
States Members of the United Nations unanimously
adopted the New York Declaration for Refugees and
Migrants. That historic political Declaration is aimed at
improving the way in which the international community
addresses large movements of refugees and migrants,
including protracted situations involving refugees. We
commend the work of the international community and,
at the same time, we would like to highlight aspects of
Uruguayan policy pertaining to refugees.

Uruguay recognized the right to asylum and the
rights of refugees through the adoption of its law 18-76,
of 19 December 2006. All persons in Uruguay have the
right to seek refuge on our national territory to preserve
their life, physical, moral and intellectual well-being,
freedom and security. Likewise, Uruguay espouses two
fundamental principles with regard to refugees, namely,
the principle of non-refoulement at the border and
confidentiality. The first principle assures that during
any immigration control entry into Uruguay shall not
be denied to any individual expressing their intention
to seek refuge. That provision applies even to cases in
which the applicant lacks the documentation required
under migratory law or produces obviously fraudulent
or falsified documentation. Concerning confidentiality,
no information regarding asylum seekers or refugees
shall be made publicly available.

Pending the completion of the petition process,
every asylum seeker in Uruguay is entitled to the
issuance of a temporary identity document that bears
similar features as those issued to legal residents,
thereby facilitating their access to basic health services,
education and legal employment. Once legal refugee
status has been granted, that document is subsequently
replaced by the same form of identification issued
to residents.

Rather than continuing to detail out national refugee
policies, we believe that a positive approach in the area
of refugees would set the international community
upon the right path to facing that global challenge. As
set forth in the New York Declaration, protecting those
who are forced to flee and the obligation to support
countries and communities that host them are shared
international responsibilities that must be assumed
in a more equitable and predictable manner. We must
address the root causes of forced displacement, support
host communities and actively promote sustainable
solutions for refugees, particularly when refugee status
becomes protracted. For the short- and medium-term,
High Commissioner Grandi can count on Uruguay's
commitment to participating actively and constructively
in developing the global compact on refugees.

