Mr. Czaputowicz (Poland): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, and the Republic of Peru for
convening today's meeting, as well as to congratulate
you on your presidency. I also thank the briefers for
their excellent presentations and commendable work in
preparation for today's meeting.

Poland welcomes the progress study on youth, peace
and security (see S/2018/86), which will help shape
a forward-looking strategy for the implementation
of the resolution 2250 (2015). We appreciate this all-
encompassing document, which touches upon the
most crucial issues affecting the young generation. We
would favour an annual implementation report by the
Secretary-General on youth, peace and security, as well
as yearly Security Council open debates on this issue.

Youth empowerment and participation are
indispensable to enhancing the inclusivity and equality
of our societies. Young people are the cornerstone of
sustainable development and lasting peace. They need
not only quality education, vocational training, skills
development and access to digital technologies and
services, but also employment and entrepreneurial
opportunities. The most constructive way to empower
young people and ensure that they will not be
radicalized is to offer them credible and constructive
ways to positively contribute to their communities. If
youth remain excluded from national and international
peacebuilding efforts, then instability and extremism
will continue to pose serious threats to our societies.

First of all, we should provide youth around the
world with a wide range of educational opportunities
as a key element of development and life improvement.
The international community must mobilize resources
to improve the learning prospects of young people
and to support inclusive labour policies. Those goals
are also an important part of Poland's foreign policy.
We believe that, in order to make lasting change in the
world, we need to act at the source of the problems.

I recently visited Rwanda, on the occasion of
granting the Raphael Lemkin International Award in
Kigali. I was also in Kibeho, a town in the southern part
of the country, where I visited the Educational Institute
for Blind Children, led by the Polish Franciscan
Sisters Servants of the Cross and funded by the Polish
Ministry for Foreign Affairs. The Institute, which is the
only educational facility for blind children in Rwanda,
provides its students not only with basic education, but
also with vocational training, thereby preparing them
to enter the labour market. It contributes to a change
in attitude on the part of the Rwandan society towards
blind children. That unique project is an excellent
example of an inclusive and comprehensive approach
to development, which we promote as part of our
foreign policy.

There are examples of such an approach in other
countries as well. In Lebanon, for instance, together
with our German partners, we implemented a project to
rehabilitate public schools for children of both refugees
and the local community. In Jordan and Lebanon, we
are providing informal education to young Syrian
refugees, who are often excluded from the national
educational system.

Resolution 2250 (2015), on youth, peace and
security, was a valuable step in recognizing the
needs and the potential of youth in the prevention and
resolution of conflict. It reaffirmed the important role
that youth can play in enhancing sustainability and
inclusiveness, as well as in the success ofpeacekeeping
and peacebuilding efforts.

We need to acknowledge the different prospects
of young people worldwide in the employment,
education, health-care, civic and political spheres.
Based on Poland's experience, young people are deeply
committed to engaging in non-governmental activities,
and they contribute significantly to the culture of peace
at various levels in various areas.

In the 1980s, the Solidarity movement contributed
greatly to the peaceful transition to democracy in
Poland and in countries of the whole region. As a
phenomenon that combined a trade union, a social
movement and an aspiration for freedom and respect
for human rights, Solidarity was a non-Violent struggle
against the authoritarian Communist regime. Youth
played a prominent role in that struggle.

Pope John Paul II strongly supported Polish society
in its uphill struggle for democracy. His close ties with
young people are also well known. On the celebration
of World Day of Peace in 1985, Pope John Paul II stated
in his message that young people must not be satisfied
with an instinctive desire for peace, and that desire
must be transformed into a firm moral conviction that
encompasses the full range of human problems and
builds on deeply treasured values.

Poland strongly supports the engagement of young
people in democratic processes, as it increases their
visibility and political participation. At the same time,
young people remain highly vulnerable. Therefore,
all efforts are needed to strengthen their protection
and to address their particular needs. Young people
are recognized as agents of change, entrusted to
fulfil their own potential and to build a world fit for
future generations.

Poland supports strategies and programmes that
promote youth-led initiatives fostering intergenerational
dialogue, tolerance and reconciliation. In 2016, young
people from all over the world came to the city of Krako'w
in Poland to meet Pope Francis and to celebrate World
Youth Day. Those 1.6 million young people brought
with them a spirit of peace, solidarity and friendliness.
We should act together in a similar way to address all
symptoms of violence and to ensure that there is less
and less racial, ethnic and religious prejudice.

The youth of any region of the world need a
positive environment so as to develop their potential.
Poland welcomes the proposals included in the progress
study on youth, peace and security. We agree that it
is indispensable to make more efforts to allow young
people to fully benefit from their rights and to provide
them with a voice, helping them to become active and
responsible citizens. We also agree that increasing the
economic and educational opportunities for all young
people is pivotal, as that in turn helps to build more
peaceful and equal societies.

I shall conclude by underlining the primary
role and responsibility of national Governments in
the process of youth empowerment as part of efforts
to maintain peace and security. If we are serious
about ensuring a better life for our families and for
future generations, there is simply no alternative to
investing in young people, giving them a voice in all
relevant decision-making processes and building solid
partnerships with youth as a bridge to a more peaceful,
sustainable and prosperous world.

