Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium): I am
delivering this statement on behalf of the three
co-penholders: Kuwait, Germany and Belgium.

I would first like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Lowcock for his valuable and timely briefing.
Mr. Lowcock has reminded us once again that millions
of Syrians continue to need humanitarian assistance
and protection. We heard the numbers. Eleven
million Syrians, including some 5 million children,
need humanitarian assistance. These are essential
and critical needs. We are talking about food, water,
shelter, medical assistance, preventive medical care
and education for Syrian children. The United Nations
and its humanitarian partners should be allowed to
continue to deliver humanitarian assistance in a timely,
safe, sustained and unimpeded manner by using all
means - including cross-border, cross-line and regular
programming - to reach Syrians in need throughout
the country. As of last month, 4 million people in need
of humanitarian assistance depended on cross-border
operations. In other words, almost 40 per cent of the
entire humanitarian assistance is covered through
that mechanism.

Since the United Nations began cross-border
operations in July 2014, pursuant to resolution 2165
(2014), the mechanism has offered a true lifeline
to the people in areas not under the control of the
authorities. To this date, the mechanism continues to
allow the United Nations and its partners to ensure
that life-saving assistance reaches millions of people.
In fact, this year has been extremely busy. Never have
there been as many humanitarian cross-border convoys
as during the month of October, owing to the situation
in the north of the country. Moreover, as Mr. Lowcock
explained in detail, the Monitoring Mechanism linked
to cross-border operations is robust and reliable. It
is known to be among the most effective and detail-
oriented systems of all humanitarian operations run
by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs across the world.

The current mandate of cross-border operations
ends by the beginning of next year. The renewal of
the mandate is of prime importance. As the Secretary-
General notes in his report,

"Without this operation, we would see increased

numbers of civilian deaths, greater prevalence of

disease and even greater suffering being inflicted
on a population who cannot be reached at this scale,
in such a timely and direct manner, through any

other means." (S/2019/820, para. 44)

We share that assessment, which is why the
co-penholders will work closely with all members of the
Council and the countries concerned or involved in order
to renew the resolution on cross-border operations - a
purely humanitarian resolution - before the end of the
year. It is our collective responsibility to ensure that
resolution 2165 (2014) is renewed so that the United
Nations and its humanitarian partners can continue to
alleviate the humanitarian needs of all people in Syria.
In north-eastern Syria, clashes continue to be
reported, adding further risk to the already dire
humanitarian situation. They have led to civilian
casualties and, although the number has dropped, many
people remain displaced. It is of prime importance that
humanitarian access not be impeded. At this stage,
we are paying particular attention to the Allouk water
station and call on all parties to ensure the continued
full functioning of the station, which provides water
to almost half a million people in Al-Hasakah. Some
68,000 residents, 94 per cent of whom are women and
children, remain in Al-Hol camp. We call for continued
and full humanitarian access to the camp and for its
specific protection needs to be addressed.

In the north-west, despite a reduction in hostilities
since the end ofAugust, a recent upsurge in violence has
been reported, leading to civilian casualties, especially
in southern and western Idlib, and further impacting
civilians and civilian infrastructure. Once again, we
are deeply concerned about recent reports of attacks on
medical facilities.

We have also condemned the attacks perpetrated
by Security Council-designated terrorist groups, while
reiterating that counter-terrorism efforts can never
absolve the obligations of all parties under international
humanitarian law, including that of adherence to the
principles of distinction and proportionality. More than
half of the current population in Idlib is made up of
internally displaced persons, many of whom remain
displaced close to the Turkish border, facing dire
humanitarian circumstances in overcrowded camps as
the winter sets in.

We remain equally concerned about the situation
in the south-west, including around Damascus,
where a total of 2.8 million people remain in severe
humanitarian need of essential protection, water,
sanitation, health care, food, education and other relief.
The security situation, which remains volatile in this
region, adds to the challenge. The situation in Rukban
also remains dire. We continue to call for a durable
and lasting solution for the remaining inhabitants and
underline, in this context, the importance of providing
United Nations access to the camp.

Finally, I will make four more points.

No lasting peace in Syria will be possible without
justice and accountability. We reiterate our support for
the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Those Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under
International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011. We also welcome the
board of inquiry that was recently established by the
Secretary-General and which is now operational.

With regard to the return of refugees our position
remains unchanged. All returns must be safe, voluntary,
dignified and well-informed.

We reiterate our call for a nation-wide cessation
of hostilities in accordance with Security Council
resolutions, including resolution 2401 (2018). There is
no military solution to the conflict in Syria.

Finally, we welcome the convening of the
Constitutional Committee as a first step in the political
process and we reiterate our support for Special Envoy
Pedersen in his efforts to reach a political solution in
Syria on the basis of resolution 2254 (2015) and the
2012 Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex).

