Mr. Garcia Moritan (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank the Government of
Senegal for organizing today's open debate on water,
peace and security, and for the related concept note
(S/2016/969, annex). At the United Nations and in the
principal international forums where water issues are
discussed, as well as in the multilateral and bilateral
international conventions, water is considered a
fundamental element in development and our continued
existence. In that context, we are concerned about some
of the statements in the concept note, such as that water
has always been considered a driver of conflict. There
is no evidence for that notion. In Argentina's view,
water is a catalyst for peace and countries' efforts
aimed at cooperation, dialogue and integration should
be founded on that concept.

We should recall that General Assembly resolution
1803 (XVII) and the outcome document of the
2012 United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development on "The future we want" (General Assembly resolution 66/288, annex) recognize the right
of peoples and nations to permanent sovereignty over
their natural wealth and resources. Argentina supports
the development of the concept of the right to water
and sanitation as a human right that every State must
assure for individuals subject to its jurisdiction, without
regard to other States. Similarly, and more recently,
with the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, the international community established
that one of its Goals is to

"[e]nsure availability of water and sustainable
management of water and sanitation for all".

Considered in that way, the issue of water must be
addressed from the perspective of poverty eradication
and sustainable development. I should emphasize
that Argentina is a sponsor of the draft resolution
being negotiated in the Second Committee entitled
"International Decade for Action, 'Water for Sustainable
Development', 2018-2028" (A/C.2/71/L.12), and we
also support the work of the Global High-Level Panel
on Water and Peace launched by the Secretary-General.

I would like to reaffirm the definition of water
security for the strategic plan of the eighth phase of
UNESCO's International Hydrological Programme as

"the capacity ofa population to safeguard access to
adequate quantities of water of acceptable quality
for sustaining human and ecosystem health on a
watershed basis, and to ensure efficient protection
of life and property against water-related hazards".
(IHP/ZOIZ/IHP-VIH/lRev, p. 5)

In that context, Argentina supports the concepts of
the integrated management of water resources, of
watersheds and the need for cooperation and rational
use where resources are concerned, at both the regional
and international levels, in order to achieve sustainable
water management. We should also recall that
international humanitarian law forbids attacks during
armed conflicts aimed at preventing people's access to
water, used as a weapon of war.

In accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
the Security Council has the primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security. Argentina
continues to maintain a constructive position, but we
believe that the Council should not distort its functions
by acting on issues that are beyond its remit or link

environmental problems to security issues, since in the
case we are discussing, water is not in itself a cause
of conflict. Based on the points I have mentioned, it
is up to the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council, the United Nations Environment
Programme, the United Nations Conference on Human
Settlements, UN-Water, the Commission on Sustainable
Development, the regional economic commissions, the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change and other specialized agencies to address water
and other environmental issues.

