Mr. El Othmani (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, let me congratulate Australia for its
outstanding presidency of the Security Council this
month, and we commend your excellent choice, Madam,
of the subject for this high-level meeting. I also express
my gratitude to the Secretary-General for the excellent
report (S/2013/503) he presented to the Council and the
recommendations contained therein.

The concept note (S/2013/536, annex) circulated by
the Australian presidency has raised relevant questions
related to the mechanisms for coordinating international
efforts to ensure an effective fight against the illicit
trafficking in small arms and light weapons and to seek
better ways to address the challenges related to it. The
world is unanimous with respect to the repercussions
of that scourge - loss of human life, the destruction
of economic capacities and threats to the peace and
security of States and their territorial integrity. It
also prolongs conflict, worsens armed violence and
undermines humanitarian, international and human
rights law. Furthermore, the close nexus between
terrorism, organized crime, human trafficking, drug
trafficking and trafficking in certain national resources
is clear.

Unfortunately, Africa bears the brunt of the
disastrous effects of that scourge. In that regard, the
Sahel region and the region ofthe Sahara are testimonies
to the link between illicit arms trafficking, terrorist
separatist groups and organized crime. Security
risks extending beyond the borders of the Sahel have
worsened because ofthe increase in arms flows in recent
years, particularly those originating from the Libyan
stockpiles of the previous regime. That threatens the
region with more instability and reinforces the arsenals
of terrorist groups.

Addressing those challenges requires international
cooperation to support, in particular, the capacities
of States in the region. Therefore, the initiative of
the Secretary-General to hold a high-level meeting
on counter-terrorism strategies in the Sahel and the
region and the special meeting organized by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, which Morocco had the
honour to chair, are of particular importance within
the framework of the cooperation and assistance to
be provided to the Sahel region to bolster its counter-
terrorism capacities.

The Kingdom of Morocco would like to reaffirm
the great importance of the Protocol against the Illicit
Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms, Their
Parts and Components and Ammunition, supplementing
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime. We reaffirm our support to the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects, as well as the international follow-up
Small Arms Review Conference. Morocco calls for the
effective implementation of the Programme of Action by
national and regional authorities within the framework
of the work plan adopted by the second Small Arms
Review Conference. Furthermore, we welcome the
opening for signature of the Arms Trade Treaty and the
holding of the United Nations Conference on the Arms
Trade Treaty, which was presided over by the excellent
Australian diplomat Mr. Woolcott. Morocco hopes that
this instrument will help to strengthen international
efforts to eradicate the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons.

For the same reasons, the Kingdom of Morocco,
since 2006, has taken part in the Geneva Declaration
on Armed Violence and Development. We contributed
to launching the Declaration together with Switzerland
and 41 other States, the United Nations Development
Programme and non-governmental organizations
active in the area of development. That initiative,

which now has 109 countries signatories, is working to
assist the countries that suffer from armed violence to
help them put an end to that scourge and to achieve
the Millennium Development Goals. That is done
by integrating disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration in their national development policies.
Morocco would like to call for international efforts to
be taken. However, in fighting illicit trafficking we
need to count international law and the Charter with
respect to the right of each State to import small arms
and light weapons and manufacture them for their
legitimate needs with respect to national defence and to
ensure territorial integrity.

In conclusion, we hope that this meeting and
resolution 2117 (2013), which was just adopted, will
strengthen cooperation internationally, regionally and
subregionally. We reaffirm that we need to step up our
efforts at cooperation to implement the programme
of work and all of the commitments pertaining to
international instruments. We commend civil society
and the role that it plays in dealing with this scourge.

