Mr. Butagira (Uganda): On behalf of the Uganda
delegation, I would like to thank the South African
delegation for organizing this important debate.

The African Union (AU) is increasingly engaged
in efforts to promote peace and stability on the African
continent, including the pacific settlement of disputes,
thus contributing to the maintenance of international
peace and security. Quite often, enforcement action is
needed. Hence the cooperation envisaged under
Chapter VIII of the Charter between the United
Nations and regional organizations, in particular where
enforcement action is required.

However, the primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security lies with
the Security Council under Article 24 of the Charter. It
follows, therefore, that any derogations under Chapter
VIII of the Charter do not mean abdication of
responsibility by the Security Council. That point is
important, especially when considering the financing
of any operations undertaken by the African Union or
through Member States. The important thing to
consider here is how to finance operations undertaken
by the African Union on behalf of the Security Council
or with authorization of the Council.
07-28766
The peace operations undertaken by the African
Union can take various forms. For instance, the African
Union may be mandated by the Security Council, as is
the case with AU peacekeeping operations in Somalia
under Security Council resolution 1744 (2007), or the
Security Council may reinforce or take over a mission
initiated by States members of the African Union, as
was the case in Burundi. Either way, the United
Nations should find ways and means of financing such
peacekeeping operations.

I would suggest setting up a fund on the lines of
the Central Emergency Response Fund for
humanitarian activities, whereby voluntary
contributions could be made, in addition to
contributions from the United Nations system. Such a
fund would be utilized to finance peacekeeping
operations undertaken by the African Union. The fund
could be augmented by providing a budget line in the
regular budget of the United Nations. The fund could
be jointly operated by the African Union and the
United Nations.

Other areas of cooperation can include the United
Nations contribution to enhance the capacity of the
early warning mechanism set up in Addis Ababa by the
African Union. An intelligence fusion cell on the lines
of the Tripartite Plus One Commission in the Great
Lakes region could be set up in the early warning unit
in Addis Ababa. Other areas of cooperation could also
include the supply of equipment and other logistical
support to AU peacekeeping operations, including
strengthening the capacity of the African Union
standby force. Uganda, as my President has often said,
believes that African problems should be owned by
Africans and should have an African solution. That is
why we emphasize strengthening the capacity of
African Union forces.

Very often conflicts are a result of poverty.
Hence, there is a need to strengthen economic
partnership between the AU and the United Nations
through mechanisms, such as the New Partnership for
Africa's Development, aimed at poverty eradication in
States members of the African Union.

Finally, the African Union stands ready to
cooperate with the United Nations in the maintenance
of international peace and security, as evidenced by the
Declaration on Enhancing United Nations-African
Union Cooperation, signed in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia,
on 16 November 2006 between the Secretary-General

and the Chairperson of the African Union, and various
Security Council presidential statements and General
Assembly resolutions.

