Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): My first words must be to
thank you immensely, Mr. President, for convening this
timely debate on piracy in the Gulf of Guinea. Coming
on the heels of the inaugural debate (see S/PV.6633)
convened by Nigeria in October 2011, I believe that the
holding of this meeting underscores both the enormity
and intensity of the threat. It also reinforces the
message that international attention must stay focused
on this growing menace. I would like to thank the
Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his succinct
briefing, as well as Mr. Abdel Fatau Musah and
Ambassador Florentina Adenike Ukonga, for their
insightful remarks.

The incidence of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea has
witnessed an alarming surge. Although underreported,
it has become increasingly violent. Attacks, which
were once almost exclusively confined to the coast,
now range beyond the Gulf of Guinea. The Nigerian
Maritime Security Task Force documented a total of
293 incidents of pirate attacks and robberies at sea
between 2003 and 2008 - on fishing vessels alone.

The cost of piracy to local economies is
staggering. For a region undergoing a post-conflict
transition, the annual loss of $2 billion to the region's
economy, from offshore oil, fishing and shipping, is
too high a price to pay. Future investments in the West
African oil industry face a clear and present danger.
Indeed, the profitability of any new oil exploration
taking place off the coast of Cameroon, Equatorial
Guinea and the Niger Delta is threatened. In broader
terms, the shipping industry has been rendered
vulnerable.

Let there be no doubt regarding the substantial
political will at the subregional and regional levels in
confronting this growing threat. The countries in the
region are responding to the challenge by strengthening
existing national initiatives. In recent times, mindful of
the importance of joint efforts, they have created
partnerships towards fostering an optimal regional
approach to maritime security.
The Republic of Benin and Nigeria commenced a
six-month pilot joint patrol programme along the coast
of Benin on 28 September 2011. The programme,
which is being conducted under Nigeria's tactical
command and Benin's operational command, derives
95 per cent of its logistical support from Nigeria,
including the deployment of two helicopters, two
maritime vessels and two interceptor boats. That
collaboration has recorded some measure of success,
and includes scope for broader participation. We
believe that such a cooperative arrangement will
benefit enormously from enhanced surveillance
systems, patrol boats, maintenance capabilities,
funding, joint coordination centres and information-
sharing, within a legal framework that takes into
account maritime domain awareness.

It is against that backdrop that we warmly
welcome the Secretary-General's assessment mission
to West Africa. The mission's report (see S/2012/45)
calls for actions that build on resolution 2018 (2011),
adopted in October 2011, as well as the Council's
statement to the press of 30 August (see SC/10372).
The findings and recommendations of the mission will
form the bedrock for the development of a holistic
approach in tackling this threat. They provide the
impetus for concerted, bold and swift action, not only
by countries of the region, but also by international
partners.

Nigeria supports the draft resolution submitted by
Togo. The next necessary steps to confront piracy in the
Gulf of Guinea must involve the countries of the region
working more concertedly. It must also involve greater
26

collaboration between the Economic Community of
West African States, the Economic Community of
Central African States and the Gulf of Guinea
Commission, with the support of both the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the United National
Regional Office for Central Africa.

Indeed, a comprehensive regional approach is
now imperative. That is why we are committed to the
convening of a regional summit to address the issue in
a comprehensive manner, and we are glad to note that
the initiative has received wide support. We are
confident that the summit will explore fresh ideas and
provide new directions that will engender further
action by the Council.

