Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): As the representative
of Kuwait has already delivered a joint statement on our
behalf, I will make my remarks very brief.

One month ago, the Council adopted resolution
2401 (2018) by consensus, in response to the deafening
calls for action to address the horrific humanitarian
situation in Syria. Today we have heard around this
table a continued commitment to moving forward
with the implementation of that important resolution. I
wanted to speak last in order to identify some points of
convergence. From the discussion today, I believe that
there are a number of critical areas where there is broad
agreement within the Council.

First, we all share a deep disappointment and
sense of dissatisfaction and frustration with the lack of
implementation. While a limited increase in access for
humanitarian convoys shows that progress is possible,
much more is needed. The resolution remains in force
and all parties remain obliged to comply.
Secondly, we have heard a common concern about
the continuing hostilities throughout the country,
particularly the ongoing military offensive in eastern
Ghouta. Those who leave the area should do so
voluntarily, with the right to return and a choice of
safe places to go to. At the same time, humanitarian
aid convoys must continue to support those who choose
to remain.

Thirdly, we agree that efforts to strengthen the
protection of civilians must be stepped up by the United
Nations and its partners, both inside eastern Ghouta and
for those leaving and in the collective shelters. I want
to emphasize that preventing sexual and gender-based
violence should be an integral part of those efforts.
We condemn the attacks in February that affected
health facilities.

Many colleagues also reiterated today that resolution
2401 (2018) applies across the whole of the country. I
just wanted to mention our concern about the Turkish
operation in Afrin and the statements that Turkey has
made about expanding its military operations in the
north, beyond Afrin. We are also concerned about
the protection of civilians fleeing Afrin, as well as
the difficult conditions for those remaining. We call
on all relevant parties, especially Turkey, to ensure
the protection of civilians and facilitate cross-border
and cross-line humanitarian aid deliveries, as well as
freedom of movement, for internally displaced persons.

The need for the full implementation of resolution
2401 (2018) remains as urgent today as when it was
adopted. As Ambassador Alotaibi has said, we will spare
no effort in making progress on the implementation
of resolution 2401 (2018). We will continue to work
actively and tirelessly to that end, be creative in
considering possible further steps, and remain ready to
reconvene the Council at any time should the situation
warrant its renewed action. We are convinced that the
unity ofthe Council, as difficult as it may be, is the only
way to effectively make a real difference on the ground
and alleviate the suffering of the Syrian people. For our
part, even when terribly frustrated, we will never give
up trying to achieve that change.

