Mr. Sacirbey (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Let me
welcome you, Sir, to the Council on this most notable
occasion. It is a pleasure to have you in our midst today.

Let me also take this opportunity to personally
congratulate my colleague from the Central European
Initiative, His Excellency Ambassador Karel Kovanda, on
the most capable and elegant manner in which he has
managed the tumultuous work - if you will, the April
storms - of the Security Council.

I would also extend my sincere appreciation to His
Excellency Ambassador Li Zhaoxing and the entire
Chinese delegation for their efforts during the month of
March.

Although frequently the subject of debate within the
Council, unfortunately Bosnia and Herzegovina has not
had the opportunity to be frequently thankful for the
results of those debates. The lack of decisive measures
and the continuation of the war and "ethnic cleansing"
against our citizens and our Republic indicate amply that
it is not that we do not know how to be appreciative, but
ultimately that the bottom line has left us with little to be
appreciative about except the humanitarian assistance and
good wishes of the international community and our own
determination and sacrifices for survival.

It does indeed give us satisfaction today to thank the
Council for its efforts to tighten the effectiveness of the
border-sealing regime and, in particular, to thank those
Member States that have striven for this objective and
that have been diligent and credible in alerting us to the
violations and flaws in the system. Without the efforts of
those States, the Council today probably would be
engaged in an exercise of fatalism and of legitimizing
fictions.

To be sure, we still have a long way to go before we
can ascertain, much less herald, that the new border-
sealing and monitoring system is effective. And we
certainly cannot be satisfied that the Belgrade regime
continues to refuse to recognize its neighbours, including
the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina; that this regime
has failed to cease its ideological and material support for
an ethnically homogeneous and dictatorial "Greater
Serbia"; and that this regime therefore still reneges on
making a sincere commitment for peace.

The leadership of the Belgrade regime - or more
accurately, the one dictatorial leader - maintains the
duplicitous confidence that he is the grand matador, who
on the one hand, feints - projects to the world the cape
of his innocence and disarmed ambitions - while on the
other hand keeping his sword discreetly hidden behind the
cape. One would be almost tempted to exclaim a cynical

 

"Ole'" if it were not for the carnage and for the fact that
this is not entertainment.

National sovereignty and territorial integrity, regional
stability, international peace and security and, most
important, human life - Bosnian, Croatian, Serb, French,
British, Pakistani, Malaysian, Bangladeshi, Dutch and many
others - are very much at stake, as we have all come to
learn painfully over the last three years.

With this well-based and healthy skepticism we
therefore welcome today's draft resolution as clearly
trumpeting "no more business as usual": no more illusion
and concealing. The new mechanisms and reporting systems
should all help us advance towards the desired result. In
addition, we must emphasize the essential ingredient in the
hoped-for success for this refurbished system: Member
States must provide - and I emphasize "must provide" -
all the necessary resources for this new system to be
effective. We have all too painfully learned that preventive
measures faithfully undertaken are much more effective,
efficient and ultimately economical than corrective steps
taken after the damage is done.

If the international community and certain world
Powers are sincerely of the View that new weapons and
strategic material add fuel to the fire in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, then they must first, and strictly, apply this
policy - for practical, psychological, moral and legal
reasons - to the arsonists, those that originally set the fire,
including the aggressor across the border.

The Secretary General, the Co-Chairmen and other
members of the International Conference on the Former
Yugoslavia (ICFY) Mission, the members of the Security
Council and others must be vigilant in ensuring that the
Mission is effective and that the resources are adequate, in
providing independent evidence of violations, and in
making other necessary adjustments, including the potential
deployment of more experts and troops, along the border.

We must sadly state that the so-called certifications
from the Co-Chairmen of the ICFY Steering Committee,
along with their reports, sanitized or not, did not fill us with
confidence when compared to the mountain of independent
evidence to the contrary. We request that the Security
Council, the Secretariat and the ICFY Mission take note
that, after all, this monitoring Mission is along the border
of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

In this context, we welcome the overdue provision
contained in paragraph 16 of draft resolution S/1995/319,
which calls upon the ICFY Mission to provide the
relevant Government with its observations and findings -
and, we must assume, without manipulation of such
information. We will be in contact with the ICFY Mission
to facilitate implementation of this provision, and we
remain prepared, certainly, for the fullest of cooperation.

We should also take note that the provision relating
to the current easing of sanctions with respect to the
FRY - that is, Serbia and Montenegro - is scheduled
to expire by 5 July this year. This is a most appropriate
expression of the Security Council's intention not to be
dictated to by the deserving object of its sanctions and not
to provide it with an alibi for its continuing culpability.
Also, this time-frame is long enough to test the efficacy
both of the border closure and monitoring mechanisms
and of the Belgrade regime's sincerity. It is up to
Mr. Milosevic now.

Of course, the search for peace in the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina is a multi-variable equation.
Certainly, the sealing of the border is a critical step. Also,
abandonment by the Belgrade regime of its perverse and
illegal ambitions is a prerequisite. A commitment to peace
is not consistent with evading recognition of one's
neighbours' territorial integrity and sovereignty and with
the persistent resort by Milosevic to this matador
diplomacy. The cape of deceit and double-talk must be
set aside and the dagger must be sheathed once and for
all.

And, of course, we must be very frank about this:
Mr. Milosevic does not out such a capable and elegant
figure as a matador except to some international political
leaderships that have become only too willing to play the
role of the bull.

As we have stated, the search for peace in our
Republic is a multi-variable equation, and while we seem
to be coming up to the mark on one variable, we are
unfortunately falling away from another: the alarming
acceleration of the erosion of the mandate of the United
Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR), and specifically
of the political will to see that mandate implemented.
When UNPROFOR's mandate was renewed three weeks
ago, we hoped that the process of erosion had been
stemmed or even reversed. Obviously, that was not the
case. We still await, with a ray of positive anticipation,
the Secretary-General's report with respect to the
concerns expressed in our letter of 29 March 1995
(S/ 1995/245) and cited in resolution 982 (1995). But how
is the Secretary-General to respond constructively to our

 

previous concerns and grievances when there is a rash of
new Serbian provocations and UNPROFOR withdrawals
and surrenders in the face of those provocations?

The Serbians go into a United Nations weapons-
collection point in an occupied suburb of Sarajevo and,
with UNPROFOR soldiers standing by, they fire mortars
into the civilian areas of Sarajevo. The response from the
United Nations and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) to such outrageous and murderous action is
supposed to be air strikes. Instead, the United Nations
soldiers on the scene are relegated, degraded, to the role of
witnesses to potential murder.

Now the Serbians control the skies, the same skies that
have been declared subject to a United Nations/NATO-
enforced "no-fly-zone". Not only are United Nations/NATO
air-to-ground support and air strike missions curtailed, not
only are UNPROFOR planes fired upon regularly, but now
the Serbians are actually dictating to the United Nations
who can fly in United Nations planes. As of today, it seems
that even members of the Contact Group are no longer
welcome to fly in them. Bosnians are not allowed;
American and other diplomats are removed from flights;
and even United Nations civilian officials are denied the
right to land at Sarajevo, as their planes face the threat of
being shot at, and actually are shot at. The United Nations
and NATO have gone from losing control of the skies to
becoming the victims of nothing less than air terrorism.

Let me just briefly quote from a New York Times
Service article of 20 April 1995, under the headline "Test
in Bosnia: Limits of UN Humiliation", which stated:

"The airlift to Sarajevo lies at the heart of the
UN mission here - it provides more than 80 percent
of the aid to the city. But it is obvious by now that the
airlift has also come to demonstrate how the world's
collective authority is vulnerable in Sarajevo to the
whim of a Serb who is, in the end, a member of a
rebel army holding 70 percent of a State recognized
by the United Nations." (International Herald Tribune, 20 April 1995, p. 5)

Some speak of the necessity for the United Nations to
be impartial, and others have pressed this argument to its
limits to profess neutrality. I say to members of the
Security Council "Excellencies, that is your interpretation.
But do you realize that the United Nations, your authority,
the dignity of your countries and, most critically, your men
and women, and not just the Bosnians, are under the direct
assault of these Serbians? War is being waged upon you
and all of us, and the faster you backpedal to avoid this
war, the more relentless the Karadzic Serbs become in
pursuing you and cornering you."

I should like here to address my dear colleague and
friend Ambassador Merimee, the Permanent
Representative of the French Republic. When I watched
the television scenes of the young French corporal, Eric
Hardouin, fatally wounded while helping erect an anti-
sniper barricade in front of the Holiday Inn in Sarajevo,
I was shocked and revolted and, ultimately, frozen in a
combination of fear and anger.

Once again I extend my deepest condolences to the
families concerned and to the French Government and
people over the death of two young Frenchmen. Similarly,
though, with their death another part of Sarajevo has also
died. The city they were hoping to protect is our city, my
city. The people they were looking to defend are our
citizens - actually, members of my family, my friends,
the future of our country. The Holiday Inn entrance in
front of which this one brave corporal was setting up the
barricade is the entrance that I use when I am in Sarajevo
and staying at that hotel.

I say to you, Mr. Ambassador, "Forensic evidence
may be inconclusive, politicians may speculate and some
may even slander, but when the Serbians shoot at you,
they also shoot at us. When they kill one of your
courageous young men, we also feel as if they have
murdered one of us. Do not mistake our political
differences as insensitivity to your sacrifices. Do not
mistake our stoic faces for indifference. It is just, Mr.
Ambassador, and all Council members with young men
and women in Bosnia and Herzegovina, that after three
years we have all become traumatized and numb. We are
all under attack, Blue Helmets or not."

We have accepted the Contact Group peace plan,
with all its painful imperfections and injustices. The
Karadzic Serbs continue to believe that they can
successfully resist, and even bully the Security Council
into abandoning the Contact Group plan in favour of the
reality, the status quo of their conquest and "ethnic
cleansing". Unfortunately, the Council sometimes gives
them hope, when in its resolutions and statements it calls
on the one hand for peace negotiations and cease-fires,
but on the other hesitating to offend them, does not
recognize our Government's commitment to the plan and,
once again, does not demand their acceptance.

 

The two latest French victims, the other United
Nations personnel, and the countless Bosnian civilians who
have been killed since August 1994 are the casualties of
this Serbian refusal to accept, and commit to, the Contact
Group peace plan.

Of course, the most critical variable in this equation
for peace is the Serbian acceptance and implementation of
this plan. However, until this comes about, the one
variable that we must maximize, or at least prevent from
being marginalized, is the commitment to, and capacity and
execution of, the United Nations mandate in our Republic
and, indeed, in the Republic of Croatia and elsewhere. This
will both serve to save lives and to maximize the positive
pressure upon the Karadzic Serbs to accept peace.

There are also other variables in the search for peace
in our country. We will continue to use all our capacity,
including the right and means to defend our population,
territorial integrity and sovereignty. We will use these
variables responsibly, and we here reassert our unabridgable
right to obtain the means to defend ourselves.

Our common search for peace, though, is most
definitely made more fruitful and less dangerous and
counter-productive to the extent that the United Nations in
the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina and in the region
as a whole is more committed to, and better capable of,
executing its mandate.
I trust also that some bright soul will not, purposely or
otherwise, undermine the real objective by constantly
redefining the mandate so that expectations are always
lowered. Instead, the execution and implementation of the
mandate must be brought up to the proper and intended
level.

The sum of the equation that we must derive in order
to secure peace, unfortunately, is not variable, and therefore
we cannot cheat - I emphasize that we cannot cheat - in
the very demanding task required of us to reach our
solution.

Once again, though, I should like to take the
opportunity to thank the Council for the small but
significant step it has taken today.

Finally, allow me to take a moment to address my
most dear colleague, Ambassador Madeleine Albright, on
behalf of our people and Republic.

Most Bosnians did not know where Oklahoma was
before the attack on that city and its people. Actually, I did,
from the time when I was in Bosnia. For me, Oklahoma
City was the first home that I ever had in the United
States. I know the people there to be generous, warm and
open. They help their neighbours in need, whether those
neighbours are across the street or halfway around the
world.

One of the emergency workers immediately on the
scene of the explosion, filmed on CNN, was Mr. Larry
Jones, from Feed the Children, an organization also active
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Now, he was helping his
immediate neighbours, after having helped Bosnians in
the past. I note his comment on the day of the explosion.
He said "I haven't seen anything like this since I left
Sarajevo."

The people in Sarajevo are in no position to offer
any real material help, but we do offer our most sincere
condolences and desire for recovery to the families and
all the people of Oklahoma City. Those who carried out
this crime must suffer the damnation of this world and the
next.

