Mr. Malwal (South Sudan): Allow me, first of all,
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the duties of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I assure you of my delegation's support
and cooperation.

I would also like to welcome and acknowledge
the two Under-Secretaries-General for their briefings
and their work on South Sudan. Likewise, I would
like to welcome and thank the Special Envoy for
South Sudan of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), His Excellency Mr. Ismail Wais,
for his briefing regarding the IGAD pre-high-level
revitalization consultations that took place in October.

We are happy to reiterate the commitment of the
Transitional Government of National Unity to the
high-level revitalization forum. As reported, key
consultations have been held with the presidency and
members of the Council of Ministers of the Transitional
Government of National Unity. We look forward to the
upcoming meetings of the IGAD Council of Ministers
and the summit that will be convened in December. I
would like to assure the Council that the Government
will attend the summit with an open mind in the hope
that all parties will recommit themselves to fully
implementing the Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan.

I would also like to inform you, Mr. President, and
the Council of the Government's recent meeting in Juba
with the review team of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS). That was the first time that
the Government of South Sudan was included and
consulted in the review of the mandate of UNMISS. It
was a welcome change.

On 4 December, the Transitional Government of
National Unity met with the UNMISS review team
to discuss and conduct a comprehensive review of
the engagement of UNMISS in South Sudan. We are
reliably informed that the meeting was frank and
open, and that the Government put forth a number of
proposals regarding the future mandate of UNMISS.
Among those proposals was the Government's wish to
see UNMISS engage in the capacity-building of human
resources and institutions, and to commission some
much-needed development projects. We therefore look
forward to the final report and its recommendations,
which we hope will reflect some of the Government's
points of view.

