Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mexico voted in favour of resolution 1500 (2003),
convinced of the fundamental and decisive role that the
United Nations should play in the process of rebuilding
Iraq and in the efforts of Iraqis to recover full
sovereignty.

My country considers this resolution to be a
necessary technical step to enable the Secretary-
General and his Special Representative to carry out
fully the tasks entrusted to them by the Security
Council through the provisions of the relevant Council
resolutions, in particular resolution 1483 (2003), which
clearly states that it is the responsibility of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to coordinate
the post-conflict activities of the United Nations, to
coordinate among United Nations and international
agencies engaged in humanitarian assistance and
reconstruction activities and to assist the people of
Iraq. The resolution further stipulates that those
activities must be carried out in full and absolute
independence.

In that context, the Secretary-General, in the
report (5/2003/715) on the activities of his Special
Representative for Iraq, which he submitted in
fulfilment of his mandate, gave a detailed account of
the tasks that he considers the United Nations should
carry out in order to make a positive contribution to
Iraq's recovery of its sovereignty and to the
reconstruction of the country, including the
establishment of a critical road map and concrete
timetable for establishing a fully representative
government that can exercise the sovereignty of the
Iraqi people.

In that context, the creation of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq, which is provided for in
the resolution that the Council has just adopted, is a
vital step towards fulfilling those tasks. That Mission
enables the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative to have an effective presence in Iraq so
that their tasks can be carried out independently,
forcefully and capably.

We voted in favour of this resolution because it is
our concern that there should be a United Nations
presence in Iraq. It is our concern that the United
Nations should play a decisive role in that country's
development. It is our concern that the United Nations
should support the Iraqi people by establishing an
independent and sovereign government. It is our
concern that the United Nations should fulfil its
humanitarian duties, employing its capacities in that
area. It is our concern that the United Nations should
have the institutional capacity to provide for, defend
and promote human rights and to create a space for the
participation of international humanitarian agencies in
carrying out those objectives. Finally, it is our concern
that, as indicated by the Secretary-General, the United
Nations should actively participate in Iraq's full
recovery of its sovereignty, and in the termination of
the military occupation. In that context, we associate
ourselves with the Security Council consensus on
welcoming the establishment of the provisional
Governing Council as a first logical step towards
establishing a genuinely representative government that
exercises the sovereignty of the Iraqi people. That
welcome does not constitute legal recognition. Nor
should it be interpreted as endorsement. It is not,
because the Governing Council is still under the
authority of the occupying Powers.

Lastly, the independence of the United Nations in
Iraq means that the international community has
entrusted it with tasks that are distinct from the
obligations of the occupying Powers established as an
Authority. The Authority formed by the occupying
Powers bears the responsibility for ensuring the safety
and security of the population in the occupied territory.
That obligation stems from the Fourth Geneva
Convention and is in no way affected by the present
resolution.

Like other members of the Council, my country
has already conveyed to the sponsors of this resolution
our view that it should be through the search for
consensus among the 15 members, through the broad
discussion of all initiatives, that we can arrive at
broader and more consolidated agreement in the
decisions of the Security Council. That is why we hope
that procedures will be respected in future initiatives,
so that all members of the Council will participate in
all stages of discussion and adoption of a resolution.

