Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): At the outset, Indonesia
would like to thank Special Representative Ghassan
Salame, Head of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya (UNSMIL), and Ambassador Juergen Schulz,
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya.

We were deeply concerned upon learning this
morning from the Special Representative that both
conflicting parties in Libya seem to believe they
can achieve their purpose through military means.
Therefore, as we have repeatedly highlighted on various
occasions, Council members - both collectively and
individually - must spare no effort to bring about
peace to Libya, including by urging all parties to halt
military actions and by using its influence to pressure
parties to de-escalate tensions on the ground.

It is indeed upsetting that since April, and after
numerous meetings of the Security Council, the
situation in Tripoli remains grim. We keep hearing
reports about sanctions violations on the ground,
including the presence of new weapons that further
fuel the conflict in Libya. To that end, we reiterate our
call, in line with the Council's press statement of5 July
(SC/13873), for all States to not intervene in the conflict
or take measures that will exacerbate it.

The situation in Libya remains a deep concern
for Indonesia. We convey our deep condolences for
the recent shipwreck in the central Mediterranean,
which claimed over 100 lives. We are saddened that the
situation in Libya and the lack of rescue capacity in
the area are contributing factors. We also condemn the
recent shelling on Al-Alamain school and Az Zawiyah
Field Hospital in the south of Tripoli. We call for all
parties to restrain from attacking civilian and medical
facilities. Allow me to focus on three points.

First, Indonesia calls for the immediate cessation
of hostilities in Libya. We reiterate the persistent calls
of the Council for all parties to commit to a ceasefire
and de-escalation and to return to the United Nations-
facilitated political mediation. We also reiterate that
lasting peace and stability in Libya can come about
only through a political solution. Military solutions will
never help. We welcome the efforts made by Special
Representative Salame to restore a unified international
position on Libya in order to end its current crisis. In
that regard, Indonesia fully supports the three actions
recommended by Mr. Salame earlier with a view to
achieving lasting peace. We also reaffirm our continued
support for the work of the Special Representative
and UNSMIL. We call on all partners - the United
Nations and regional organizations, such as the African
Union - to continue their support and work in pursuing
peace in Libya.

Secondly, Indonesia supports the convening of the
national conference as soon as possible for Libyans to
peacefully discuss the future of Libya. Although the
scheduled time for the national conference in April has
come and gone, we should not forget that we were once
almost there. We should find our path back to where we
were, where peace was almost within reach. Let us start
with a ceasefire.

Thirdly, Indonesia would also like to reiterate its
call for the protection of civilians and the need for a
humanitarian pause in order to prevent further loss of
lives. A recent report shows that 4,178 civilians have
been killed and more than 250.000 people have been
internally displaced by ongoing hostilities, most of
whom are children, with more trapped in the front line.
Basic needs such as water and electricity have been cut
and food is limited. The conditions now are dreadful
and are getting worse by the day. It must stop.

We are saddened by attacks on civilian facilities
and the increasing number of civilian casualties in
this crisis. It is important for all parties to respect
international humanitarian law and human rights
and not target civilians or humanitarian workers.
The Council must step up and do what we are here to
do - save lives.

