Mr. Zouev (spoke in Russian): A year ago, on
30 June 2017, the Security Council adopted resolution
2365 (2017), the first resolution on mine action (see S/PV.7992). At the same time, the Security Council
acknowledged the threat created by explosive objects
to civilians and peacekeepers, as well as the acute need
to carry out mine action in order to mitigate the threat.
With the framework of the Office for the Rule of Law
and Security Institutions, the United Nations Mine
Action Service, in coordination with bodies within the
United Nations system as well as with entities outside
the Organization, is implementing the resolution.

The report that we are discussing today (S/2018/623)
contains a short overview of what we have achieved so
far. It also describes the issues we are encountering as
we carry out our mine action.

(spoke in English)

After years of decrease, casualty numbers from
explosive hazards are on the rise again. Despite the
clearance efforts of the United Nations, Member States
and non-governmental organizations, the International
Campaign to Ban Landmines recorded, in its latest
annual report, over 8,500 casualties ofmines, explosive
remnants of war and victim-operated improvised
explosive devices. Ongoing conflicts and the difficulty
of access to contaminated areas during active combats
are among the main causes of this unfortunate trend.
The figure represents over twice as many victims as
four years ago. Over 2,000 of those victims were killed,
nearly a quarter of whom were children. Considering
the difficulty of gathering data during active conflicts,
it is likely that the actual number of casualties is
much higher.

The clearance of landmines, explosive remnants
of war and improvised explosive devices does more
than just save lives. Mine action is a precondition for
stabilization and peacebuilding - and, eventually,
sustainable development - to take hold. Once
explosive remnants of war are removed from critical
infrastructure like hospitals, power plants and water-
treatment facilities, rehabilitation and reconstruction of
public services can begin.

The resulting opportunities for progress, in turn,
increase the likelihood that peace can be sustained in
the long term. Moreover, mine action helps prevent
explosive material from being harvested for use by
armed and terrorist groups, which makes mine action a
vital element of the nexus between peace and security
and development, and a cornerstone in preventing any
relapse into future conflict.

The report before the Council today notes that mine
action is critical to the safety, security and mobility of
United Nations personnel. In 2017, 59 peacekeepers
lost their lives through malicious acts involving the
use of explosive devices, and 150 more were injured.
Contexts like Mali and Somalia continue to be highly
threatening environments for the safe conduct of
Security Council mandates.

The Secretary-General's Action for Peacekeeping
initiative seeks to make our missions stronger and safer.
We owe it to the personnel we deploy on the ground
to provide them with the right training, knowledge
and equipment to safely conduct the United Nations
mandate. Raising awareness, training and building
capacity to mitigate the threat posed by explosive
weapons are critical aspects ofthis effort. Through their
mine-action activities, peace operations also protect
civilians and enable the delivery of humanitarian aid
to those in need.

In armed conflicts, improvised explosive devices
have become the main driver of increased deaths and
injuries among civilians and peacekeepers. Peace
operations are more effective, and lives are saved, when
the threat posed by explosive hazards is considered
from the earliest stages of planning and programming.

In his Agenda for Disarmament, which was
launched last month, the Secretary-General called for
a whole-of-system approach to this increasingly deadly
threat. Under the leadership of the United Nations Mine
Action Service, United Nations entities are working
towards a more effective and integrated response.
Troop-contributing countries, too, must step up their
efforts to prepare peacekeepers for the threats they face
in their deployments. The United Nations will continue
to provide support to countries seeking to improve
their national mine-action management. I greatly thank
those Member States that have implemented measures
to mitigate the risk to their citizens of explosive
devices, including by acceding to or ratifying relevant
international instruments.

(spoke in French)

Resolution 2365 (2017) has made mine action
one of the main priorities for the Organization. As a
vital element in the prevention of casualties and the
maintenance of peace and security, it is precisely
there - at the forefront of United Nations action - that
mine action must remain. The increasing number of
victims shows that we cannot afford to be complacent.
On behalf of the Secretary-General, I urge Member
States in a position to do so to provide sustainable,
predictable and unearmarked funding to the United
Nations Voluntary Trust Fund for Assistance in
Mine Action.

The annual review of mine action by the Security
Council, based on a report on the implementation of
the resolution, would continue to give due attention to
the threat posed by landmines, explosive remnants of
war and improvised explosive devices. The Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and the Mine Action
Service of the Office of the Rule of Law and Security
Institutions will be ready at any time to inform the
Council on specific mine-action issues.

