Mr. Suarez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, as a responsible member of the
international community, has requested to participate
in this Security Council briefing, with an unwavering
commitment to preserving the Latin American and
Caribbean region as a zone of peace, as agreed by the
Heads of State and Government of the Community of
Latin American and Caribbean States in 2014.

Allow me first refer to the relevant procedures and,
accordingly, express our rejection of the practice of
exploiting items on the agenda of the Security Council,
such as today's, so as to force us into addressing the
domestic situations of sovereign countries. This
constitutes a flagrant violation of the mandates of this
organ and of the Charter of the United Nations itself,
while at the same time it sets a dangerous precedent
and once again attests to the arbitrary nature of this
presidency. In that regard, Venezuela also rejects the
Security Council's continued appropriation of topics,
especially when dealing with matters such as that being
addressed today, which in no way constitutes a threat to
regional, much less to international peace and security.
We therefore emphasize that the consideration of the
situation in Nicaragua lies outside of the mandate of
the Council, whose competencies are clearly conferred
upon it under the Charter.

Venezuela welcomes the social peace and stability
enjoyed by the brotherly Nicaraguan people today, after
having fallen victim to a four-month wave of terrorist
violence that was encouraged, organized and financed
by external factors, with the aim of overthrowing the
country's legitimate, constitutional and democratically
elected Government. We nevertheless sound the alarm
that the external aggression is continuing, including
through interventionist initiatives imposed by the
Organization of American States (OAS), an authority
that, as expressed in the budget legislation allocating
funds for the United States Department of State for the
2018 fiscal year, responds to the strategic interests of
that country. That is why the spokesperson of that agency
who spoke earlier is no more than a spokesperson for
those interests, which exemplifies once again a flagrant
violation of the principle of sovereignty and the right
to self-determination of peoples, enshrined in the
founding Charter of the Organization, which seems to
place an obstacle in the way of the imperial domination
of various United States Administrations.

As we have always done, we insist that the norms of
international law must be respected. The purposes and
principles enshrined by the Charter must be upheld. The
peaceful resolution of conflicts must be encouraged and
multilateralism maintained. Unilateralism is contrary
to the maintenance and building of peace, to which
the signatories of the Charter committed themselves.
The Nicaraguan people have the wisdom and necessary
tools under their national Constitution, inter alia, to
resolve their internal affairs and decide their future as
a sovereign country without interference of any kind.

The treatment to which Nicaragua has been
subjected is very similar to that accorded to Venezuela.
Let me give several examples.

Is it not true that United States officials threaten
OAS member countries to vote against Venezuela
and Nicaragua in that regional forum? Is it not true
that Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, the Director
of the United States Central Intelligence Agency at
that time, said in July 2017 that he had worked with
the Governments of Colombia and Mexico to promote
a transition in Venezuela? Is it not true that former
Secretary of State Rex Tillerson said in August 2017
that he was creating the conditions for a change of
Government in Venezuela? Is it not true that in August
2017 President Donald Trump threatened Venezuela
with a military intervention? Is it not true that in August
of 2017 Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin said that the
Government of the United States of America is doing
everything possible to harm Venezuela economically?

Is it not true that in February, former Secretary of
State Rex Tillerson openly called for a military revolt in
Venezuela? Is it not true that in May, Madam President,
you said that the time had come for President Maduro to

leave, which you reiterated in August on the Colombian-
Venezuelan border. Is it not true that in Brazil, in June,
Vice-President Mike Pence said that the time had
come to take firmer and additional actions to isolate
Venezuela? Is it not true that in July, the United States
Agency for International Development acknowledged
that the United States Embassy in Caracas was
encouraging the Venezuelan opposition? Is it not
true that in August the White House Spokeswoman
threatened Venezuela, warning that all options were
on the table? Is it not true that in August, following a
meeting on Venezuela with National Security Adviser
John Bolton, Senator Marco Rubio declared that the
time had come for military intervention?

Is it not true that just this past weekend the
representative of the United States to the OAS threatened
the integrity of President Nicolas Maduro Moros if he
attended the high-level segment of that organization,
to be held in the coming weeks? Is it not true that in
September the representative of the United States of
America to the OAS advocated for a military attack by
Brazil, Chile, Colombia and Peru against Venezuela,
proposing that the pretext would be an alleged military
clash on the borders shared by Brazil and Colombia with
Venezuela? Is it not true that in September the United
States representative to the OAS labelled as corrupt
those countries of the Caribbean that had notjoined the
United States plan of aggression against Venezuela?

We now ask the honourable members of the Security
Council: Who is the aggressor? Nicaragua? Venezuela?
We are talking about empirical facts and not fake
news, as the Administration likes to describe evidence.
Venezuela reiterates its rejection of the manner in which
some countries invoke the humanitarian pretext to use
the Security Council as a tool to promote their policy of
regime change that has caused so much damage to the
peoples of Africa and the Middle East, while leading
to a humanitarian crisis of a previously unimaginable
proportions and fuelling xenophobia in the very
countries that yesterday endorsed and applauded the
Western invasions of Iraq and Libya under arguments
that have proven to be false. Let us not be dragged
back into the quagmire of history by one of the most
obscurantist Administrations of recent times.

Lastly, since Ambassador Nikki Haley invoked his
memory, in 1829 the liberator Simon Bolivar said that
the United States seemed to be destined to plague all
of the Americas with misery in the name of liberty.
History has shown the judiciousness of his premonition.

The meeting rose at 12.20p.m.
