Mr. Sinirlioglu (Turkey): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this timely and important
debate. Today, in every pillar of United Nations action,
there exist tremendous challenges.

We welcome the constructive exchange of ideas
that is taking place in this open debate today. We share
the concern expressed by many as to the gravity of
existing threats and risks. We wish to contribute to the
discussion by highlighting the following points that, in
our opinion, deserve special attention.

In the face of the complexity of the contemporary
challenges we are facing, no single State possesses
the capacity to take on these challenges alone. As the
Secretary-General stated:

"The interconnected nature of today's crises
requires us to connect our own efforts for peace
and security, sustainable development and human
rights not just in words but in practice." (see S/PV. 7857, p. 3)

The United Nations is in acute need of substantial
reform to increase its capacity to address the challenges
we face. It must enhance its effectiveness and live up
to its role as the primary platform in dealing with
international peace and security. Hence, we commend
the Secretary-General for acknowledging this need and
support him in his efforts. We welcome the adoption
of the General Assembly resolution expressing support
for him to continue to work on restructuring the United
Nations peace and security pillar (resolution 72/199).

Since the report of the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446), a primary
objective has been to increase the effectiveness ofUnited
Nations peacekeeping operations while prioritizing
political solutions to crises. The prevention of crises
before they scale up to open conflicts is essential in this
regard, and so is preventing the relapse of such crises
in post-conflict recovery processes. The Secretary-
General's surge in diplomacy for peace initiative and
his subsequent proposal on reform of the peace and
security pillar have underscored the importance of
prevention and the role of mediation, to which Turkey,
together with Finland, is devoting special attention and
effort as co-Chair ofthe Group ofFriends of Mediation.

The Security Council, in view of its objective and
responsibility to maintain international peace and
security, also needs to be reformed so that it can address
complex contemporary challenges in that realm.

The views of Turkey, as a member of the Uniting
for Consensus group, on the substance of Security
Council reform are well known. The Security Council
has on many occasions failed to provide timely and
adequate responses to emerging and prevailing crises.
Most often inaction results from the threat of, or, as
we witnessed this week, the use of veto. This is the
greatest roadblock facing the Security Council. The
veto disables the Security Council's function, and,
whatever the motivation, the outcome is a sustained
or aggravated crisis and a United Nations whose
credibility is undermined each and every time such an
event occurs.

We would also like to underline here the
importance of greater Security Council interaction
with non-Council members and various United Nations
agencies and bodies. Also important is the cooperation
of the United Nations with other organizations.

We also subscribe to the idea that we should take a
comprehensive, holistic and integrated approach to the
increasingly complex contemporary challenges.

Let me say as a final point that we need to pay
greater attention to tackling the root causes of or factors
driving conflicts. The use and proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction; terrorism; territorial, ethnic,
religious or cultural disputes; or driving factors such
as climate change, water, famine, pandemic disease,
transnational organized crime, and human and drug
trafficking, among other things, pose a challenge to
the international community as a whole. As noted in
the concept paper prepared by the Japanese presidency
(S/2017/1016, annex), the Council has aimed to discuss
the relationship between many of these factors and
security in many open debates and briefings. We
support this approach, because no crisis can be
addressed adequately without paying due attention to
these factors in the context of a comprehensive and
collective approach.
Turkey, as has been the case so far, stands ready
to join its efforts with those of other nations in
increasing our joint capacity to address these complex
contemporary challenges.

