Mr. Forsyth Mejia (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
For me, it is a pleasure to thank you, Mr. Minister, for
the brilliant leadership shown by the Argentine
Republic in the presidency of the Security Council.
The initiative to convene this open debate on the
situation in Haiti reaffirms the priority that we accord
to the resolution of this crisis. I also wish to welcome
the presence of His Excellency Mr. Rene Preval,
President-elect of Haiti, and to express to him once
again, on behalf of the Government of Peru, our
heartfelt congratulations on his election. We assure him
of our commitment to continue to cooperate in
supporting his Government's efforts to lay the
foundations for a stable society where law, democracy
and respect for human rights prevail. Those are
conditions essential for the achievement of sustainable
development in Haiti.

We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for his briefing and reiterate our
commitment and gratitude to the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) for its
extraordinary efforts to contribute to stability in that
country, to offer assistance to the Haitian authorities
and to ensure an adequate security environment in the
country - an environment that was essential for the
normal functioning of the recent electoral process.

In addition, my delegation associates itself with
the statement to be made by the representative of
Guyana on behalf of the Rio Group.

The elections held last February were the first
step toward the restoration of democracy and stability
in Haiti. From now on we face the challenge of
preserving peaceful and secure conditions in the
country in order to guarantee the continuity of the
process.
The second round of the parliamentary elections
and the upcoming local and municipal elections require
the assistance of the international community and
renewed political commitment on the part of the
Haitian authorities and people. We believe it is
fundamental to continue promoting national political
dialogue and reconciliation in order to avoid returning
to polarization, violence and chaos.

Peru calls for a broad and lasting national
consensus within the Haitian society that would help
them to face, in unity, the enormous challenges that lie
ahead. Without an understanding of the Haitian citizens
themselves that would establish a true national
consensus, it is difficult to imagine that the critical
social and economic situation that generated the
violence two years ago could be overcome. In that
context Peru, as an American country in solidarity with
the others, shares the desire of the Haitian people for
peace, democracy and development and offers its
experience in the areas of coordination and national
consensus.

Security, the strengthening of democratic
institutions and human rights, and the sustainability of
the development process are an indissoluble triad. With
regard to strengthening the main State institutions -
an urgent task for the consolidation of democracy -
MINUSTAH must continue to support the Haitian
authorities in accordance with its mandate.

For example, the reform of the Haitian national
police must be consolidated and completed in such a
way as to adapt to the new democratic institutions.
Peru is evaluating cooperation modalities for that task,
which could include, among other things, the
participation of Peruvian national police officers in the
Haitian police training centres.

Similarly, comprehensive reform by the Haitian
authorities of the justice system and of the human
rights protection regime is urgently needed. However,
we must keep in mind the kind of crisis in Haiti - a
case of disintegration of the social fabric, where
criminal activity and the institutional collapse are
interlinked. That situation is the result of years of
marginalization and extreme poverty, which have
generated an enormous environmental disaster.

Regrettably, today Haiti is a country with a great
social and physical imbalance. It has one of the highest
urban population growth rates in the world, with one of
the lowest per capita consumption rates for water, food
and energy - the fundamental resources for national
survival of any society. That imbalance, resulting from
the enormous population growth rate of 3 per cent per
annum - one of the highest in Latin America - has
destroyed the habitat through relentless deforestation
that has produced enormous soil erosion, sedimentation
and loss of fertility. Consequently, there is insufficient
water to grow crops and generate power, both crucial
elements for the life of the Haitian population.
Recovery from the ecological damage in Haiti will be
extremely difficult, as the current global climate
change will worsen the social and physical imbalance.

Because of all of those grave issues, we reiterate
that now is the time for the efforts of the international
community - of all the countries that are friends of
Haiti, both in this hemisphere and around the world -
to decidedly come together in long-term support of the
Haitian Government and people. We believe that Haiti
needs a pact through which the international
community should provide the necessary resources, in
specific time frames, for the implementation of the
goals defined with the Haitian authorities, based upon a
national consensus, in areas such as democratic
governability, social and economic development,
environmental protection and security.

The next re-evaluation of the assistance priorities
agreed in the Interim Cooperation Framework, to be
carried out by the new Haitian authorities, will be a
valuable occasion for that purpose. We believe that in
this long-term commitment, the Organization of
American States (OAS) and the Inter-American
Development Bank have a role to play equal to that of
the United Nations. The OAS must be the executor for
that approach so that the work carried out by
MINUSTAH does not dissolve in the social and
environmental deterioration, once the electoral
enthusiasm passes.

I cannot conclude without stressing the important
work performed by Ambassador Juan Gabriel Valdes as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of MINUSTAH and thanking him for the efforts
he has made since his appointment. He will surely be
difficult to replace. My country believes that his
successor should be a person with similar diplomatic,
political and management skills, as well as broad
experience in designing and implementing
development programmes, resource mobilization, the
strengthening of institutions and conflict resolution.
Those are all important elements in Haiti's post-
election stage.

Here today Peru reaffirms its commitment to the
Haitian people and the new Haitian authorities to
continue making its best efforts for Haiti to begin a
clear democratic, economic and social recovery
process. The American continent cannot allow a new
crisis in Haiti. Therefore, we will maintain our
commitment, determination and solidarity with our
neighbour country.

