Mr. Naidu (Fiji): May we commend you
personally, Mr. Minister, for your presence here and
your office for coordinating this open discussion on
East Timor under your presidency of the Security
Council. This topic is of great significance not only for
my country, but also for the integrity of the United
Nations.

Before I proceed further, my delegation wishes to
commend Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello for his continued
contribution to the people of East Timor. We also
welcome Chief Minister Mari Alkatiri among us today.

As the Council knows, Fiji makes a modest
contribution to the operation, with 194 military
personnel maintaining peacekeeping duties along the
East Timor border - and I am pleased to say that our
troops serve with Irish troops as well as with New
Zealand troops. Our intervention today is therefore
based on our own observations in the field and on the
report of the Secretary-General.

East Timor is truly a success story for the United
Nations, being the shortest peacekeeping engagement
to have substantially achieved its mandate. Contrast
that with the more protracted operations which have
continued for years, but for which a peaceful resolution
has remained elusive.

The Secretary-General's latest report, on
developments in East Timor over the past four months,
is very promising and provides a realistic road map for
ultimately achieving independence. Implicit in that
report is the continuing need for peacekeeping.

The successful outcome of the August elections is
encouraging. We hail in particular the fact that women
occupy 28 per cent of the Constituent Assembly, which
positively reflects upon the results of the women, peace
and security strategy of Security Council resolution
1325 (2000). The result is a significant step forward in
East Timor's nation-building, in coming out of a
conflict situation and along the difficult path of
transition to political independence.

We would be pleased to see consensus reached on
the issue of maintaining a troop presence in East Timor
for a number of reasons. Most importantly, the new-
found peace in East Timor has yet to consolidate. It
will most likely flounder in a withdrawal that lacks a
strategy - more so as there are still outstanding issues
under negotiation between the parties, including law
enforcement, capacity-building of the police and
security forces and developing the basic infrastructure
that is vital for full autonomy.

Although declining, the continuing militia
activities pose some security and human rights concerns
that must be addressed for the protection and safety of the
population, both local and international. There is a need,
therefore, for the continued presence of peacekeepers.
Besides, much work remains to be accomplished in
facilitating the return of thousands of refugees who are
still in the Indonesian territories. This will also
safeguard our credibility in the long term and make the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET) an efficient and strategic operation.

Much irreparable loss and waste befell East
Timor prior to the peacekeeping engagement. United
Nations resources have now been channelled to this
democratization and peace-building exercise in its two
years of operation. We reiterate that a premature
withdrawal would expose East Timor to likely violence
and armed conflict. This situation would undo the
progress made and squander the substantial investment
of the international community; and it is therefore to be
avoided at all costs.
After going through such trauma, UNTAET has
given the people of East Timor a feeling of security and
hope in building new lives with some sense of purpose,
hope for the future, enabling them to invest now for the
benefit of generations to come. The least that the
United Nations can do under the prevailing
circumstances, having come thus far, is to provide them
security and confidence with the presence of
peacekeepers until the new Government has developed
the capacity to fend for itself.

Beyond this issue, the Secretary-General's
assessment of the essential build-up work on the
ground is well appreciated by my delegation. It also
recognizes that a peaceful and composed environment
is critical for the anticipated framework to succeed,
which we all understand will happen only through
peace-building and peacekeeping. We agree that the
downsizing and phasing out of the peacekeeping force
need to be based on the development of infrastructure
and institutions. In this regard, we endorse the
Secretary-General's entire set of recommendations for
the successor mission and its core functions to be
supplanted by the fledgling East Timor Government
two years following independence.

