The President (spoke in Chinese): I will now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
China.

I thank Ambassador Quinlan, Ambassador Loulichki
and Ambassador Joon Oh for their briefings. China
appreciates the important contributions made by
Ambassador Loulichki, during his tenure as Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism,
to the effective implementation of the Committee's
mandate and the coordination of international efforts
in the fight against terrorism. China also expresses
its appreciation to Ambassadors Quinlan and Joon Oh
for their leadership as the Chairs, respectively, of the
Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities and the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004).

The Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee is one of the
main instruments at the disposal of the United Nations,
and the Security Council in particular, in the fight
against terrorism. China supports the Committee in its
efforts to improve communication with the countries
concerned, strengthen the activities for the review
of listing and delisting on an ongoing basis, conduct
regular consideration of the sanctions list as planned,
and implement resolutions 1267 (1999) and 2083 (2012)
in a comprehensive and accurate manner, with a View to
contributing further to the cause of counter-terrorism at
the international level. China supports the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team in its activities
under the leadership of the Committee and notes the
efforts by the Office of the Ombudsperson to improve
the fairness and transparency of the mechanism. We
hope that Member States will actively cooperate with
the Committee in its activities in order to preserve
the authority and effectiveness of the United Nations
sanctions mechanism.

China appreciates the many activities of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism (CTC).
China supports the CTC and its Executive Directorate
(CTED) in their continued efforts to promote the
implementation of the Council's relevant resolutions by
improving assessments of resolution implementation,
organizing relevant meetings and events, conducting
country visits and providing the necessary technical
guidance to Member States, upon request. China hopes
that the CTC will continue its dialogue and interaction
with Member States and assist them in strengthening
capacity-building for the fight against terrorism. As the
Security Council is going to consider the extension of
the mandate of CTED, China will take an active and
constructive part in the consideration of the relevant
draft resolution.

Over the past six months, thanks to the joint efforts
of the members of the 1540 Committee and the panel
of experts, the programme of work of the Committee
has been carried out in a steady manner. Its outreach
activities in particular have raised awareness of the
resolution among Member States and have enhanced
international assistance and cooperation.

Next year will mark the tenth anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 1540 (2004). A universal,
comprehensive and balanced implementation of
the resolution depends on Member States playing a
central role and requires the Committee to carry out
its mandate in letter and in spirit. China supports the
Committee's efforts, through solid and steady efforts
and in accordance with its mandate, to increase the
number of reporting States, to compile experience in
the context of the resolution's implementation, and to
promote international assistance and cooperation in
its main activities. China will continue to work with
all parties in a joint effort to enhance the role that the
United Nations plays, as it should, in the prevention of
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.

I now resume my function as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.

