Ms. Stiglic (Slovenia): First of all, I would like to
thank Bosnia and Herzegovina for organizing this open
debate on post-conflict peacebuilding, with a special
focus on institution-building, which is a prevalent
challenge in a number of societies that have just
emerged from conflict. This debate, under Bosnia and
Herzegovina's first-ever presidency of the Security
Council, has special significance. Bosnia and
Herzegovina is a country with extensive first-hand
experience of the subject before the Council. In the
15 years since Dayton, Bosnia and Herzegovina has
undergone a difficult process of peacebuilding,
transition and recovery, and it continues along the path
to ensuring further progress in institution-building,
integration into Euro-Atlantic structures and overall
prosperity.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his statement and the Deputy Prime Minister of Timor-
Leste, His Excellency Mr. Jose Luis Guterres, for
sharing his insights into Timor-Leste's experiences in
institution-building. My thanks also go to Ambassador
Wittig, outgoing Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), for his contribution to the
Commission's role in promoting and supporting an
integrated and coherent approach to peacebuilding,
including women's participation.

Slovenia fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the European Union.

I would like to stress the importance of the
Secretary-General's 2009 report on peacebuilding in
the immediate aftermath of conflict (S/2009/304), as
well as to welcome the continuous attention paid to the
issue of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture.

It is widely recognized that in the aftermath of
large-scale violence, the needs of the people tend to be
far greater than the capacity of national or international
actors to meet them. Given that imbalance, national
and international efforts in the early post-conflict
period should focus primarily on meeting the most
urgent and important peacebuilding objectives, such as
establishing security, building confidence and trust in
the political process, delivering initial peace dividends
and expanding core national capacity.

We believe in the importance of providing
support for basic safety and security, including the
protection of civilians; disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration; strengthening the rule of law;
demining and supporting security-sector reform.
Peacekeepers should be able to contribute in the early
stages of peacebuilding, where they are best positioned
to do so.

A secure environment is crucial to the
implementation of peacebuilding tasks, whether by
national or international actors. Societies emerging
from war face a high risk of relapse into conflict. It is
therefore essential that international efforts facilitate
and support their transition from short-term
stabilization to long-term security. Capacity
development is at the heart of peacebuilding. It is
crucial to help create national structures to manage
tensions and mediate between various societal
interests, with a view to preventing a return to
violence. Capacity development is also the main
approach to stronger and more resilient State-society
relations based on trust and inclusiveness, as it leads to
the reactivation of core State functions and helps the
State to re-establish legitimate governance throughout
the country.

It is imperative that national ownership - which
must often be strengthened through a step-by-step
process - focus on capacity-building of core
Government functions and on national actors. In that
context, the international community and regional and
subregional organizations should partner with post-
conflict societies to assist with institutional capacity-
building, promoting the rule of law and strengthening
civilian institutions, including ministries, the
parliament and the judiciary.
International assistance must be allocated to
support State institutions with a view to establishing a
basis for competent and legitimate governance. In the
process, dependence on international assistance must
be gradually but steadfastly reduced, and self-reliance
promoted.

Peacebuilding requires coherent, comprehensive
and consistent efforts by many different actors working
together. It demands the integration of political,
security, humanitarian and development considerations.
Security and development partnerships must be
strengthened to include global, international, regional
and local actors as well as civil society.

We recognize the important role of the PBC as an
intergovernmental body tasked with developing
peacebuilding strategies and providing enhanced
coordination for countries that have transitioned from
war to peace. We support strengthened institutional
arrangements among various United Nations actors,
along with closer cooperation between the Security
Council and the PBC. In that respect we welcome the
statement made by the representative of Belgium on
behalf of Brazil, Canada, Jordan and Switzerland in
their capacities as Chairs of the PBC's country-specific
configurations.

It is crucial that we prevent the persistent
violence, intimidation and discrimination against
women and encourage their participation and full
involvement in post-conflict activities, especially as
women can be important drivers of recovery and
development in peacebuilding processes. Slovenia
welcome the 2010 report of the Secretary-General on
women's participation in peacebuilding (S/2010/466),
including the seven-point action plan.

The establishment of the United Nations Entity
for Gender Equality should further contribute to the
effective implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000)
and 1820 (2008). Last year, Slovenia adopted its
national action plan for the implementation of both
resolutions. One of the main objectives of the action
plan is to increase the involvement of women in
peacebuilding and peacekeeping missions.

While the past 20 years have witnessed a decline
in the number of international armed conflicts, there has
been an emergence of internal conflicts, mostly in low-
income countries, due to horizontal inequalities along
ethnic, religious and regional lines associated with civil
wars. It is thus clear that numerous peacebuilding
challenges still lie ahead and that we must turn to
lessons learned and best practices when tackling those
challenges in the future. When embarking upon
sustainable post-conflict reconstruction, we should
ensure and commit to long-term institution-building, as
that will ultimately strengthen the processes and conduct
necessary to peacefully manage conflicts at all levels.

