Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): The
Libyan request for a meeting of the Security Council
following the interception of a Libyan vessel raises the
more general question of access, in particular
humanitarian access, to Gaza.

The French position was recalled in a statement
issued on 14 November by the presidency of the
European Union. In that statement, the presidency of
the Council of the European Union condemned the
resumption of violence, particularly the rocket strikes
from Gaza into Israel, and called for its immediate end.
However, the presidency deplored the Israeli
Government's decision to close border crossings into
Gaza. This disproportionate response will again
collectively punish the entire civilian population in

Gaza, where the humanitarian situation is deeply
worrying. The presidency of the Council of the
European Union therefore called for the reopening of
border crossings and the immediate resumption of fuel
and humanitarian supplies.

In that regard, my delegation recalls that this year
the European Union will once again submit to the
General Assembly a consensual draft resolution on
assistance to the Palestinian people that emphasizes
humanitarian access. I also recall that France defends
the principle of free humanitarian access in all
circumstances and wherever a population is in need of
international humanitarian assistance. My delegation
welcomes the consensus demonstrated today by the
Security Council on that principle, and hopes that such
consensus will become the rule with respect to all
items on its agenda.

Furthermore, again with respect to access to
Gaza, the European Union presidency has deplored the
refusal to allow the European heads of mission,
including the French Consul General in Jerusalem, who
is the Union presidency's local representative, to visit
Gaza during a field trip to assess the humanitarian and
economic situation.

France firmly believes that the Security Council
has a role to play with regard to the Israeli-Palestinian
issue. In View of the humanitarian situation in Gaza,
we are prepared to work at any time on a response
from the Security Council. We feel that such a response
should address all the difficulties of access to the Gaza
Strip by putting the incident involving the Libyan
vessel in the broader context of access for
humanitarian assistance and workers to the Gaza Strip
by land and by sea.

If such a response should prove impracticable
today or in the near future, we note also that the
Quartet, in which France participates in its capacity as
presidency of the European Union, will meet again in
December. Moreover, the Security Council will hold an
open meeting on the situation in the Middle East on 18
December. We feel that we should use both
opportunities to explore possibilities of further action
by the Council.

