Mr. Ele Ela (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I would like to thank the United States
penholder for this dossier for submitting resolution
2468 (2019), which we feel can contribute to a final and
lasting solution to the Western Sahara conflict.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea voted in favour
of the resolution, which renews the mandate of the
United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western
Sahara (MINURSO) until 31 October. Our vote affirms
our full support for MINURSO, for Mr. Colin Stewart,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Western Sahara and Head of MINURSO, and for the
Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General for Western
Sahara, former President Horst Kohler.

Equatorial Guinea has given clear and consistent
support to MINURSO as a mission with a mandate
and adequate capacity to carry out its tasks and main
objective. However, for important reasons of form and
substance, the parties to the conflict have complicated
the situation and prolonged this United Nations Mission
for more than a quarter of a century. We were therefore
pleased with the renewed momentum generated
for the mandate by the meetings held in Geneva on
5 and 6 December 2018 and in Addis Ababa on 21 and
22 March 2019, at which Morocco, the Frente Popular
para la Liberacion de Saguia el-Hamra y de Rio de Oro,
Algeria and Mauritania committed to participating in
a United Nations-driven political dialogue on Western
Sahara, with a view to arriving at a solution that is
lasting and mutually acceptable to everyone, based on
the established agreements and in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. Equatorial Guinea welcomes these efforts to
conduct negotiations with a view to ensuring respect for
the principles of international law in accordance with
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions.

Equatorial Guinea encourages the parties
to continue along this path of negotiation in an
atmosphere of good faith and without conditions, with
a view to identifying areas of convergence, pursuing
strategic approaches to maintaining peace and finding
a peaceful political solution to the conflict. We would
also like to encourage the neighbouring countries and
other countries of the region to bring their influence
to bear on the parties in the political process, working
together with the United Nations and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

In conclusion, Equatorial Guinea would have
preferred a l2-month renewal of MINURSO's mandate,
but since this did not happen, we hope that in October
that request will be taken into account in order to give
the Mission and the Personal Envoy time to continue
their work without interruption.

