Mr. Bishnoi (India): We thank you, Sir, for
convening this open debate on the subject of children
and armed conflict, with a special focus on child
victims of non-State armed groups. We thank your
delegation for the concept note that has been prepared
(S/2015/168, annex). We also thank the Secretary-
General, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, Deputy Executive Director of UNICEF and
other briefers for the information they have provided.

We note that 2014 was reported to be the worst year
as far as children and armed conflict are concerned,
and that the pattern continues. This is most distressing.
Children are innocent, and they should not be victims of
what is not of their making. While we acknowledge the
importance of resolution 1612 (2005), the situation also
highlights its limitations. The focus on children and
armed conflict profiles the issue, as indeed it should.
The real solution, however, lies in the achievement of
durable peace, and that is what the Council's actions
should focus upon.

It is important that United Nations access to
non-State armed groups be ensured through the
cooperation framework between the United Nations
and the concerned national Government. We must be
cautious that the United Nations actions not be such
as to bypass national Governments and give political
legitimacy to non-State actors. It is this legitimacy
that they seek the most and which may also, to some
extent, be a motivating factor. I will also add that, in
the context of monitoring mechanisms, the veracity and
credibility of field data can be maintained only through
the involvement of national Governments.

We note that the concept note refers to the need for
military operations, including peace operations, against
non-State armed groups to integrate child protection
issues into their operational planning, procedures
and operations so as to minimize and prevent child
casualties. The drafting of such important mandates
would require the Council to have the full cooperation
of the host Government of the peacekeeping operation,
as well as of the Member States not represented in
the Council that contribute troops to such operations.
Unfortunately, the latter consultation is not the practice
in the Council, although the provisions ofArticle 44 are
quite clear on this

The concept note also refers to the need to
encourage States to adopt legal measures to prohibit
and criminalize the use of children under the age of
18. We are not clear how this would help. Illegal armed
groups operate outside the law. They kill, torture and
maim the innocent. It seems most doubtful that those
who resort to illegal armed conflict and terrorism
would be deterred from recruiting children if they were
prohibited from doing so merely by the law.

Again, the possibility of sanctions and questions
of accountability should not lead us to be blindsided.
There are references in the concept note to putting
more pressure on non-State armed groups, to holding
commanders of such groups accountable for their
actions, and to raising the normative and political costs
for them. We should not end up in a situation of missing
the woods for the trees.

It is also our view that the international community
should also strive to address the broader issue of the
economic and social marginalization that drives
millions of children into the kind ofchildhood that could
make them part of the problem rather than tomorrow's
solution. The socioeconomic issues plaguing the
poorest nations and the need to eradicate poverty must
be the imperatives of our development agenda in order
to enable an environment of lasting peace and security.

