Mr. Pleuger (Germany): My delegation, too,
thanks the Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), Ambassador Arias, for his detailed
and substantial report.

The fight against terrorism within the broadest
possible international coalition remains one of
Germany's most important policy objectives. Our
internationally recognized contributions to that fight
are well known and need not be elaborated here. While
we fully subscribe to the forthcoming statement by the
presidency of the European Union, we would like to
highlight the following points.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee has done
impressive work and deserves our recognition. We
support the CTC's new work programme, as we have
always supported its work, and will remain committed
to close cooperation. Some weeks ago, we submitted
our fourth report under resolution 1373 (2001). We
have actively contributed to the current efforts to
improve the CTC's effectiveness by strengthening its
support structure. In our view, this reform must be
undertaken in an open and consensual atmosphere, in
close cooperation with the Secretariat and the General
Assembly and in full respect for the United Nations
Charter. In that context, we strongly suggest that the
views expressed by the Secretariat in its letter to the
Chairman of the CTC, dated 3 March 2004, be
carefully analysed and duly taken into account.

Besides strengthening the CTC's internal work
structures and procedures, the reform must contribute
to further enhancing the CTC's legitimacy in the
perception of all United Nations Member States, which
have up to now placed their trust and confidence in that
major counter-terrorism instrument of the United
Nations. This, in our view, also means including an
appropriate human rights perspective by appointing a
human rights expert as a staff member of the new
support structure.

Most important of all, the CTC should improve
its capacity to deepen its continuous dialogue with all
United Nations Member States on key counter-
terrorism issues under resolutions 1373 (2001) and
1456 (2003). The quality, impartiality and intensity of
that dialogue are unprecedented in United Nations
history and remain a valuable asset on which we can
build.

In that context, let me repeat a suggestion that we
made during the last open debate. CTC experts could,
with the help of the enhanced structure, form joint
teams with members of specialized international
organizations and actively assist countries in key areas
of resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1456 (2003), such as in
professionalizing their financial control, border
protection, weapons control or law enforcement
sectors.

In conclusion, I would like to express our
appreciation of the fact that a great number of Member
States are taking the floor today in order to present
their views and suggestions on the CTC reform efforts.
We can assure them all that we will do our outmost to
give their points due consideration in the ongoing
consultations on a draft resolution on this matter.

