Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report to the Security Council under this agenda item.
We would also like to convey our special gratitude for
the useful presentation made by Mr. Dhanapala, the
Under-Secretary-General for Disarmament Affairs.

I would like to begin my statement by
unequivocally stating Colombia's commitment to
address this issue at the multilateral level. Since the
1980s Colombia, together with various friendly
countries, has been a co-sponsor of General Assembly
resolutions on this subject, including the first one
submitted on this subject. More recently, we presided
over the United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade
in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects,
which was held in July 2001. As a member of the
Security Council, Colombia has had an ongoing
interest in ensuring that this body fully assume its
responsibilities and makes a real difference in how it
deals with issues pertaining to small arms and light
weapons arising in the situations under its
consideration. The report of the Secretary-General
under consideration at this meeting was submitted
pursuant to the Council's request contained in the
presidential statement adopted on 31 August 2001
under Colombia's presidency (S/PRST/2001/21).

Colombia has been particularly affected by the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons. This is
perhaps our primary motivation in tirelessly alerting
the international community to the harmful effects of
the uncontrolled proliferation of, and illicit trade in,
small arms and light weapons. We must also not ignore
the negative impact of this issue on the peace, security
and socio-economic development of many countries
and regions.

While today's open debate is important to the
consideration of this problem, we believe that it is not
enough. We have the responsibility of ensuring that the
Security Council makes progress in its consideration of
this item and that it does not merely limit itself to
general discussions without clear goals. We also have
the responsibility to add value, to find a new way of
contributing and to make progress beyond what has
already been achieved. In short, we must avoid
covering old ground. Our proposal has been, and
continues to be, to focus discussions such as this one
and to define goals. Our aim should be to find a way to
have a real and positive impact on the situations under
the Council's consideration that are deeply affected by
the illicit traffic in small arms and light weapons.

In keeping with what has been agreed, and with
the consent of all the members of the Council,
Colombia has drafted a working document that will be
made public and issued as an official document of the
Council. In that document we suggest to the Council
that it consider the recommendations of the Secretary-
General on small arms and that, in so doing, it focus its
efforts on a specific topic while not ignoring the
importance of other issues and elements such as the
ones mentioned by the ambassador of Mauritius
regarding a comprehensive treatment of this item.

Our proposal is to strengthen the implementation
of arms embargoes on the basis of the lessons learned
from the past, in particular so as to produce effective
results. In achieving that goal, we have at our disposal
a wealth of inputs that merit careful consideration. The
general and specific recommendations of the
monitoring groups and panels of experts established by
the Council also deserve our attention and very careful
consideration. In this regard, I would like to refer to the
sanctions regimes referred to as targeted sanctions,
which are aimed at specific actors, including the
Taliban, the Al Qaeda group and Osama bin Laden and
his associates, as well as conflict situations such as
those in Angola, Sierra Leone, Liberia and, most
recently, Somalia. This is an area in which the Security
Council can, and should, define a comprehensive
strategy and political vision that inspires its actions
with regard to current situations and future risks. We
want to draw the Council's attention to this matter
because we are aware of the lack of effective results in
the implementation of those sanctions. We therefore
believe that careful analysis of past experiences and a
new approach might serve to achieve the objective that
the Council has set for itself in the establishment of
arms embargoes.

We have received with interest the draft
presidential statement that the President has circulated
among members of the Council. We trust that the text
will incorporate the relevant changes stemming from
the statements made by the participants in this debate,
including those we have just put forward.

