Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China welcomes the visit to New York of the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Finance and Development Cooperation of Belgium in order to preside over today's meeting. We thank Under-Secretary-General Mueller and UNICEF Executive Director Fore for their briefings. China supports the United Nations in continuing its effective delivery of aid to Syrian civilians. The political, economic and security situations in Syria are complicated and its humanitarian situation remains dire. The international community should increase its humanitarian aid to Syria. The United Nations and the Security Council must apply integrated measures to handle the Syrian humanitarian crisis ina comprehensive and impartial manner. In that connection, I would like to emphasize the following points. First, the international community should provide the United Nations with adequate funding and supplies and continue to deliver humanitarian aid to civilians throughout Syria. Years of war have led to harsh living conditions for the Syrian people, who do not have the means to buy fuel, food and medicine. The international community should continue to provide Syria with necessary assistance. In addition, efforts must be made to stabilize the country's economy in order to secure the Syrian people's basic livelihoods. In areas with relatively stable security, the Syrian Government is rebuilding houses and medical and educational facilities and clearing the explosive remnants of war. Those efforts are conducive to addressing the humanitarian situation in Syria. Secondly, terrorist forces must be eliminated if we are to put an end to the Syrian conflict. The international community should fully cooperate in a joint effort to bring terrorists to justice. The occupation of Idlib by terrorist forces and their systematic attacks on civilians, journalists and medical workers, as well as the acute problem of foreign terrorist fighters, are major obstacles to the restoration of peace and stability in Syria. We should work to eliminate the entrenched terrorist safe havens in Syria, in accordance with the relevant Council resolutions and international law. China supports all parties in their continued efforts to seek a comprehensive and long-term solution to the Idlib problem through dialogue and negotiation. Thirdly, the Syrian Government has the primary responsibility for improving the humanitarian situation in Syria. The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and other humanitarian agencies must strengthen coordination and cooperation with the Syrian Government; abide by the Charter ofthe United Nations; observe the humanitarian principles of neutrality, impartiality and independence; and fully respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria. The cross-border humanitarian aid delivery mechanism is a special modality for relief in certain situations and should be adjusted to developments on the ground. In a letter to the President of the Council and the Secretary-General, the Permanent Representative of Syria expressed his willingness to accept the delivery of humanitarian assistance. The Syrian Government agreed to the World Health Organization's use of border crossings and multiple airports under Government control for shipping supplies. It also authorized the use, by the Syrian Red Cross and other United Nations humanitarian agencies, of roadways for transporting medical supplies in Syrian territory for the purpose of delivering aid. OCHA should accept that Syrian proposal. China is closely monitoring the humanitarian situation in Syria. Since the start of the Syria crisis, China has delivered multiple batches of food aid to Syria and has provided medical services, power equipment, office facilities, public transportation and personnel training in various areas relating to the delivery of humanitarian aid. China has also cooperated to that end with eight agencies, such as the International Committee of the Red Cross, and has done all it can to help Syria's neighbours to manage their refugees. China intends to continue helping the Syrian people, including Syrian refugees outside of Syria. China categorically rejects the accusation made by the United States. Since the start of the Syrian crisis, China has been committed to diplomatic efforts to push for an early conclusion to the conflict and a political solution to the Syrian issue. China has no ulterior motives with regard to the Syrian issue. We are guided by the best interests of the Syrian people. We have made judgments and established our positions based solely on the merits of the case. China resolutely supports the efforts of the legitimate Syrian Government to maintain its sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity. That is also conducive to peace and stability in the Middle East. China has consistently supported the comprehensive and impartial management of the Syrian humanitarian issue. It has consistently advocated the humanitarian principles of neutrality, impartiality, independence and non-interference with regard to the delivery of humanitarian aid to Syria. Those principles are widely accepted by the international community and are indisputable. China has consistently played a constructive role in the Council's discussions of the Syrian humanitarian issue. All countries are entitled to voice their opinions, make recommendations on issues and determine their voting positions independently, in accordance with their own principled positions. China rejects the levelling of frivolous accusations against other countries, which constitutes an abuse of the Security Council platform. A political solution is essential for improving the humanitarian situation in Syria and must be based on safeguarding the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity of Syria. China supports Special Envoy Pedersen's efforts to reach a Syrian- led and -owned solution and to use the platform of the Constitutional Committee in the search for a political solution that addresses the concerns of all parties in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015).
