Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would first like to express my
sincere appreciation to you for taking up this timely and
important topic. My appreciation also goes to Ms. Viotti
and all other speakers for their insightful briefings.
Over the past few months, we have adopted two
Security Council resolutions on counter-terrorism:
2309 (2016) on aviation security and 2322 (2016)
on international judicial cooperation. We welcome
the adoption today of resolution 2341 (2017), on the
protection of critical infrastructure. We thank Ukraine
for taking the lead. Through these resolutions, the
Security Council has shown unity in addressing
terrorism through a multifaceted approach. Our task
now is to translate these resolutions into action.

Once a terrorist attack occurs, it is already too
late, especially given the devastating impact that
the destruction of critical infrastructure could have
on societies and individuals. We must collectively
strengthen our security with a focus on prevention.
Japan is giving particular priority to the protection of
critical infrastructure. We owe it to our citizens and
visitors alike. This is especially so for Japan, as the host
of the Tokyo Olympic and Paralympic Games in 2020
and the Rugby World Cup in 2019.

Learning from international best practices, Japan
has enhanced its infrastructure security, including
for public transportation, large-event facilities,
international seaports, nuclear plants and embassies.
The protection of nuclear plants from terrorist attacks
is particularly important owing to the possibility of a
particularly devastating effect. For nuclear plants in
Japan, anti-firearm squads are deployed by the police
around the clock and special assault teams can be
dispatched in emergencies. Information is key. Japan
is exchanging information with foreign counterparts
and police are conducting joint exercises with self-
defence forces while also working closely with nuclear
plant operators through on-site visits and guidance on
self-vigilance.

Responding to recent technological developments
is critical. As there has been an increase in incidents
involving the malicious use of information and
communications technologies, Japan has been
enhancing its cybersecurity in cooperation with the
private sector and foreign counterparts. Last April, we
enacted a law prohibiting unmanned aerial vehicles, or
drones, from flying over critical facilities, embassies
and nuclear plants to prevent possible attacks.
Our experiences attest to the importance of
multiple streams of efforts, including international and
public-private cooperation, accelerating information
exchange, sharing good practices, developing advanced
technologies and supporting capacity-building for
those in need. We believe the resolution just adopted
provides a useful framework for all other members
to undertake their own proactive efforts. As part of
this effort, two weeks ago the Government of Japan
decided on a new assistance package for international
cooperation in the fields of counter-terrorism and
preventing violent extremism. This will be used to
facilitate the implementation of relevant Security
Council resolutions through concrete projects, such as
a project on cyberattacks on information technology
systems of financial infrastructure. We also support
the initiative of Secretary-General Guterres to ensure
coordination and coherence in United Nations counter-
terrorism efforts, under the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy review process.

To conclude, I would like to emphasize Japan's
consistent and constant preparedness to promptly
address terrorism in all its aspects. Japan will continue
to be an active partner in this important endeavour with
the entire international community.

