Mr. Nl'ifiez Mosquera (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the Chairs of the three Committees for the
information provided. Our country, as all know, strictly
fulfils the provisions of resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373
(2001) and 1540 (2004), and will continue to do so.

Cuba reiterates its firm commitment to fighting
terrorism and its deepest rejection and condemnation of
all terrorist acts, methods and practices in all their
forms and manifestations by whomsoever committed
against whomsoever, wherever they are committed, and
whatever their motivations, including those acts
committed by States that may be directly or indirectly
involved.
State terrorism is also one of the most abominable
forms of terrorism. The measures to eliminate
international terrorism must be based on strict respect
for the Charter of the United Nations, the principles of
international law and international humanitarian law.

Cuba fully supports the position of the
Non-Aligned Movement, opposing the unilateral
formulation of lists that accuse States of supposed
support for terrorism, since such lists are incompatible
with international law and resolutions of the United
Nations. Despite Cuba's proven and transparent record
in fighting terrorism, the Government of the United
States persists in its arbitrary decision to include my
country in a list of States that sponsor international
terrorism in an ever more pathetic annual ritual, given
that the impossibility, since these claims are false, to
objectively substantiate the stigma that they attempt to
impose on us. If it were not for the enormous cost of
sanctions added to the blockade that this unfair
designation imposes on the Cuban people and the
dangers that this decision entails, it would simply be a
mockery of the international community and nothing
more than a typical effort to conceal the lack of
seriousness and the political nature of all decisions
taken by the United States in relation to Cuba.

Cuba vigorously rejects the inclusion of our
country on this unilateral and spurious list, which is
politically motivated and corrupt in its conception,
having been prepared by the United States Department
of State. Like other lists drawn up without authority by
an international organization, it is in complete violation
of international law. The shameful inclusion of a State
like Cuba, which fights terrorism, further discredits
this unilateral mechanism and compromises the
credibility of the United States in its fight against this
scourge.

Since resolution 1540 (2004) was adopted, Cuba
itself has undertaken practical measures to guarantee
its full application. Our country does not possess and
has no intention of possessing weapons of mass
destruction. The possession of such weapons will never
be part of our national defence strategy and never has
been. On the contrary, we support the urgent
prohibition and total elimination of these weapons
worldwide. Our national nuclear, chemical and
biological programmes have always been for strictly
peaceful means and have been used to the benefit of
the well-being of the Cuban people.
In fulfilment of the provisions of resolution 1267
(1999), the competent Cuban authorities are regularly
informed of the updates to the consolidated list drawn
up by the Committee established pursuant to the
resolution. Cuba has maintained broad and sustained
cooperation with the Counter-Terrorism Committee.
We have given detailed and transparent reports on
seven occasions of the measures adopted by our
country to ensure the prevention of and the fight
against terrorism, as stipulated in resolution 1373
(2001).

For years now, our country has presented the
Security Council with detailed information regarding
terrorist actions against Cuba. Unfortunately, to date
our denunciations have not received a concrete
response. Terrorism against Cuba has taken the lives or
seriously hurt thousands of our fellow countrymen and
countrywomen. For six years now, Luis Posada
Carriles, a self-confessed murderer, has enjoyed the
official protection of the Government of the United
States of America, and from North American territory
announces future crimes with complete impunity.

Nevertheless, for trying to prevent terrorist
attacks and share information with the Government of
the United States, five Cuban anti-terrorist compatriots
were unjustly convicted and are serving cruel prison
sentences in the United States; one of them is not
allowed to return home, under the absurd excuse of a
parole arrangement. It is high time that we end this
two-faced morality and double standards in this
important matter. Terrorism must be rejected under all
circumstances. Closer cooperation among States is
needed in order to fight against this scourge.

Finally, we reiterate the firm, tireless readiness of
the Government and the people of Cuba to cooperate in
multilateral efforts to put an end to all terrorist acts,
methods and practices in all their forms and
manifestations.

