I thank Jun very much, as well as Ingrid for her briefing. Let me begin, as others have done, by welcoming the appointment of Deborah Lyons as Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and by thanking Special Representative Yamamoto for all his work. Let me start by addressing the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), an issue, I think, of concern for us all, and with regard not just to Afghanistan but to a number of the issues - or, indeed, all of the issues - on the Security Council's agenda. So we are, of course, concerned globally, but also in Afghanistan in particular. For our part, we are looking at our options of scaling up humanitarian action in response to the pandemic. We will work closely with our partners in doing so. But it makes it even more important that, first, the Taliban cease its attacks, in line with the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire to confront the spread of the disease; and, secondly, that Afghan political leaders come together so that the Government can lead the necessary response. I am going to say a bit more about both of those point later on. But also, I have a question for later for Ingrid. She talked about some of the concerns and the risks in Afghanistan, but it would be interesting to hear from her what actions she thinks the United Nations should be taking, as the United Nations family, and how members of the Council can support that. Moving on to the political side, I think it is vital that we see quick progress towards intra-Afghan negotiations and ensure that momentum is not lost. We have seen some positive moments, including talks between the Afghan Government and Taliban on prisoner releases and the announcement of an Afghan negotiation team, but challenges clearly remain. While it is for Afghans themselves to work out the structures and formats of intra-Afghan negotiations, the United Nations and the international community should be flexible and ready to support, however required. The Taliban must negotiate with the Afghan Government team in good faith. Only a negotiated and inclusive settlement will bring peace and the Taliban must end violence. That is a clear demand from all Afghans. But we are disappointed that leaders in Kabul have been unable to unite ahead of negotiations with the Taliban. Now is the time for them to follow through on their promises, set aside their differences and form a genuinely unified Government. The Afghan people expect and deserve nothing less, and their political leaders must not squander this moment. In particular, we want to ensure that we protect and build on the gains made in the lives of women and girls over the past 18 years. Let me finish my remarks by saying a few words on the Afghans' development needs. We know that the conflict in Afghanistan is one the deadliest ones in the world, with more than 10,000 casualties recorded in 2019. Years of displacement and hardship arising from conflict and severe drought and flooding, as well as sluggish economic performance, have left more than 80 per cent of Afghans below the international poverty line. Over 14 million people are in crisis or emergency levels of food insecurity, and that adds to the vulnerability to COVID-19. The United Kingdom has committed in this financial year $362 million. We are ready to work with Finland as co-hosts and other international donors as we look forward to the 2020 pledging conference in Geneva. The coordination between development, security and political actors is more crucial than ever. Let me sign off by saying that we have a tendency, all of us, to talk about the fact that we are at a critical moment in many situations on our agenda, but it seems to me particularly true now and particularly true of Afghanistan. There are many risks ahead of us and around us, but we need the key decision-makers in Afghanistan from all parties, from all areas, to hold their nerve and to do the right thing and to come together for peace and for the people and to tackle the pandemic
