Mr. Strommen (Norway): First of all, we would
like to thank Ambassador Gambari for briefing us on
his recent and very important trip to Angola, and to
acknowledge the presence here today of the Secretary-
General.

Judging from the positive and constructive
atmosphere during the visit, the working relationship
between the United Nations and the Government seems
to be very good. We are, of course, happy that this is
the case.

As far as the peace process is concerned, we are
encouraged by reports that there might be signs of
progress. In this regard, we strongly urge the parties,
especially UNITA, to show the necessary flexibility
and will to depart from the path of war and terror and
work for a peaceful solution to the conflict. We are also
happy that there now seems to be an opening for civil
society to play its important part in the process. We and
the Council have repeatedly underlined the essential
part that churches and other civil groups can play. We
would like to commend the Government for reaching
out to such groups.

The humanitarian situation in Angola is cause for
great concern. All reports confirm that the situation
continues to be extremely difficult for large parts of the
population, especially the internally displaced, the
main reason for that being, of course, the continuation
of the conflict. We would like to commend the
Government for increasing its efforts in trying to help
those in need, and we encourage it to continue to do so.

In this connection, we again appeal to
Mr. Savimbi and UNITA to refrain from further
Violence. Mr. Savimbi is still playing a key role in
Angola, in spite of the fact that he himself is rather
silent for the time being. the Council should continue
to hold him responsible, in spite of the fact that some
say that his days are numbered and that his military
capacity has been reduced to almost nothing.
Finally, let me repeat that we are encouraged by
the new developments in Angola. We hope that the
United Nations and the rest of the international
community will be able to help the Government build
on these positive developments to create peace and a
better future for the Angolan population. Norway will
continue to be part of that effort.

