Mr. Gambari: I thank you very much, Mr. President,
for the opportunity to brief the Council once again on
the situation in Darfur and the implementation of the
mandate of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). Further to the report
of the Secretary-General on UNAMID of 16 July
(S/20l2/548), which is before the Council, I would like
to highlight several key developments related to the
political and security situation.

While the signatory parties to the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur, namely, the Government of the
Sudan and the Liberation and Justice Movement, have
made notable progress towards its implementation,
to date that has been focused mainly on establishing
the institutions provided for in the agreement and
associated political appointments. In that connection,
the parties recognized that many provisions ofthe Doha
Document remained unimplemented several months
after their stipulated deadlines.

A committee consisting of the signatory parties
and UNAMID has revised the implementation
timetable to allow for new deadlines on implementing
the agreement's provisions. Representatives of the
parties initialled the revised timetable at a ceremony
in Khartoum on 18 July, during which they committed
to promptly fulfilling their obligations under the
agreement. Unlike the situation following the adoption
of the Darfur Peace Agreement 0f5 May 2006 - which
was signed in my country's capital, Abuja - when the
Government of the Sudan had far more resources than
political will to implement the agreement, it now appears
the Government has the political will to implement the
Doha Document but fewer financial resources to fully
implement its provisions.

It is in this context that the Darfur Regional
Authority (DRA), with the support of UNAMID and
other international partners, has initiated the Darfur
Joint Assessment Mission provided for in the Doha
Document. The Mission, which is intended to identify
and assess needs for economic recovery, development
and poverty eradication in Darfur, is projected to
be completed by the end of the year and to form the
basis for resource mobilization. Its initiation is a
positive step that deserves our commendation. As
the announcement by President Al-Bashir on 18 June
of austerity measures indicates, while the principal
responsibility for implementing the Doha Document
rests with the signatory parties, they will require the
support of the international community to implement
the major provisions effectively and in a timely manner.

In my capacity as Joint Chief Mediator ad interim, I
have continued to work, in consultation with the Deputy
Prime Minister of the State of Qatar, His Excellency
Ahmed bin Abdullah Al-Mahmoud, who has retained the
portfolio for mediation on the Darfur conflict, towards
the resumption of negotiations between the Government
of the Sudan and non-signatory armed movements. In
this regard, in addition to my engagement with the
major movements, several smaller armed movements
and factions have approached me expressing interest
in holding talks with the Government using the Doha
Document as a basis for discussions. These movements
are listed in the latest report.

In my recent discussions with Deputy Prime Minister
Al-Mahmoud, we agreed that the environment was
suitable for a relaunch of the mediation process through
preliminary consultations with all interested opposition
movements. The intention would be to consolidate the
gains being made through the implementation of the
Doha Document and apply pressure on the hold-out
movements to join the process. During our discussions
with the Sudanese Government Minister and Chairman
ofthe Darfur Peace Follow-Up Office, Mr. Amin Hassan
Omar, he expressed the Government's willingness to
engage with the movements using the Doha Document
as a framework for discussions.

UNAMID has continued to assist the parties in
their efforts to disseminate the Doha Document, in
conjunction with civil society organizations. On 5 July,
the last dissemination workshop was held at El Fasher
University, bringing the total of completed workshops
to 140, with the participation of over 25,000 individuals
in the five Darfur states, over 30 per cent of whom were
women. Almost all the workshops took place without
restrictions.

Within the context of the dissemination efforts, the
Mission has sought the views of Darfuri stakeholders
on the role of the Darfur internal dialogue and
consultations in consolidating peace and encouraging
reconciliation, as provided for in the Doha Document.
While they expressed concern about whether the
majority of stakeholder groups would be allowed to
participate in a process free from manipulation by the
parties to the conflict, they nevertheless called for the
process to start immediately.

I had the privilege of attending the DRA's
preparatory All Darfur Stakeholders Conference in
E1 Fasher from 10 to 12 July. The stated objective of the
Conference was to

"mobilize popular, political and diplomatic
support for the Doha Document; mobilize efforts
and potentials for supporting development
programmes; promote principles of team work
and values of democracy and dialogue; create an
environment conducive to repairing the social
fabric and voluntary return of internally displaced
persons; and create good conditions for launching
the Darfur-Darfur dialogue".

The Conference was opened by the First
Vice-President of the Republic, Mr. Ali Osman Taha.
It was attended by several ministers, members of the
diplomatic corps based in Khartoum and members
of the Doha Document Implementation Follow-Up
Commission. UNAMID provided logistics support to
the conference, transporting more than 800 participants
from a broad range of Darfuri stakeholder groups.

The Conference's principal achievement is that it
provided a forum, for the first time since Doha and
inside Darfur, for Darfuri stakeholders to take stock
and recommend the way forward. Over 110 people
expressed their views freely and clearly during the
Conference. Almost all of them were very critical of
the Government in their approach. We have heard of
no instances of reprisal or intimidation of participants.

The Conference, in combination with the Doha
Document dissemination workshops conducted
throughout Darfur, provided lessons learned in
preparations for the internally displaced persons (IDPs)
and refugee returns conference planned by the DRA in
the fall, as well as the eventual Darfur internal dialogue
and consultations. UNAMID will continue to monitor
the establishment of elements that facilitate an enabling
environment ahead of the conduct of the internal
dialogue. With the experiences gained and views
expressed by Darfuris during the Doha Document
dissemination exercise, and also at the All Darfur
Stakeholders Conference, prospects appear positive for
the proposed dialogue and consultations.

In this regard, the Darfur Regional Authority
should be commended for organizing the All Darfur
Stakeholders Conference during the current atmosphere
of economic crisis and frustration. It is a manifestation
of the DRA's commitment to dialogue and partnership
with the people of Darfur on the region's future.

Further to the military clashes described in the
report before the Council, UNAMID peacekeepers
verified that, on 8 July, Sudanese Armed Forces
(SAF) aircraft dropped 24 bombs approximately 20
kilometres south of Tawilla, in North Darfur, seven
of which landed four kilometers from an IDP camp. A
UNAMID patrol visited and confirmed the safety of
four non-governmental organization personnel stranded
in Khartoum Jadid village by the bombing. The patrol
provided security information to the aid workers and
offered to escort them to safety. They subsequently
reached El Fasher safely after opting to proceed of their
own accord.

On 16 July, Government and unidentified armed
movement forces then clashed 29 kilometres south-east
of Tawilla. Local sources corroborated reports that a
SAF helicopter was shot down by movement ground
forces during the fighting. A further two bombs were
dropped by SAF aircraft on 18 July, 23 kilometres south
of Tawilla. The clashes followed reports of carjackings
and robberies of civilians by unidentified armed groups
active in the area, as well as, on 26 June, the ambush of
a Sudanese Armed Forces convoy 30 kilometres south
of Tawilla. Government soldiers were allegedly killed
and vehicles stolen in the attack.
UNAMID peacekeepers verified the reports of
bombings and clashes and assessed the populations'
protection needs. There were no reported civilian
casualties. An ordnance disposal team safely disposed
of eight unexploded bombs and several unexploded
rockets. A UNAMID patrol to Dally IDP camp, eight
kilometres south of Tawilla, ascertained that the
fighting had displaced approximately 750 people.
A humanitarian assessment mission to the area was
conducted on 18 July, the findings of which will inform
assistance to be provided by the aid agencies.

In other incidents, on 8 July two unidentified
armed men who entered Hamadiya camp near Zalingei,
Central Darfur, were confronted and fatally assaulted
by residents who suspected them of criminal activity.
The following day, nine camp residents were abducted
from the camp. The abductees have demanded a ransom
for the hostages, compensation for the two persons
killed, and the handing over of the perpetrators of the
assaults.

Camp leaders, many of whom support the
non-signatory movement Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul
Wahid, have refused to allow Government authorities
access to the camp to investigate the killings. UNAMID
is engaging with local authorities, camp leaders and
neighbouring communities to ease tensions and facilitate
a peaceful resolution of the situation. Peacekeepers
have been deployed around the camp to deter further
violence. Furthermore, the frequency of UNAMID
police patrols within the camp has been increased.

On 16 and 18 July, clashes between groups of
Rezeigat and Misseriya at Abu Jabra, East Darfur, near
the border with Southern Kordofan, were triggered by
a dispute over land and grazing rights. According to
local sources, approximately 60 people were killed in
the fighting. Upon receiving reports of the fighting,
UNAMID dispatched a team to the area to avert further
conflict. The mission also transported local authorities,
including the East Darfur Wali and tribal leaders, for
discussions with community leaders in order to call
for calm. Sudanese armed forces have been deployed
between the groups. Tensions have eased following
the intervention by UNAMID and local authorities.
UNAMID, whose intervention earned commendation
by local authorities in East Darfur, continues to monitor
the situation closely and to support local reconciliation
efforts.

The challenges facing Darfur today are many,
but through the determination and commitment to
sustainable peace championed by the staff of UNAMID
and the people of Darfur, considerable progress has been
made. Politically, the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur
and the African Union and United Nations framework
for the Darfur peace process are key documents capable
of steering Sudanese and international engagement
in Darfur along a path towards a comprehensive and
inclusive settlement of the conflict. Furthermore, both
documents offer a means through which the everyday
lives of Darfuris can be improved.

With the establishment of the Darfur Regional
Authority, we in UNAMID now have a new and direct
partner with which to advance our common goal of peace
in Darfur. I would like to emphasize the importance
of working with the DRA and other institutions to
build their capacity at this critical juncture in the
peace process. It is time for the task of peacekeeping
to be complemented by initiatives that advance
peacebuilding and early recovery and development in
Darfur. We must redouble our commitment to restore
basic services to more communities and facilitate
early recovery and reconstruction. In my view, that is
the key to consolidating our gains in the region and to
persuading communities ambivalent about the peace
process to join it.

I should like to say, with respect, that while
sustainable peace is in sight, there remains some way to
go. What progress has been made remains fragile and
is easily reversible, should we lose focus. The people
of Darfur have suffered too long, and too deeply, for us
to allow any setbacks or regression. We must instead
remain focused, determined and committed to making
progress along the path to peace and reconciliation in
Darfur.

