Mr. Baja (Philippines): I wish to thank you,
Madam President, and your delegation for organizing
this meeting. Peacebuilding is vital issue for the
Security Council. The Council's work revolves around
peacebuilding activities as countries emerge from
conflict and undergo the process of peacebuilding and
economic and social reconstruction.

The process of rebuilding and reconstruction
following the cessation of conflict is a challenging and
daunting task requiring the involvement of many
sectors, both domestic and international. A country
emerging from conflict needs the involvement of its
citizen and every sector of its society. Local
stakeholders need to acquire a deep sense of ownership
of the peacebuilding process in order to achieve a
stable and progressive future for their society.

Post-conflict peacebuilding also requires the
active involvement and participation of the
international community through a strong partnership
among the Member States of the United Nations, the
plans, programmes and specialized agencies of the
United Nations, international financial institutions and
civil society. All must work hand in hand to succeed
and rid countries emerging from conflict of the scourge
of further violence.

The complex nature of post-conflict
peacebuilding requires a comprehensive mechanism
that addresses its various facets. In that regard, the
Philippines subscribes to three imperatives of all post-
conflict peacebuilding activities: policy, strategy and
resources - what we call the "PSR" of
peacebuilding - which are defined by the complexity
of the post-conflict process itself.

First, all post-conflict peacebuilding requires a
clear policy or mandate to succeed. A clear policy
emanating from the Security Council is necessary
before any post-conflict activity is undertaken. That is
in line with the Council's mandate under the Charter of
the United Nations. A clear mandate from this body is
necessary to put a stamp of legitimacy on the action on
the ground and to stabilize the whole situation.

Secondly, it is essential to have a clear, coherent
and comprehensive strategy that addresses the period
extending from immediately after the cessation of
conflict to the implementation of an exit strategy.

Based on the mandate, a clear strategy should be
devised to address: first, the period immediately after
the cessation of conflict, particularly the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) process;
secondly, the more extended period of political, social
and economic rehabilitation and reconstruction,
including the crucial aspect of coordination and
cooperation between and among the various
stakeholders within the United Nations system, such as
the Security Council, the Economic and Social Council
and the General Assembly; and thirdly, the exit
strategy for the period in which the United Nations-led
involvement in post-conflict peacebuilding ends.

The latter should be undertaken only if and when
the people have already been equipped with adequate
financial and administrative support, as well as the
human and technical capacity to enable them and their
country to proceed on their own. A premature exit from
conflict areas courts a disastrous slide back into
conflict.

As well, in designing the second phase of post-
conflict peacebuilding - political and socio-economic
rehabilitation - the needs and the requirements of the
people must be taken on board. Ownership of the plan
and the design ensures a more successful post-conflict
peacebuilding process.

Thirdly, adequate resources and support from all
actors and the various stakeholders are indispensable.
Financial resources are necessary to carry out the plans
arising from the country's actual needs and
requirements. The best of plans and intentions are
futile without adequate resources to support them. In
that regard, the Philippines is convinced that a
voluntary revolving fund should be established for any
post-conflict peacebuilding strategy.

Without a clear policy, the legitimacy of the
action on the ground will come under scrutiny,
potentially leading to more instability. Without a
strategy, the whole process of post-conflict
peacebuilding will proceed in an ad hoc fashion, with
no clear guidance or direction. Without a clear plan,
international actors will not be able to adapt their
assistance to the political dynamics of the societies
they wish to support. And without resources, the best
of intentions will come to naught.

Peacekeeping has evolved from the traditional
objectives of ceasefire and separation of forces into a
complex weaving of elements working together to
build peace in the aftermath of wars. The international
community can draw lessons from its experience in
Timor-Leste, where United Nations missions delivered
on their respective mandates. Those missions enjoyed
strong and broad support from local, regional and
international actors.

The Philippines believes that if the proposed
Peacebuilding Commission, which is now the subject
of General Assembly debate, is given the right mandate
or policy and the appropriate strategy or mechanism to
carry out its tasks, and if it is supported by adequate
resources and financing, it could very well supply the
missing institutional link of a peacebuilding
mechanism, which the United Nations system now
needs in order to implement the imperatives that I have
spoken of today.

