Mr. Edrees (Egypt): I have the pleasure to
address the Security Council today on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement, including the Arab Group,
which Egypt has the honour to chair this month.

I would like to start by expressing appreciation
for the convening of this debate to address the situation
in the Middle East, including the question of Palestine.
It takes place at a time when endeavours continue to be
made to support and advance the resumption of peace
process negotiations and to overcome the lack of
progress and, in some respects, the deteriorating
situation and rising tensions resulting from the ongoing
Israeli occupation and the many violations that
continue to be perpetrated by the occupying Power.
These include its illegal settlement activities in the
occupied Palestinian territory, in particular East
Jerusalem, and its continuing imposition of a blockade
on Gaza.

Despite all serious efforts to relaunch direct
negotiations towards the attainment of the well-known
and internationally-supported objectives of the peace
process, a just and lasting settlement to the question of
Palestine regrettably remains far from being achieved,
as Israel, the occupying Power, continues to carry out
illegal policies and practices that are totally
contradictory to an outcome based on a two-State
solution on the basis of the 1967 borders.

In the light of the ongoing situation, the Non-
Aligned Movement reiterates its call for the
international community to be resolute in demanding
that Israel, the occupying Power, abide by its legal
obligations under the Fourth Geneva Convention,
respect the relevant Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions and comply with its Road Map
obligations.

Israel must cease all of its Violations and
unlawful measures, including its policies of collective
punishment and colonization in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. This is
essential to creating an environment conducive to the
launching of direct negotiations on all core issues,
which must be conducted within a fixed time frame and
in good faith, in accordance with the agreed principles
and terms of reference of the peace process, namely
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973),
1397 (2002), 1515 (2003) and 1850 (2008), the Madrid
terms of reference including the principle of land for
peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet Road
Map.

While the Palestinian Authority has repeatedly
affirmed its determination, with Arab support, to
pursue the path of peace, security and State-building,

Israel continues to fail to abide by its obligations and
continues to blatantly impede efforts to resume direct
negotiations, through a series of measures that only
further aggravate the situation. These include the
31 May military attack on the civilian maritime convoy
carrying humanitarian assistance to Gaza to alleviate
the suffering of the Palestinian civilian population
under Israel's blockade.

The Non-Aligned Movement reiterates its
condemnation of Israel's use of force against the
civilian maritime convoy and calls upon the Secretary-
General to initiate a full, impartial, transparent,
independent and credible investigation, as demanded
by the Security Council. Further, the Movement fully
supports the demand of the Human Rights Council,
through its resolution 14/1, for an accountable and
fully independent investigation into the matter.

The Non-Aligned Movement believes that justice
must prevail and that the unacceptable and
unsustainable situation in the Gaza Strip must end. The
unresolved crisis of Gaza continues to have negative
repercussions on efforts to advance peace and inflicts
deep suffering on the Palestinian civilian population
there. We reiterate, in this regard, that international
humanitarian law, in particular the Fourth Geneva
Convention, and the relevant United Nations
resolutions, must be fully applied and respected by
Israel, the occupying Power. The Non-Aligned
Movement demands that Israel immediately lift its
blockade, in compliance with Security Council
resolution 1860 (2009), General Assembly resolution
ES-10/18 and other relevant United Nations resolutions
in this regard.

We still believe that the international community
must play its rightful and obligatory role by taking the
necessary action to halt all illegal measures taken by
Israel in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem.

The Non-Aligned Movement expresses deep
concern regarding the extensive damage caused by
Israeli settlements in the West Bank, the separation
wall and the network of hundreds of checkpoints that
the occupying Power continues to impose, which are
undermining the contiguity, integrity, viability and
unity of the Palestinian territory, isolating East
Jerusalem and seriously jeopardizing the prospects for
physically achieving the two-State solution.
The international community, represented by the
United Nations, must take clear action to ensure that
violations are swiftly brought to an end and replaced
by concerted endeavours for peace, in line with
relevant United Nations resolutions and the Charter.

Turning now to Lebanon, the Non-Aligned
Movement remains deeply concerned over Israel's
ongoing violations of Lebanon's sovereignty, in breach
of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006). The
Movement calls for the full implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006) by all parties in order to end the
current fragility and to avoid the recurrence of violence.

Concerning the occupied Syrian Golan, the
Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms that all measures
and actions taken or to be taken by Israel, the
occupying Power, to alter the legal, physical or
demographic status of the occupied Syrian Golan, as
well as Israeli measures to impose jurisdiction and
administration there, are null and void and have no
legal effect. The Non-Aligned Movement demands that
Israel abide by resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw
fully from the occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of
4 June 1967, in implementation of resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973).

I do not need to state that if the ongoing Israeli
measures are not stopped and remedied, their
consequences will lead to the further destabilization of
the situation in the region, with far-reaching
repercussions. Tangible progress in the peace process is
vital and would contribute to a positive dynamic. This
requires Israel to cease immediately and completely its
illegal policies and measures in Gaza and the West
Bank, including in and around East Jerusalem, and that
it finally commit to the terms of reference of the peace
process and uphold its legal obligations and
commitments in this regard. The international
community has to take the lead by reaffirming clear
parameters for the negotiating process on all core
issues and by helping the parties to reach agreed
solutions based on United Nations resolutions, the
Madrid terms of reference and agreements reached
between the parties.

To conclude, the Non-Aligned Movement
reiterates its call for serious and concrete actions from
the Security Council, stressing in this regard the
permanent responsibility of the United Nations towards
the question of Palestine until it is resolved justly and
satisfactorily in all respects. This is a responsibility

from which the Security Council cannot be absolved,
particularly in the light of its responsibility under the
Charter of the United Nations for the maintenance of
international peace and security, which cannot be
achieved as long as the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and
the Arab-Israeli conflict as a whole continue to fester
unresolved, with their wide-ranging impact on the
region and beyond.

