Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): My
delegation would first like to thank the Prime Minister
of Timor-Leste, Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta, for his
presentation as well as Mr. Atul Khare, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
statement. We welcome the role they play in stabilizing
the situation in Timor-Leste.

In a few minutes, the Permanent Representative
of Germany will speak on behalf of the European
Union and my delegation fully subscribes to that
statement. I shall confine myself to the following
comments.

The combined activity of the local Timorese
forces, the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT) and the international security
force has made it possible to somewhat improve the
security situation in the country, but the stabilization is
still incomplete and fragile, as we see from the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2007/50).

The presence of UNMIT and the international
security force is therefore indispensable, as we see it,
in the medium term so long as the Timorese institutions
are not yet in a position to take over. France is
therefore in favour of an extension of UNMIT's
mandate for a 12 month period.

I would also like to commend the regional States
on their stabilizing role, and particularly the members
of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, as
demonstrated by the strong participation of Malaysia,
the Philippines and Singapore in UNMIT, as well as
the strengthening of relations between Indonesia and
Timor-Leste. I would also like to commend the part
played by Australia and New Zealand. The particular
efforts of Portugal also deserve to be highlighted.

In the short term, the main challenge has to do
with organizing elections under satisfactory conditions.
The elections are an opportunity for genuine
reconciliation among the Timorese, which is the only
guarantee of long-term stability. It is therefore essential
that the Timorese authorities implement the
recommendations of the Independent Special
Commission of Inquiry. We also support the proposal
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
to expand UNMIT by adding an additional formed
police unit to ensure security stability throughout the
elections.

In addition, the international community must
continue to support the reconstruction of Timorese
institutions, in particular the reform of the civil and
military security forces and of the judiciary. We are
happy to note the good relations which have apparently
been established between UNMIT, which is
concentrating on the short-term situation, and the
development agencies, which are acting primarily in
the medium- and long-term ranges.

The implementation of the compact among the
Timorese authorities and the international community
is also a positive first step in a strategy of
peacebuilding. We would be grateful to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General if he would
give us more detail about the functioning and prospects
of that mechanism at a forthcoming meeting with the
Security Council.

Reconciliation within Timorese society and
between the Timorese and their neighbours must be
based on a situation of transparency and justice. In that
regard, combating impunity is a decisive aspect of such
reconciliation. In that respect, we fully support the
establishment by UNMIT of an independent Serious
Crimes Investigation Team to complete the work begun
by the Serious Crimes Unit on the crimes committed in
1999. We also hope that Commission for Truth,
Reception and Reconciliation will shed light on the
past in order to better build the future.

