Mr. Heinbecker (Canada) (spoke in French): As
we approach the 30 August elections, it is clear that
East Timor has thus far made outstanding progress on
the road to independence. The elections will be an
important milestone and will surely help East Timor
move forward in nation-building. While this process
has been a success for East Timor, it has also been a
success for the United Nations. But we cannot rest on
our laurels. We are only at the beginning of the
process, and the great progress that East Timor has
achieved could be obliterated if we in the international
community do not meet our commitments.

(spoke in English)

The security situation remains tentative, and we
must see East Timor through. We agree with the
representative of Singapore and others who have
argued effectively and convincingly here that the
transfer from the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) to East
Timorese civilian authority must be managed carefully
to ensure that the transition unfolds in a seamless
manner.

We also note that the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello,
advocated this morning the cautious and thoughtful
rightsizing of the international presence. He is right to
argue that the successor mission to UNTAET ought to
be funded by assessed contributions, and we agree with
him and with others who have said so. We recognize
that, in due time, United Nations involvement can be
reduced, but the United Nations must stay the course
for the time being and must withdraw progressively
when we have confidence that East Timor's success
and stability as an independent State will not be
compromised. A factor that would contribute to that
stability would be the curtailment of militia activity in
West Timor: a culture of impunity exists there.

We understand the challenges confronting the
new Indonesian Government and the size of the job
that faces it. We nonetheless urge that Government to
bring to justice those guilty of the murder of United
Nations civilian and peacekeeping personnel. Such
people are there on behalf of us all, and we owe them
justice.

At this critical juncture, we must be vigilant to
ensure that UNTAET functions in a robust and
responsible manner. In particular, we see the
continuation of the United Nations civilian police and
the development of the East Timor Police Service as
essential to safeguarding law and order in East Timor.
However, despite the achievements of the United
Nations civilian police in training and developing the
East Timor Police Service, we have noted some
developments with increasing concern. For example,
although we agree that a small number of specialized
police units will be necessary for crowd control and
other public safety purposes, the number of East Timor
Police officers scheduled to be trained for those units is
worryingly high. Last week's report of the Secretary-
General (S/2001/719) says that upon completion those
units will consist of 58 officers, with others to
assemble in task forces as needed. Yet we understand
that 750 East Timorese police officers are to be trained
for those units. To whom will those specialized units
report once trained? What functions besides crowd
control and public order, as specified in the latest
report of the Secretary-General, will they fulfil? To
what level will they be armed? What sort of training
are they receiving, and why is the training not taking
place at the Police College? Those are questions that
have been occurring to my authorities in Ottawa.

We believe that, in order to ensure that East
Timor's developing security sector is effective,
accountable and responsible, UNTAET's civilian police
philosophy must adhere fully to democratic principles
based on a community policing model. Focusing on
training a large quasi-paramilitary force strikes us as a
distraction from that goal.
Our concerns with some aspects of police
planning notwithstanding, we remain steadfast in our
full support for UNTAET, and we thank Mr. Vieira de
Mello and his entire staff for their dedicated work. The
Security Council has an important responsibility before
it: to ensure that the excellent job that Mr. Vieira de
Mello and his team have done and are now doing is not
prejudiced by a precipitous withdrawal.

