Mr. Menon (Singapore): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate on the
implementation of the note contained in document
S/2006/507 on the Security Council's working
methods. Member States last had the opportunity to

express their views on this important topic in August
2008 (see S/PV.5968).
Singapore fully subscribes to the statement
delivered by the representative of Liechtenstein on
behalf of the group of five small countries, of which
we are a member.

Among the areas of Security Council reform, we
believe that the issue of working methods is one that
commands widespread support and resonance with
Member States. It is also an area that is objectively
logical to develop, but has been practically mired in the
reluctance of the Council to open itself up to scrutiny
by fellow Member States.

The provisional rules of procedure of the Council
state that meetings shall be held in public.
Unfortunately, that premise of transparency has been
eroded over the years in favour of so-called
effectiveness and functionality. It is supposed to be
easier to broker deals to save the world in back rooms
than in boardrooms. Yet, it strains the bounds of
credulity for Member States to hear each year, in the
face of constant threats to regional peace and human
dignity, that the Council has discharged its
responsibility for maintaining peace and security. It is
absolutely true that the Council has to manage serious
global complexities with less than adequate resources,
but it is also true that the Council is sometimes prey to
its own practices, which add to the complexities rather
than solve them.

Thus, it was significant that the Council adopted
note S/2006/507, signalling recognition of the need to
improve how it functioned. That document contains
many measures to address the three areas identified by
the President for possible discussion during this open
debate, namely, transparency, interaction and dialogue
with non-members, and efficiency. In practice,
however, the implementation of the document's
contents has been uneven.

Transparency is one area of great interest to
Singapore, as it promotes a sense of accountability in
the Organization. However, we should not mislead
ourselves into believing that reports and briefings
alone can ensure greater transparency. The notion of
openness extends to developments as simple as an
explanation for the sudden shift in the date of this open
debate or the provision of adequate notification of
important meetings of the Council.

It should also extend to the access that
non-members, the Secretariat and even members of the
press have to Security Council members and, where
relevant, their deliberations. In that connection, there
has been some concern over the perceived curtailing of
such access, ostensibly due to the limitations imposed
by the relocation of the Security Council Chamber as
part of the Capital Master Plan. That is an issue of
transparency and needs to be addressed.

We acknowledge that there has been some
improvement in the opportunities for interaction and
dialogue between the Council and non-Council
members. That includes interactions with troop- and
police-contributing countries, as well as regional
organizations, consultations between the Security
Council and Member States in the preparation of the
annual report, and briefings by Security Council
presidents on each month's programme of work.

However, much more could be done, particularly
on issues of interest and concern to Member States. For
example, countries directly affected by a particular
issue being considered by the Security Council should
be given every opportunity to participate in the
deliberations. Beyond interaction and dialogue, the
Council should also not fear opening up its
proceedings to non-members. Ultimately, it is in the
interest of the Council to create a climate of trust,
which is possible only if Member States are better able
to appreciate and understand the decision-making
considerations, processes of and challenges faced by
the Council.

The Council's scorecard on efficiency is
middling. The Security Council, in document
S/2006/507, undertook to maintain regular
communication with the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council for better coordination
among the principal organs of the United Nations.
However, its implementation has been cursory when it
could easily be a catalyst to streamline processes
within the Organization and demonstrate the Council's
commitment to promoting greater efficiency within the
United Nations system. As a simple example, when the
Security Council decides to establish a special political
mission, it makes sense to ensure that the Fifth
Committee is notified without delay and provided with
as comprehensive a picture as possible, enabling it to
factor such information into its consideration of the
overall resource requirements necessary for such
missions.

Without this basic coordination, unnecessary
complications can arise and precious resources wasted.

In December 2009, the Council took decisions on three
special political missions. At the same time, the Fifth
Committee had been considering the budget for such
missions for the coming biennium 2010-2011. Even
though the Council's decisions had been taken before
the Fifth Committee concluded its work for the main
session, information on the three special political
missions that would have affected the outcome of the
Committee's deliberations was not forthcoming.

While the appropriate course of action is for the
Fifth Committee to be notified through a report of the
Secretary-General, accompanied by recommendations
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions, this process takes time. As a
result, the resource requirements for these three
missions had to be taken up separately when the Fifth
Committee resumed its work in March 2010. This led
to difficult negotiations, as some countries were
resistant to the idea of increasing the overall budget for
special political missions to accommodate these
additional resource requirements, while others were
concerned that absorbing this cost under the overall
budget for such missions would negatively impact
existing missions. While a solution was eventually
found, many of the complications could have been
avoided if a system had been in place to better
facilitate the flow of information between the Security
Council and the Fifth Committee from the inception of
these special political missions. It is incumbent upon
Member States to see what we can do to improve such
working methods and thereby enhance the efficiencies
of both the Security Council and the General
Assembly.

Singapore appreciates the opportunity of this
open debate. We are encouraged by the Security
Council's willingness to continue its engagement on
this issue and its efforts to better implement the
contents of document S/2006/507. We look forward to
continuing our discussions with the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions later this year, and to further open debates.

