Mr. Dejammet (France) (spoke in French): Mr.
President, your initiative to organize today's open debate on
the role of the Security Council in the prevention of armed
conflict is a most welcome and timely one. I wish also to
thank the Secretary-General for having opened our
discussion. His statement reflected his wise conception of
his role and of the implementation of the Charter of the
United Nations. It is the Charter that, in Article 99, gives
the Secretary-General the power and the right to contribute
to the maintenance of international peace and security. That
role has sometimes been debated; the Secretary-General's
use of Article 99 and of his powers in that sphere have at
times been criticized - with respect, for example, to the
Middle East or to Africa. I find it perfectly splendid that
the Secretary-General is here today to demonstrate his
interest in the President's initiative.

During September's general debate in the General
Assembly and during the Assembly's debate on the report
of the Security Council, many Member States emphasized
the importance of conflict prevention and the need to make
better use of existing resources and procedures. That appeal
is justified by the simple observation that it is always more
costly both financially and in human terms to put an end to
an armed conflict than to prevent it from breaking out.
Hence the interest in this debate, which was clearly
highlighted by the previous speaker.

The Charter gives the Security Council a role in the
prevention of armed conflict. Chapter VI, which relates to
the pacific settlement of disputes, sets out the role the
Council can play in assisting the parties, in determining
whether the persistence of a dispute seems to threaten the
maintenance of international peace and security, and in
recommending procedures or methods of adjustment, or
even what it deems as the appropriate terms of a settlement.
Chapter VII deals with actions in the event of a threat to
the peace. There, we are still in the preventive stage, and
we can see that the Council has a range of resources that
can go as far as the use of enforcement measures.

Yet the Security Council has encountered difficulties
in playing its proper role in conflict prevention, and we
should be fully aware of those difficulties. First of all, at
a time that is powerfully influenced by the media, events
leading to an armed conflict draw less attention than a
conflict that is already under way. Unfortunately, news
reports too often tend to define priorities. Moreover,
preventive action often requires discretion and tenacity,
virtues that are not well adapted to the constraints of an
ultra-media-oriented world - about whose values a great
deal has been said.

In this area as in many others, good judgement is
required. Sometimes it can be useful for the Security
Council to deal openly and publicly with an issue so as to
mobilize attention and to put pressure on the parties. That
was certainly the effect of the Security Council mission
to Jakarta and Dili, sent on the initiative of Ambassador
van Walsum and led by Ambassador Anjaba in the
outstanding manner that has already been noted. That
mission made international intervention possible in East
Timor before the situation was beyond repair. That was
an example of the value of preventive Security Council
action carried out publicly.

But in other cases it can be preferable to act with
discretion. While we understand the mounting wish for
increased transparency in the Council's activities, we
must also be able to make use of discrete ways and
means to settle a matter satisfactorily, and of the
advantages offered by informal consultations among
Council members or other procedures that can make
possible direct, private dialogue with the parties
concerned.

I shall mention only one example of this, and indeed
one in which the Council was not directly involved: the
decisive action by the former Secretary-General in the
settlement of the dispute between Eritrea and Yemen over
the Hanish islands. From the initial steps by the former
Secretary-General to the decision by a court of arbitration,
this required long months of delicate negotiations carried
out with absolute discretion. Indeed, my country played
a role in that peaceful settlement, but sought no public
advantage from this. That is an example of how discretion
is sometimes necessary and how we should value it,
however much we may regret the absence of the media's
cameras and flashbulbs.

 

Furthermore, most current conflicts are internal. Their
prevention can therefore be seen as an infringement of the
principle of State sovereignty. However, if action is not
taken soon enough, an internal crisis can rapidly degenerate
into an armed conflict which, in many cases, has
international repercussions and can destabilize a whole
region, provoking a flood of refugees, stimulating arms
trafficking and drawing in outside players. We have to find,
therefore, a balance between these apparently contradictory
preoccupations in such a way that the Security Council can
be called upon early enough to prevent a spiral of violence.

We should note in this respect that the text of the
Charter, in legal terms, does not exclude the Council from
debating an internal situation if, according to Article 34,
"the continuance of the situation is likely to endanger the
maintenance of international peace and security" or, again,
as in Article 39, if "the Security Council shall determine
the existence of any threat to the peace". It is perfectly
possible in the Council to debate, under these Articles of
the Charter, a situation within a State. However, one must
not confuse debate with having recourse to force, which
comes under other provisions that are precise and limiting.
The Council can take up an issue and take preventive
measures without necessarily envisaging the use of force.

This was done in the spring of 1998 in the case of
Kosovo. The Council debated, preoccupied by a degradation
during several months of the situation on the ground
marked both by an intensification of repression by
Yugoslav forces and by activities of the guerrillas of the
UCK, and the Council adopted resolution 1160 (1998). This
resolution included several demands addressed to the parties
to put an end to Violence and terrorism and to engage in a
real dialogue, and coercive measures, in particular an arms
embargo aimed at putting pressure on the parties and
depriving them of the means of intensifying the fighting.
The events which followed, unfortunately, showed that only
even stronger action on the part of the international
community could prevent the conflict from getting worse.

This leads me to the third difficulty, which consists of
taking adequate measures, in time, to confront a situation
and give oneself the means to desired ends. Is not the
Council reproached too often for doing too little too late?
Retrospectively, it would have been necessary in Kosovo to
intervene earlier and more forcefully.

In what was formerly Zaire, in the autumn of 1996,
the Security Council, after having authorised deployment of
a multinational defense force to allow the sending of
humanitarian aide to hundreds of thousands of refugees,
estimated too quickly that the situation was returning to
normal and no longer justified such intervention. We now
know well that such was not the case. Because of the
Council's hesitation in intervening in time and adequately,
not only did tens of thousands of people die, but the
causes of future problems remained; one year later these
brought about a much greater conflict which we now find
difficult to resolve. This highlights the importance of
making an effort to solve problems tied to implementation
of the Lusaka Agreement with all the determination and
the all the honesty necessary, and that should one not play
around with words. One should realize that it is necessary
to provide the resources, financial and undoubtedly the
human resources, and that, indeed, right now the means
should be provided to make these decisions without any
more slipping between words and reality.

Practically, that means two things: on the one hand,
having the courage and the political will to act while it is
still not too late; on the other hand - and this is not
limited to preventive actions - watching to ensure an
appropriate balance of means to ends and provide the
necessary human, financial and material resources. On
this subject, when it involves preventing an armed
conflict - which I believe is the subject of today's
debate - the financial aspect, as important as it is,
should become neither a constraint nor a pre-condition for
action by the Security Council.

Fortunately, some examples show how the Council
acted effectively in the past. We must not forget that, for
example, with respect to the former Yugoslav Republic or
Macedonia, the United Nations prevention force has been
there from 1992 to 1999, the first example of the
deployment of a force aimed at preventing conflicts and
tensions in a region from overflowing into a neighbouring
country. This must be credited to the United Nations,
which has had successes as well in the Balkans.

We cannot, with respect to preventive action, isolate
the role of the Security Council from the responsibilities
and functions of other organs of the United Nations and,
beyond that, from regional organizations and from
Member States.

The Secretary-General, I have already said, has an
extremely important role to play in alerting the Council to
situations which seem to him susceptible of degenerating
and in taking, in consultation with the Council, preventive
diplomatic actions directly or indirectly through special
envoys. Evidently, to accomplish such missions, the
Secretary-General must be able to rely on expertise within

 

the Secretariat, as well as on other means of information
and early warning. Reinforcing the Secretariat's ability in
this area is not, we believe, optional and must not rely
essentially on voluntary contributions. This should not
prevent countries from placing personnel at the disposal of
the Secretariat for its benefit, without creating suspicion and
excessive vigilance on the part of various members of the
General Assembly.

Thus, the Secretary-General, in his report on Africa,
has very justly said that the best prevention is through
treating the underlying causes of conflicts, notably internal
conflicts. That supposes that States, assisted by donors and
international organizations, ensure sustainable development,
being attentive to social redistribution, watching over good
governance, power sharing, democratization, respect for
human rights and protection of minorities. This highlights
our sense of the need for directions currently taken by the
United Nations Development Programme, based on this
concept of good governance, that we would like to see
involve respect for human rights, proper justice and
protection of minorities. These areas are various and
related.

Growing attention is rightly being given to the
problem of excessive and destabilizing accumulation of and
illegal trafficking in light weapons and small arms. These
weapons, of which 500 million are in circulation throughout
the world, have been the principal instrument of killing
occasioned by conflicts of the post-cold war period. They
are responsible for 90 per cent of the deaths caused by
these conflicts. The struggle against their accumulation and
trafficking constitutes the prime example of a preventable
situation. It is appropriate here to recall the conference
scheduled in 2001 on the illegal trafficking in small arms
at which France has the intention to propose negotiation of
an instrument making obligatory the marking of these arms.
It is also worth commending again, as we have done
in other circumstances, the initiative of Mali, now a project
of the Economic Community of West African States for a
moratorium on importing, exporting and manufacturing
light weapons in West Africa.

In the same spirit, programmes of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants have
both curative and preventive sides. The Council must
continue to encourage such measures. But these will only
have a limited scope if they are not completed by actions
in other spheres related to the careful reintegration of ex-
combatants. Reduction of the number of armed men
presupposes that the economy offers real prospects of
reinsertion. This underlines the necessity of continuing to
support official development assistance for the least
developed countries.

Regional organizations also have an essential role to
play. Their coordination and dialogue with the United
Nations - the Security Council in particular - must be
strengthened. More frequent contacts between the Security
Council and the leaders of the regional and subregional
organizations would provide useful opportunities to
exchange information and examine situations in which
preventive action might be necessary and the involvement
of the Security Council desirable.

As can be seen, conflict prevention is an area in
which we could do more and be more effective. France
hopes that today's debate will both increase the level of
resolve and stimulate imaginations. In this connection, the
presidential statement that you, Mr. President, are to make
on behalf of the Council at the end of this open debate
reviews the Council's means and capacities for carrying
out its conflict-prevention mandate. It will be useful to
review them, but it is even more important to keep them
in mind when we examine specific situations, as we do
on a daily basis.

