Mr. Negroponte (United States of America):
Nine months after the establishment of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC), the United States would
again like to thank Sir Jeremy Greenstock for his
continued vigorous and committed leadership of the
CTC. We would also like to thank the Vice-Chairmen
for their contribution as well as the Mission of the
United Kingdom, which has a dedicated team of
professionals who are supporting the Committee's
work.

From the beginning, Sir Jeremy has insisted on
serious and energetic implementation of resolution
1373 (2001) and on monitoring by the Counter-
Terrorism Committee. We believe he has been
imaginative and effective both in building and
maintaining consensus within the Committee and in
informing Member States of the work and the progress
of the CTC. As a result of the efforts of CTC members,
experts and the Secretariat, the CTC has largely
completed its successful review of the initial reports
and is now embarked on the second round of reviews.

With the second stage of the CTC'S work now
under way, we reiterate the importance of all States
abiding by their obligations under resolution 1373
(2001), including submission of timely, responsive and
complete reports. Only in that way can we have a
benchmark of the world's counter-terrorism capacity.
The review of the second round of reports will, to a
large extent, determine the level of impact the CTC
will have in the fight against terrorism and whether it
will be anything more than an ongoing world audit of
the capacity of Member States to combat terrorism.
The Committee must be prepared to be professionally
critical and tough-minded but also constructive. Above
all, it needs to focus attention on those States which
lack the capacity and/or the will to implement
resolution 1373 (2001). To that end, in its second set of
responses to Member States the Committee should
identify the gaps in implementation, what each State
needs to do to bring itself into compliance with
resolution 1373 (2001) and what should be each State's
priorities. Where a particular State needs technical or
other assistance with the implementation of resolution
1373 (2001) we believe the CTC should undertake
efforts to ensure that such State receives the assistance
it needs. We are pleased to see that the CTC informally
agreed to such procedures earlier this month.
Regardless of how successful the CTC is in identifying
the States that lack capacity to implement resolution
1373 (2001), its ultimate success will in large part be
determined by whether those States and organizations
that have the resources to help are willing to do so.

To that end, we urge Member States with the
capacity to do so to provide assistance to countries that
seek help in full implementation of 1373 (2001). A
substantial number of countries capable of providing
assistance such as training have yet to list themselves
in the CTC directory of assistance providers. Perhaps
some of the countries with expertise do not usually
think of themselves as potential assistance providers. I
have in mind sophisticated financial centres in
particular. It would be desirable for such States to
consider carefully their capacity to provide assistance
such as technical training.

We are pleased to see that the CTC now has two
experts to coordinate its efforts to mobilize States and
organizations, to provide assistance and to match those
willing to help with those in need. We also agree with
the importance that Ambassador Greenstock continues
to place on the role regional, subregional and
functional organizations can play in the fight against
terrorism. Those organizations are well placed to
undertake collective efforts to implement resolution
1373 (2001). They can also assist - and some have
already begun assisting - the CTC in monitoring the
efforts taken by countries in their respective regions to
implement the resolution. Thus, we welcome the
Committee's intention to encourage these organizations
to develop action plans to implement resolution 1373
(2001) and to facilitate the sharing of principles, best
practices and expertise within their regions and their
areas of competence.

It is important to remember that resolution 1373
(2001) and the Committee established to monitor it
have no time limits. They will continue until the
Security Council is satisfied with the implementation
of the resolution. The high level of energy and
determination that those involved with the Committee
have shown to date will need to be maintained.

Before closing, I am pleased to report that
yesterday the United States deposited with the United
Nations the instruments of ratification of the
International Convention for the Suppression of
Terrorist Bombings and the International Convention
for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism. In
so doing, the United States expressed its consent to be
bound by those two treaties, the last remaining United
Nations anti-terrorism conventions to which it had not
yet become a party.

One of the tangible results of the adoption of
resolution 1373 (2001) and the work of the Committee
has been an increase in momentum among Member
States towards ratification of all 12 United Nations
anti-terrorism conventions. We hope that this
momentum will continue, and we urge all States that
have yet to do so to take the steps necessary to ratify
those instruments.

