Mr. Djangone-Bi (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My delegation joins preceding speakers in
congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council and for the wise
initiative of holding this public debate on threats to
international peace and security caused by terrorist
acts.

We also express our great appreciation of the
clear presentation of the twelfth programme of work by
Ambassador Konuzin, Chairman of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) concerning the combat against terrorism.
As well, my delegation sincerely congratulates
Ambassador Konuzin on his assumption of the
chairmanship of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) and congratulates Ambassador Ruperez on his
appointment as head of the Committee's Executive
Directorate. We wish them every success in carrying
out their new duties.
As we take note of the conclusions and
recommendations of the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
I shall make a few general points of principle and of a
general nature concerning the question under
consideration in order to shed light on the practical
problems encountered when implementing the
decisions taken in the fight against terrorism.

The Council's regular, almost bimonthly holding
of public meetings on this agenda item and the ever
greater participation of peoples and nations in these
discussions clearly testify to a universal reality:
terrorist acts have taken their place among the most
important, cruellest and most current threats to
international peace and security.

The shocks caused by the murder and the attacks
against innocent civilians and those, often foreigners,
who happen to be using national property, and the
impact on every household around the world of the
destruction of what we consider to be national
patrimony but which is really, after all, the patrimony
of all humankind, spare no one, no people or nation on
this small planet of ours. Whether those acts take place
in Bali, Jakarta, Madrid, Moscow or New Delhi, they
strike the body, heart and soul of our humanity, assail
our conscience, revolt us, disturb our private and
collective tranquillity and undermine the peace of all
nations and the security of all.

But our analysis of this disease and the treatment
to be prescribed will be right only if we know how to
define and characterize this disease and, above all, if
we can agree on the description of its symptoms and
thoroughly lay bare its causes. The vital need to
promote the primacy of multilateralism, legitimate
defence and the triumph of the latter demand this. It
seems to me that universal agreement on the definition
of acts of terrorism is a prerequisite for any collective,
concerted and coherent strategy to fight terrorism. A
testament to that is the difficulties encountered by the
Ad Hoc Committee tasked with drafting an
international convention on terrorism and an
international convention for the suppression of acts of
nuclear terrorism. In fact the Committee, almost since
its creation pursuant to General Assembly resolution
51/210, has been stuck at an impasse on the definition
of terrorism and the scope of the future convention.

If our peoples, nations and States fail to show the
sufficient political will and active and effective
solidarity to reach a happy and prompt conclusion to
the negotiations under way on those two conventions
essential for reducing the frequency and gravity of
terrorist acts - or even completely removing their
cruel threat to international peace and security - one
hardly need consult a crystal ball to foresee the great
difficulty - even impossibility - of the old
democracies prospering. Not to advance is to recede.
Worse, nascent democracies will die before reaching
adolescence - which, one knows, is not the easiest or
the most gratifying time.

Terrorists would thus have succeeded in their goal
of splitting the international community and,
especially, by exacerbating the negative effects of
globalization, by violent insurrection by the poor
against the rich - sometimes through the unfortunate
resort to terrorism.

Moreover, as a number of international situations
have indicated, the lack of consensus about basic
founding principles of the two future conventions will,
for our poor and non-nuclear countries, continue to
prolong the painful abuses of authority and the attacks
on our sovereignty. When not directly responsible,
some of our rich partners will be complicit in that. I am
referring to State terrorism of the kind imposed upon
us by virtue of the liberties that some powerful and so-
called democratic States have taken with multilateral
provisions painstakingly arrived at, including the
United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the Ottawa
Convention on landmines and the Kyoto Protocol on
climate change, among others.

We hail the positive strengthening of cooperation
between the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning
Al Qaeda and the Taliban and the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning counter-terrorism, and we encourage
them to continue on that noble course. At the same
time, my delegation appeals to all our peoples, nations
and States - with the unambiguous and irrepressible
sense of solidarity that they share - to quickly
overcome the remaining obstacles to the adoption of
those two conventions, which remain sadly absent from
the list of international legal instruments relating to the
prevention and suppression of international terrorism.

Lastly, as other speakers have done, I would like
to emphasize that the fight against terrorism cannot
make progress without rigorous respect for human
rights and international humanitarian law. We are
devoted to those principles and we would like to assure
Ambassadors Konuzin and Ruperez of our full
willingness to cooperate with the CTC and its
Executive Directorate.

That is the modest contribution that my
delegation wanted to make to what has been said by all
of today's speakers on the pressing subject of threats to
international peace and security caused by terrorist
acts.

