The President (spoke in Spanish): We have heard
the last speaker in today's debate. I mentioned this
morning that it was my intention to take the floor in
my national capacity at the end of this debate. I will
therefore now make some comments and observations
in such capacity - but I may perhaps not adhere to the
three-minute rule.

I have had a team of people from the Spanish
Mission and the Secretariat here during the entire day,
following with great attention each and every statement
made. The team has noted the various proposals made
by the members of the Security Council as well as, of
course, non-members. I think that the summary I now
have before me intelligently and very well distils all
the currents of opinion among the membership of the
United Nations. This is just a first summary; later on I
will make a more detailed, written proposal to the Chair
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions, namely, the Ambassador
of Angola. Six main themes were raised today.

The first is the importance ofthe Security Council's
working methods. Almost every speaker pointed out
that, while it is the prerogative of the Council to adopt
its rules of procedure, the impact of its authority means
that the rules affect all of us.

We have also noted full agreement on the relevance
of open debates - and I have personally heard so in
the last statements made today. Such meetings are
important in making it possible for the Council to
assess the interactive nature and effectiveness of its
work and to note the contributions of the membership.
In that connection, the representative of Nepal, the
representatie speaking on behalf of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency (ACT) group, the
observer of the Holy See, and the representatives of
the Czech Republic and India, among others, called for
follow-up to the debates and that the product of such
encompass relevant contributions by Member States in
the course of the debates. That is exactly what Spain is
endeavouring to do today.

There have been many other substantive advances
in the work of the Security Council, as reflected
in the various presidential notes. I join the overall
commendation of the efforts by the members of the
Council and by the leadership of the Chair of the
Informal Working Group.

The second theme has to do with practical
implementation. Many Member States, including the
representatives of Panama and Peru, underscored
that the practical implementation of those notes was
essential. I now want to point out some of the many
suggestions made today for strengthening the Council's
political effectiveness.

The representative of the United Kingdom suggested
lending greater dynamism to consultations. Speaking
on behalf of several members of the Council, the
representative ofAngola referred to the need for greater
restrain when proposing Security Council products.
The representatives of Venezuela and Uruguay spoke
about a more inclusive process for drafting resolutions
and presidential statements. The representative of the
Russian Federation and the speaker on behalf of the
ACT group called for reviewing the penholder system
in order to foster greater participation by the members
of the Security Council. And the representatives of
Lithuania, Japan and Pakistan spoke of the need to
hold a discussion on the assigning and handover of the
chairmanships of the subsidiary organs.

The use of the veto was raised by almost every
delegation. The Mexican and French initiative was
the subject of particular mention, as was the code of
conduct proposed by the ACT group with regard to the
Council's action in connection with genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes. Many others referred
more broadly to the reform of the Security Council.

Transparency was the third major theme. In a
general way, speakers recalled that, in acting on behalf
of all the States Members of the United Nations, it
is legitimate to expect that the Council's work is
transparent, inclusive, accountable and in line with
current reality. In that regard, the representatives of
Algeria, Cuba, Finland, speaking on behalfofthe Nordic
countries, and Thailand called for the Security Council
to step up its practice of holding public meetings and
to hold consultations only when necessary. Speaking
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned countries,
the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran
highlighted the usefulness of monthly summaries,
which inform the Council's annual report.

The representative of Switzerland, speaking on
behalf of the ACT group, as well as the representatives
of France, Germany and Mexico, emphasized their
interest in monthly briefing meetings by the Council's
Presidents. Spain intends to continue that practice and
will convene an informal meeting open to the entire
membership, to which we will also invite the members
of the Council, in order to lay out what has transpired
during this month. That will be ajoint exercise involving
the presidency and the members of the Council.

The fourth theme has to do with cooperation with
other organs. There was clear consensus on the need for
the Council to maintain close cooperation with other
bodies of the United Nations and with regional bodies.
It was felt that there was much room for improvement
and that it was urgent to to do so.

On behalf of various Council members, the
representatives of Portugal and Angola stressed
that the manner in which the Council organized
its monthly programme of work should seize the
opportunity to maintain constant interaction with the
Secretariat, the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council, as well as with other organs of
the United Nations system. Many noted that the new
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1) provides an opportunity
for collaboration among the Council, the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council. The
representatives of Australia, Chad, China, Brazil and
Ukraine stressed the importance of such cooperation in
conflict prevention, and many delegations emphasized
the importance of using the early warning capability of
the Peacebuilding Commission.

The representatives of Nigeria, Egypt, Sierra
Leone, speaking on behalf of the African Group,
Pakistan, and the Netherlands, speaking on behalf of
the Benelux countries, among many others, highlighted
the need for greater Council interaction with other
organs and entities, including troop-contributing
countries, regional organizations and stakeholders and
the Special Representatives of the Secretary-General.
Some delegations, including Italy and Lithuania,
explicitly referred to the High Commissioner for Human
Rights, while the delegations of Germany and France in
particular mentioned the International Criminal Court.

The fifth theme, which raised a great deal of
interest among all the delegations, was the appointment
of the next Secretary-General. Most speakers identified
the appointment of the next Secretary-General as one
of the key decisions that we will have to take and called
for greater transparency and involvement on the part
of the membership in the process. The representatives
of South Africa, Guatemala, Turkey and Costa Rica
stressed the need for the Council to submit the names of
various candidates to the Assembly. The representative
of Mexico suggested that the candidates could be met
in Arria Formula meetings, while the representatives
of Colombia, Argentina, Poland and Venezuela, among
many other delegations, stressed the importance of
there being women candidates.

With today's debate, Spain trusts that it has
contributed to what should be the result of a transparent
and inclusive dialogue between the Council and the
General Assembly.

The sixth theme is follow-up, which is a truly
fundamental because without it the debates remain
theoretical and the ideas presented never become
grounded in texts. Reforming the working methods is
a dynamic process. Therefore, Spain plans to grant the
request of many delegations to follow up on today's I new resume my functions as President of the
debate with a summary of the recommendations that Security Council.

were tnadc in our discussions and which go well beyond
the points that were highlighted, with the intention of
guiding the Informal Working Group going forward.
We welcome Member States' contributions in that The meeting rose at 6.05pm.
regard, for which we thank them in advance.

There being no further speakers on my list, 1
warmly thank all participants.
