Mr. Nishida (Japan): I would first like to extend
warm congratulations to His Excellency Sir Mark Lyall
Grant, Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom to the United Nations, on his assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
March and, of course, to express appreciation for his
leadership in convening this open debate on Somalia at
this timely juncture. I also would like to express my
appreciation to His Excellency Mr. Elmi Ahmed Duale,
Permanent Representative of the Somali Republic, for
his statement, and to Ambassador Augustine Mahiga,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Somalia, for his briefing.

I wish to highlight that a large window of
opportunity has finally opened for Somalia, which has
seen more than 20 years of devastation. That was made
possible thanks to the efforts of the Somali Transitional
Federal Government (TFG), the Somali people and the
international community. Japan extends its sincere
appreciation to the forces of the Somali TFG and the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM),
recently joined by troops from Kenya and Djibouti, as
well as Ethiopia. They have spared no efforts to
combat Al-Shabaab despite huge sacrifices. It is high
time for the international community to echo those
efforts.

In that context, Japan welcomes the adoption of
resolution 2036 (2012), which allows for more
sustainable assistance to AMISOM. operations. We
commend Ambassador Mahiga for his dedication to
Somalia, including his mediation role and his decision
to relocate the United Nations Political Office for
Somalia to Mogadishu.

Japan congratulates all participants on the success
of the London conference on Somalia, held on
23 February, in which Japan also took an active part. It
2

was an important occasion for the international
community to reaffirm its strong commitment to
Somalia. Japan would like to express its appreciation
and respect to the United Kingdom for its leadership in
making that meeting successful and fruitful. Japan
intends to cooperate proactively with other partners, in
accordance with the communique adopted at the
conference.

It should be noted that, over the past year, Somali
stakeholders have made tremendous efforts in the
Somali political process. Japan expresses its sincere
appreciation for the series of agreements that they have
made, namely, the Kampala Accord, the road map and,
most recently, on 17 February, the second Garowe
accord, which paves the way for the end of the
transitional period in August. Now that the
commitment of the international community has been
reaffirmed, it is time for the Somali people to renew
their commitment. Japan has committed firmly to the
achievement of peace and stability in Somalia and has
made a wide range of substantive contributions.

First, together with the European Union, Japan
has taken a leading role in efforts for the reinforcement
of the Somali and AMISOM. police sectors,
contributing a total of $38 million through two United
Nations trust funds. That contribution currently
provides for the stipends of 5,000 Somali police
officers, as well as the construction of police stations
and the procurement of equipment, including armoured
vehicles. Bearing in mind that the needs in that field
will increase as TFG and AMISOM. forces advance in
expanding their control over areas, Japan remains
committed to maintaining such police sector assistance.

Japan is also extending assistance to ensure
improvement in the humanitarian situation in Somalia,
in particular $30 million in assistance to ease the
serious famine situation last year. Although the famine
crisis has receded, humanitarian needs still remain. We
must therefore continue to extend our support.

Furthermore, it is not too early to consider the
issue of the reconstruction of Somalia. In that regard,
Japan looks forward to taking part in the Istanbul
conference in June to discuss the issue. Japan is
already engaged in the improvement of infrastructure
and the promotion of good governance through various
projects, such as the rehabilitation of Mogadishu port
and border control training for Somali TFG officers, in
partnership with the World Food Programme and the
12-25146
United Nations Development Programme and the
International Organization for Migration, respectively.

Piracy is not only linked to stability in Somalia,
but also continues to be a stand-alone, serious threat to
international security. We need to continue to conduct
anti-piracy operations. Japan is proud of its participation
in these vast maritime peace operations, in close
collaboration with other coalitions over the past three
years, through the continuous deployment of two
vessels and two patrol aircraft in the Gulf of Aden. Our
escort and surveillance activities have contributed
significantly to the safe passage of merchant ships
through these areas. Moreover, in June of last year,
Japan established its own facility in Djibouti to
accommodate its personnel and equipment in order to
more effectively conduct these operations. Those
efforts clearly demonstrate Japan's strong commitment
to the fight against piracy.

While it is commendable that the anti-piracy
operations have greatly contributed to the effective
prevention of attacks by pirates, Japan has become
increasingly concerned about the recent expansion of
the area of pirate activity to the western part of the
Indian Ocean. As stated in the report of the Secretary-
General submitted in January (S/2012/50), the issue of
piracy prosecution remains a major task for the
international community. Japan is one of 20 countries
that prosecute apprehended suspected pirates in their
respective countries, and has recently pledged to make
an additional contribution amounting to $2 million to
the Trust Fund to Support Initiatives of States
Countering Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, managed
by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, in
support of the prosecution of suspected pirates in
Somalia and neighbouring States. Also, Japan supports
neighbouring coastal nations in enhancing their
maritime security and enforcement capacity so that
they can tackle Somali piracy on their own.

The TFG can be transformed to become a more
democratic and legitimate Government for Somalia. To
that end, the upcoming months will be very crucial.
Japan urges all Somali stakeholders to implement
without further delay the road map and the Garowe
Principles adopted at the second Somali National
Consultative Constitutional Conference. The next
milestone will be the adoption of a new Somali
constitution. All stakeholders should play an active role
in this important task, and the international community
should extend assistance to ensure its realization.
12-25146
Japan, of course, spares no efforts to continue to
support Somalia.

