Mr. Alyemany (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation would like to align itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Norway on behalf of
the signatory countries of the Safe Schools Declaration.

I would like to reiterate the commitment of the
Yemeni Government to protecting children and
preventing their recruitment in armed conflicts. The
Government has taken several measures to those
ends, including a decree issued in November 2012 by
the Yemeni president, Mr. Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi
Mansour, prohibiting the recruitment of children under
18 into the army or security forces. He has directed all
military and the police forces not to recruit to children
under 18 and stressed that such recruitment was
unlawful. Further, an action plan was signed in May
2014 between the Government of Yemen and UNICEF
to end child recruitment in the armed forces. We have
repeatedly requested that specialized United Nations
agencies help the Government to begin implementing
the plan, particularly in the light of the fact that Houthi
coup militias in Yemen have extensively recruited and
exploited children, which is reflected in the figures
contained in the Secretary-General's reports on children
and armed conflict for the years 2015 (S/2016/360) and
2016 (S/2017/821).

An agreement has been developed with the Office
of the Special Representative to establish a system to
register newborns and infant deaths so that information
can be referenced in determining the age of applicants
who seek to join the military. The agreement also
contains provisions for exploring the possibility of
creating units in the Yemeni Army for protecting
children and for training armed forces personnel on
the protection of children. Based on our commitment
to the protection of children and to preventing their
suffering in situations of conflict and violence, we
have endorsed the Safe Schools Declaration, which
aims to protect children and schools during armed
conflicts. As such, Yemen is the seventy-second State
to endorse the Declaration. Indeed, in her briefing this
morning, Ms. Gamba welcomed Yemen's signing of
the Declaration.

With respect to the Secretary-General's report for
2016, I would like to make the following observations.
First, we strongly denounce and find it strange that the
report equates the legitimate Government and the armed
coup militias when it is the legitimate Government alone
that is cooperating with United Nations and seeking
to protect its people and prevent the recruitment of
children. The Government is committed to international
law and to the implementation of the relevant Security
Council resolutions, including resolution 2216 (2015),
which is seen in the progress achieved in the period
between the 2015 report and the current report.

The United Nations continues to rely on civil society
organizations and individuals affiliated with the Houthi
militias that are deliberately misleading international
public opinion as its sources. These organizations and
individuals are seeking by any and all means to transform
the political crisis into a humanitarian crisis and are
fabricating the figures to direct accusations against the
Arab Coalition and the Yemeni Government. For its
sources, the United Nations is relying on the registries
of the Ministry of Health and hospitals controlled by
the Houthi militias, which are deliberately fabricating
such registries and providing the United Nations with
baseless figures. They are deliberately exaggerating the
reality to achieve political gain. Since the beginning of
Ms. Gamba's work, we have objected to the monitoring
approach that has been adopted, and we have requested
greater transparency and affirmed our readiness to
cooperate with her Office to uncover the truth.

International organizations are weakly represented
in liberated areas, where, as we have repeatedly said,
they have no offices. This exposes these organizations
to unilateral and unreliable sources. The United
Nations continues to neglect our request to remedy
this situation.

In conclusion, we hope that the progress achieved
by the Yemeni Government in the area of protecting
children will be reflected in future reports of the
Secretary-General through the delisting of the armed
forces and air coalition from the report's annex. We
welcome the cooperation of Ms. Gamba's Office, in
particular her willingness to adopt preventive measures
for the protection of children, collaborate with different
Governments and dissociate herself from the kind of
propaganda that does not serve cooperation but widens
the gap between the United Nations agencies and
Member States. We also look forward to her Office's
assisting the Yemeni Government in implementing the
action plan for 2014 and to protecting children from the
effects of armed conflict.

