Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): We
welcome the Minister of Justice of Burundi to New
York, as well as his delegation. We thank him for his
very enlightening statement. We wish also to express
our deep appreciation to Assistant Secretary-General
Zacklin for his introduction of the Kalomoh report.

The presence of a ministerial delegation from
Burundi at this meeting bears witness to our shared
concern - that of the Security Council and of the
Government of Burundi - to continue to seek together
ways of achieving lasting peace in Burundi. Recent
events on the political scene there have given fresh
hope to the people of that country that peace will be
restored. We find in that one more reason for the
international community to continue, and even step up,
the considerable efforts that have been made for
several years now to help Burundi restore peace.

However, we all are aware that the road to peace
and stability in Burundi is still full of pitfalls and
replete with challenges. We are particularly concerned
by the repeated violations of human rights. One of the
major challenges is the fight against impunity and the
struggle for national reconciliation. Recent proposals
contained in the Kalomoh report seem to us extremely
useful and relevant in that regard.

The quest for national reconciliation should take

duly into account the need to promote justice. The
establishment of truth should be accompanied by the
establishment of responsibility. We cannot
overestimate the contribution that the twin mechanism
proposed could make to the strengthening of the
judiciary apparatus and of the rule of law in Burundi. It
is our hope that the political leadership in Burundi as a
whole and all the parties involved will support these
proposals, and that they will engage in this process in a
spirit of sincerity, so that the sources of violence in the
country can be eliminated and human rights violations
discouraged once and for all, in order to relieve
Burundi of the burden of its recent past.

My delegation, together with other Council
members, will give its unswerving support to the
implementation of the recommendations of the
Secretary-General towards that end.

