Mr. Lolo (Nigeria): I would like to welcome
Mr. Staffan de Mistura back to the Council and to
thank him for his first comprehensive briefing since
assuming office as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Afghanistan. My thanks also go
to Ambassador Apakan for his report on, and
leadership of, the Council's mission to Afghanistan, as
well as to Ambassador Tanin for his statement this
morning.

We condemn the attack yesterday by unidentified
gunmen on a United Nations vehicle, which resulted in
the death of one staff member in Kabul. We convey our
condolences to the victim's family and to the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).

It is clear that the recurring incidence of attacks,
explosions of improvised explosive devices and suicide
bombs against the civilian population has failed to
achieve its goal of derailing the relative peace and
stability achieved so far. Such desperate measures by
the insurgents, avowed enemies of peace, could not
deter the participation of over 1,600 delegates,
including 300 women, in the Consultative Peace Jirga,
held three weeks ago.

Our debate today is of particular significance
because it draws on the assessment of the Council's
timely and, one must admit, successful mission to
Afghanistan, which ended only a few days ago. The
engagement of the Council, through its mission, with a
widespread group of Afghan stakeholders, afforded us
the opportunity to listen to the Afghan people directly
and learn lessons on the ground, and also demonstrated
the support of the United Nations for the Government
and people of the country. We commend the courage
and resilience of people who not only risk their lives
under difficult security circumstances, but also send a
loud message to the enemies of peace by participating
in large numbers in high-profile activities.

With regard to the political and electoral process,
the year 2010 is a significant watershed. The legislative
elections slated for September should serve to
consolidate the peace process. We feel that the
elections should avoid the pitfalls of the 2009
presidential elections and be conducted in a free, fair
and transparent manner. The three security ministries
responsible for vetting candidates and submitting
results to the Independent Electoral Commission and
the Electoral Complaints Commission should take
every step to preserve the credibility and integrity of
the electoral process. We acknowledge the enormous
scale of the electoral challenges in Afghanistan. While
reforms may take a while to yield the desired results, it
is necessary to underscore the need for Afghanistan's
electoral process to garner public confidence and
acceptance.

The commendable contribution of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, under the
able leadership of Mr. De Mistura, should be sustained
and intensified. In particular, UNAMA should continue
to support the Electoral Commission, especially in its
efforts to strengthen national capacity and to build
mutual confidence and security during the electoral
period.

There is also a need for concerted efforts to
support the national security forces in their
determination to counterbalance insurgency attacks.
The successes recorded in the London Conference and
the recent Peace Jirga should serve as impetus for the
forthcoming Kabul Conference in July 2010, and thus
contribute to the consolidation of dialogue,
reconciliation, peace and reintegration programmes in
Afghanistan. We urge the Afghan Government to seize
the momentum of the Conference to rekindle its
commitment to tackling the priorities on its agenda,
such as stamping out corruption and promoting justice
and the rule of law. But we acknowledge also that the
best efforts of Afghanistan would not achieve lasting
peace without effective and sustained regional support.
Therefore, we urge regional actors, especially those
with leverage, to remain steadfast in their peace
initiatives in the country.

We welcome the important role of the United
Nations in supporting and coordinating international
efforts to strengthen Afghanistan's capacity to
coordinate aid, formulate its own development
priorities and receive and disburse funds to finance its
needs. The transition to Afghanistan's assumption of
greater responsibility for its own security and
development, as endorsed at the London Conference,
cannot be overemphasized. We hope that the Council
will respond to the concerns raised at the Consultative
Peace Jirga regarding the removal of Afghan
opposition names from the sanctions list established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) - a point that was
made by Ambassador Mayr-Harting this morning. We
note that those de-listed should meet the criteria laid
down, including denouncing violence, recognizing the
Government and Constitution of Afghanistan, and
breaking their links to and affiliations with Al-Qaida
and other terrorist groups. Indeed, the sanctions
Committee has only recently completed the review of
all the Taliban names, involving more than 300 persons
on the consolidated list, and made appropriate
recommendations. In January, the Committee de-listed
five men who had held senior positions within the
Taliban regime. This action points to the fact that the
Committee is responsive and willing to contribute to
the efforts to create an environment that is conducive
to peace and development in Afghanistan.

