Mr. Gombo (Chad) (spoke in French): I, too, would
like to thank Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative
for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for his briefing.

The developments and circumstances characterizing
the period from 21 April to 21 October 2014 in Bosnia
and Herzegovina show that the process of building
peace is a complex one that faces constant challenges.
Three factors illustrate this complexity in particular:
the floods, which have made the humanitarian situation
in the country even more fragile; the general elections,
which polarize the political scene; and, lastly, the
country's sovereignty and territorial integrity, which
are being contested by a segment of the population.

First of all, in May 2014, we received the shocking
reports and images of the floods and landslides that
occurred in Bosnia and Herzegovina - a natural
disaster that provoked the displacement of hundreds
of thousands of persons and destroyed thousands of
homes. More tragic still, the floods also resulted in
the displacement of landmines and other unexploded
munitions from the 1992-1994 war, exposing 70 per
cent of the flooded area to risk. The economic impact
of the disaster is estimated at €2.04 billion, which is
almost 15 per cent of Bosnia Herzegovina's gross
domestic product.

Despite the rapid response of the international
community, several months on the country has yet
to recover from the disaster. Chad encourages the
national authorities to redouble their efforts to define
a comprehensive strategy to coordinate the various
initiatives to reintegrate the vulnerable population as
winter approaches. Contingency planning should also
be developed to deal with such catastrophes in the
future.

The seventh general elections for the Parliament
of Bosnia and Herzegovina were hold on 2 October.
The polls were conducted in an orderly manner, with
an overall participation rate of 55 per cent. According
to the final results, the nationalist parties largely
dominated the elections, and the Croat, Serb and Muslim
nationalists will form a tripartite presidency of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, pursuant to the Dayton Agreement
of 1995. Chad expresses its concern with regard to
the calls for the secession of the Republika Srpska.
Moreover, we believe that the disputes over State
property in the municipalities of Kalinovik and Foca,
the legislative gridlock resulting from the use of vetos,
the administrative non-cooperation and the refusal of
transport, information and documents must be resolved
in the framework of the General Framework Agreement
for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Dayton
Agreement and the principles of the Constitutional
Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina. In the same vein,
Chad calls on all parties involved to exhibit calm and
restraint and urges them to preserve the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
with full respect for the rights of minorities.

In conclusion, Chad notes with satisfaction that,
despite the complex humanitarian, political and
constitutional context, the security situation in the
country remains calm and stable. In that regard, we
welcome the good cooperation between the Office of
the High Representative, the European Union military
mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, NATO and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
towards the implementation of the Peace Agreement.
However, efforts must continue to fulfil the five
objectives and two conditions for the Office of the High
Representative to be closed. We trust that the desire for
peace motivating the parties involved will allow for
stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina to be strengthened.

