Mr. Vukasinovie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At
the outset let me congratulate you, Sir, on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of November, and wish you and your delegation
every success.

We welcome Mr. Valentin Inzko, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, and have
taken note of his report on the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (S/2017/922, annex), covering the period
from 22 April to 21 October.

Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomes the adoption
of resolution 2384 (2017), extending the mandate of
the European Union-led peacekeeping force (EUFOR)
Althea for an additional 12 months. It is important
to emphasize that Bosnia and Herzegovina, as a host
country, has enjoyed respectful and constructive
cooperation with EUFOR Althea, particularly in
capacity-building and the training of the armed forces
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which have contributed to
strengthening national ownership.

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina has been
peaceful and calm for a long period of time, which
has been regularly reflected in the reports of EUFOR
Althea and in the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council. EUFOR Althea is mandated to support
the implementation of the military aspects of Peace
Agreement and to ensure compliance with annexes
1-A and 2 of the General Framework Peace Agreement.
Over the past few years, in order to correspond to
the situation on the ground, EUFOR Althea has been
reconfigured, while its primary focus has shifted from
deterrence and activities in providing a safe and secure
environment to the capacity-building and training of
the armed forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Bosnia and Herzegovina takes note of the readiness
of the European Union (EU) to further calibrate the
EUFOR Althea presence, bearing in mind the progress
made in its EU integration process and taking into
account the security situation on the ground.

In the reporting period, Bosnia and Herzegovina
continued vigorous work on implementing the
socioeconomic reforms necessary for its integration
into the European Union. Bosnia and Herzegovina has
further intensified its efforts to ensure the effective
implementation of the reform agenda, in accordance
with its action plan. Bosnia and Herzegovina has made
significant progress in the EU integration process
following last year's conclusion of the EU Council,
inviting the European Commission to submit an opinion
on the merits of Bosnia and Herzegovina's application.
Bosnia and Herzegovina's authorities at all levels
have coordinated their activities in the multifaceted
labour of preparing answers to the questionnaire of the
European Commission. In that regard we reiterate our
appreciation to the European Union for its unwavering
commitment to Bosnia and Herzegovina's membership
in the EU.

One of the most important goals of Bosnia and
Herzegovina's foreign policy is the advancement of
friendly and constructive cooperation among the
countries of the region. The perspective of integration
into the European Union continues to drive the
transformation and modernization of the region
through political and economic reforms. The EU
perspective remains the crucial factor not only for
regional cooperation but also for the stability of the
Western Balkans. Cooperation within framework of
the Berlin process, which provides assets for traffic
and energy infrastructure, is particularly important to
regional development.

The countries of the Western Balkans continue
to hold regular meetings at the highest level, which
generate a positive political atmosphere. At the latest
Western Balkans summit, which took place in Trieste,
Italy, on 12 July, leaders of Western Balkans States
and high-level EU representatives adopted concrete
measures to deepen cooperation in the field of economy,
infrastructure and transportation. In that connection,
we would like to stress that in September 2017 Bosnia
and Herzegovina signed the Transport Community
Treaty with the European Union.

Bosnia and Herzegovina has intensified its efforts
to strengthen the rule of law in several key areas.
In the reporting period, we continued to fulfil our
international obligations with regard to countering
terrorism, violent extremism and the phenomenon of
foreign terrorist fighters. Bosnia and Herzegovina, in
accordance with provisions of its amended penal code,
continues to process individuals involved in fighting
on behalf of terrorist organizations, as well as those
facilitating the recruitment of terrorist fighters.

Bosnia and Herzegovina's judicial and security
institutions have been implementing our strategy
for preventing and combating terrorism. It is
important to emphasize that the strategy, alongside
security measures, includes preventive activities for
deradicalization, undertaken by national stakeholders
such as religious communities, educational institutions,
civil society organizations and the media.

During the reporting period, Bosnia and
Herzegovina's rule of law and security institutions made
progress in combating organized crime, corruption
and money-laundering. In that regard, we thank the
European Union for providing significant support
in capacity-building to the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Agency for the Prevention of Corruption and the
Coordination of the Fight against Corruption.

With respect to the international migrant crisis,
the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina have
undertaken a set of comprehensive measures, including
in the humanitarian and security fields. Bosnia and
Herzegovina has implemented its strategy in the field
of migration and asylum, as well as a plan of action
for the period 2016-2020. This document has specified
Bosnia and Herzegovina policy in the field of migration
and asylum, in accordance with the highest European
and international standards.

As for processing war crimes before domestic
courts, we would like to reiterate that fighting impunity
at the local level is vital to Bosnia and Herzegovina
as a complex and multinational State. In that context,
implementing the national strategy for processing war
crimes, regardless of the national or religious origin
of the perpetrators or the victims, is essential for
reconciliation and a long-term stability.

With regard to the economic situation, it is important
to stress that Bosnia and Herzegovina's economy, like
other economies of the region, has been affected by
the global economic slowdown. However, Bosnia and
Herzegovina's economy has grown at a solid pace. In
the period from January 2016 to January 2017, Bosnia
and Herzegovina's economy grew by 2.7 per cent. The
current inflation rate is -0.2 per cent, which means that
consumer prices have fallen slightly in comparison
with the previous year.

It is important to mention that Bosnia and
Herzegovina is actively contributing to international
peace and security by providing its military and police
personnel to United Nations peacekeeping missions.
At this moment, we have around 40 personnel serving
in United Nations peacekeeping missions worldwide.
Bosnia and Herzegovina, as a current member of the
Economic and Social Council, supports United Nations
activities with regard to the promotion of the 2030
Sustainable Development Goals and encourages the
mutual exchange of experiences in various aspects of
the implementation of the Agenda.

Finally, we would like to express the readiness of
Bosnia and Herzegovina's authorities to continue their
work to secure a better and prosperous future for its
citizens. At same time, we would also like to express
gratitude to our international partners for supporting
Bosnia and Herzegovina on that path.

