Mr. Akram (Pakistan): I would like to thank
Assistant Secretary-General Danilo Tiirk for
introducing the Secretary-General's report on the
United Nations Political Office in Bougainville
(UNPOB). We would like to put on record our
appreciation for the work of the United Nations,
UNPOB and all the parties who have worked to seek,
facilitate and implement a peaceful solution to the
conflict in that territory. The courageous decision of
the Government of Papua New Guinea to follow this
path and its strong commitment to the peace process
deserves our special appreciation. I would like to
welcome the participation here of the Permanent
Representative of Papua New Guinea.

We support UNPOB's mandate to complete the
verification of stage II of the weapons disposal plan.
This is an important prerequisite for the subsequent
holding of elections for an autonomous Government in
Bougainville. This would, along with the necessary
constitutional changes, clear the way for the granting
of autonomy and the eventual holding of a referendum
in which the people of Bougainville will exercise their
right to self-determination, in accordance with the
provisions of the Lincoln and Arawa agreements.

Pakistan strongly supports this path, which the
parties have courageously agreed to follow. However,
we agree with the Secretary-General, who states, in
paragraph 17 of his report (S/2003/345), that: "The
peace process is stronger than it has ever been
before, but it still needs nurturing." Those groups
which continue to remain outside the peace process
must be encouraged to join it. Peace is the only
solution, and this process, painstaking though it is, still
remains its best guarantor.

Pakistan regards the mandate of the United
Nations Political Office in Bougainville as crucial for
building peace as well as trust in that territory. We
hope that UNPOB will be allowed sufficient time and
resources to complete its complex task. We also hope
that the withdrawal of the Peace Monitoring Group
after 30 June 2003 will not adversely affect the work of
UNPOB in the implementation of its mandate. If it
does, we hope that alternative arrangements can be
found to rectify the problem and facilitate UNPOB's
task. We hope that the role of the United Nations in
Bougainville will not end with the expiry of UNPOB's
mandate and that the United Nations will continue to
work there and to stay the course in facilitating the full
implementation of the peace process.

Finally, I would like to observe that progress has
been made possible on Bougainville by the courageous
position of the Government of Papua New Guinea in
the implementation of Security Council resolutions and
in allowing the exercise of the right of self-
determination.

I cannot but observe, and express the wish, that
the outstanding role of mediation and facilitation
played by the United Nations on this issue could well
be performed by our Organization on other, far more
dangerous and long-standing disputes, such as the one
over Jammu and Kashmir, where the right of self-
determination prescribed by the resolutions of the
Security Council has remained outstanding for over 50
years.

