Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like to begin by welcoming Mr. Samura M.W. Kamara,
Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation ofthe Republic of Sierra Leone. I also thank
Mr. Jens Toyberg-Frandzen, Executive Representative
of the Secretary-General, as well Mr. Guillermo
Rishchynski, Chair of the Sierra Leone configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission.

As the mandate of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL)
comes to an end, I would like to express my gratitude to
all the staff of the Office, both local and international,
including the staff of the United Nations country team,
for their contribution in establishing security and
stability and supporting peacebuilding efforts in Sierra
Leone.

No one can deny that the positive turn of events in
Sierra Leone in recent years would not have taken place
without the determination of the country's people,

whatever their ethnic or political affiliations, to build
their State, strengthen their economy, address all the
repercussions ofthe civil war, aspire to a hopeful future
and strengthen and develop their region. In that regard,
we note that such determination was supported by the
efforts of the United Nations at the highest levels to
complement the work of UNIPSIL and the country
team, both in the capital and in field offices. That made
it possible to secure many achievements - in strategic
planning, for example - as well as in the areas of
implemenation and financing. Moreover, we would like
to pay tribute to the crucial role of the Special Court
for Sierra Leone in providing criminal justice as part of
ensuring peace in the country.

The closing of UNIPSIL in no way means the
end of United Nations commitment in Sierrra Leone.
On the contrary, this is a key moment in transferring
certain functions to the country team following the
very successful conclusion of the work of the Office.
Dialogue will now be the means for resolving conflicts,
and elections will also be held. The participation of
women and young people in Government institutions
will be very important. There will be reform of the
security sector, in particular to address corruption and
drug trafficking. And there will also be strengthening
of human rights. All those are very important
achievements.

We believe that the Government of Sierra Leone's
assumption of political, economic and security
responsibilities is an essential pillar in ensuring
lasting stability. Moreover, working on the basis of the
principles of good governance, justice and an equitable
distribution of the dividends of economic development
will strengthen the credibility of the Government and
boost national unity, thereby decreasing the likelihood
of conflict among the parties to the extent that economic
development and the fair distribution of development
benefits constitute the primary basis for political and
security stability.

With regard to recent investment in the sound
performance of the economy of Sierra Leone, we
would encourage the Government to continue to make
progress in that direction, with the cooperation of the
international community, by implementing the Agenda
for Prosperity for the period 2013 to 2018, improving
financial stability, reforming the monetary system and
improving the system for the management of public
assets.
In conclusion, although we are aware of the
challenges, we remain optimistic about the future
of Sierra Leone. We have full trust in the future of
the country, thanks to the efforts of the people and
the determination of the Government to face those
challenges and to continue to achieve progress in
various areas. We also think that the work of UNIPSIL
should be documented so that the lessons learned can
be adopted by other missions in the field.

