Mr. Chaouachi (Tunisia) (spoke in French): First
I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for having
organized this meeting and to associate myself with the
words of welcome and thanks addressed to General
Lamine Cisse, the Secretary-General's Representative
and Head of the United Nations Peace-building
Support Office in the Central African Republic, for the
briefing that he has just given, which gives us a clear
picture of the current situation in that country. We are
also grateful for the actions being undertaken by the
Office in many areas. We also thank Mr. Calderisi for
his briefing.

Despite the remarkable progress since the end of
the 1996 crisis and the sustained efforts of all actors
involved, the situation in that country remains fragile
and the achievements made since then in the political
and security fields are being steadily weakened. The
efforts of the Central African Republic Government to
improve the socio-economic situation are also
increasingly being put to the test.

Unfortunately, last May's attempted coup d'e'tat
only confirms our fears and heightens our concern.
While it is true that it is primarily up to the Central
Africans themselves to work to restore the political,
economic and social stability of their country, it is also
true that the alarming situation in the Central African
Republic at present requires from donors and the
international community, as was rightly stressed by the
Secretary-General in his report, emergency assistance
that will make it possible for the Central African
Government to establish its authority, to deal with its
priority needs and to calm the widening social tension.
In this respect, we commend the many initiatives taken
by the Government and we associate ourselves with the
Secretary-General in urging that these efforts be
strengthened by adequate financial and technical
international assistance.

In this regard, it is important that the World Bank
resume its disbursements and that Member States that
announced pledges here in May 2000 honour their
commitments. Technical assistance that makes it
possible to train civil servants and economic affairs
personnel is also important. Support for the
organization of local elections would also certainly
strengthen national unity and would consolidate the
democratic process in that country. International
solidarity is clearly highly desirable, but, I repeat, it
must serve as a valuable form of support for Central
African resolve and for a strong national effort. I must
say that the security situation in the Central African
Republic concerns us greatly.

The increase in the number of light weapons in
the country and the escape of the coup plotters show
that the risk of destabilization is still present and that
the Government of the Central African Republic must
remain watchful. We therefore believe that it is
important to strengthen the process of collecting and
confiscating such weapons and to strengthen the plan
for the reintegration of refugees and for assistance for
their return and to continue the restructuring of the
defence and security forces; the stability of the country
depends on this.

The search for a definitive solution to all of these
security, humanitarian and socio-economic problems in
the Central African Republic should also take place in
the framework of an overall subregional approach,
taking into account, inter alia, the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

I should like to welcome the considerable efforts
being made by the United Nations Peace-building
Support Office in the Central African Republic
(BONUCA). We are convinced that its presence and its
activities are of great help for both the Government and
the population of the Central African Republic. My
delegation would like to take this opportunity to
express its support for the recommendations of the
Secretary-General regarding the strengthening of the
structures and capacity of BONUCA so as to make its
efforts more effective and enable it to work, together
with the Government of the Central African Republic,
to establish lasting peace in that country.

