Ms. Liivin (Sweden): Let me first express my
condolences and those of the Swedish Government
and people on the loss of life following the vicious and
cowardly attacks in Kabul and London. Our thoughts
are first and foremost with the families of those who
lost loved ones and those who are now recovering from
their injuries. We share the shock and outrage of the
British and Afghan peoples and I assure them that
Sweden stands with them at this time.

Moving on to the subject of today's discussion,
I would like to thank Bolivia for putting the issue of
preventive diplomacy and transboundary waters on the
agenda. Water is one of the essential building blocks of
human life. Without it, nothing can survive. I also thank
the Secretary-General for his insightful and thought-
provoking statement. He underlined for us the challenges
and opportunities presented by transboundary waters.
He also underscored the vital importance of preventive
diplomacy as a tool for averting conflict and fostering
cooperation through water management.

Today's meeting coincides with another important
meeting focused on water, specifically on our seas
and oceans. Sweden is proud to co-host the Oceans
Conference with Fiji, which started yesterday. We
believe that the Conference can be a game changer and
lead to a reversal in the decline of the oceans to the
benefit of people, the planet and prosperity.

The topic at hand is vital and urgent. The effects of
climate change are real. They are being felt every day,
not least by those who depend on rivers, lakes, seas and
oceans to sustain their lives and livelihoods. Sweden
is not excluded from such concerns. We are currently
facing unprecedented low groundwater levels in parts
of our country, which is affecting countrywide water
supply levels almost throughout the entire contry. It
is imperative that we all respond to the challenge by
raising the level of our global ambition to meet our
global responsibility.

Sweden is deeply and fully committed to the
prevention agenda being pursued by the Secretary-
General, which the Council discussed it in January
(see S/PV.7857). Such commitment to a more holistic
approach to prevention builds on an acknowledgment of
the many varied and interlinked drivers of conflict. The
issue of the management of transboundary waters is an
important example. A large proportion of the world's
population depends upon shared water resources for
domestic, agricultural and industrial uses. How shared
water is managed between communities has a profound
effect on all aspects of human life, as well as economic
growth and sustainable development. Considering
its importance, it is not surprising that shared waters
can also be a source of tension that fuels conflict and
threatens peace. The negative effects of climate change
have the potential to increase such tensions. To quote
the Secretary-General,

"climate change is a threat in itself and a multiplier
of many other threats - from poverty to
displacement to conflict".

In response, we need to support countries' efforts
to make informed and efficient decisions when
responding to the effects of climate change, including
on transboundary waters. The United Nations needs
an institutional home for the security risks related to
climate change that are already affecting countries. Such
a home would ensure that the United Nations has the
skills set needed to provide adequate risk assessments
and deliver comprehensive risk-management strategies
with regard to the impact of climate change. Together
with increased capacity for more integrated, cross-
pillar analysis, such work would also provide the early
warning needed to support the Council's work to prevent
conflicts from emerging. That need was underlined in
March with the adoption of resolution 2349 (2017).

Improving the management of water resources so
as to ensure water security must be a top priority at
global, regional and national levels. We simply cannot
afford not to responsibly and sustainably manage our
waters. Issues of shared waters can and must be turned
into opportunities for cooperation. Doing so can help
prevent conflicts and deliver positive outcomes for all
communities across borders. We have a number of tools
at hand to support such efforts.

First, international law relating to water, which
sets out key principles around prevention and avoiding
transboundary harm, can play a significant role in
preventing conflict. The Aarhus Convention is an
important instrument for ensuring the participation
of the public and non-governmental organizations
in environmental decision-making. In that regard,
it is important that the rights of indigenous peoples
be recognized, taken into account and included in
decisions regarding water resources.

Secondly, regional actors have a crucial role to play.
As the Secretary-General underlined, Europe has a long
history of managing shared waters. We have developed
extensive systems for transboundary water governance,
including an overreaching treaty framework. The
European Union has lessons to share in that regard.
So, too, has Sweden, where we have made efforts to
gain experience in the area of water diplomacy for the
benefit of all countries. The Stockholm International
Water Institute and the UNESCO International Centre
for Water Cooperation and Global Water Partnership,
which is hosted by Sweden, hold extensive knowledge
pertaining to transboundary water and actively engage
in water management dialogues.

Finally, we should enhance and deepen our
efforts to work together around transboundary waters.
Cooperation needs to be extended beyond managing a
shared resource to the areas of increasing the quality of
water and protecting the environment. Cooperation over
shared waters can have far-reaching positive impact and
build trust far beyond the issue of managing a shared
resource, which further reduces the risk of conflict.

The waters that we share - whether rivers, lakes,
seas or oceans - sustain life and support our common
prosperity. However, they are coming under threat
more and more. No country acting alone can respond.
Instead, we must work together as partners across
borders in order to secure our shared future and protect
our planet for everyone.

