Prince Zeid Ra'ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me, Mr. President, at the
outset, to thank you for your prompt response in
convening this meeting to discuss the question of
Palestine and the issue of Israeli acts of military
aggression against the Palestinian people in the Gaza
Strip, specifically in the Jabaliya refugee camp. I wish
to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the current
month. I am fully confident that you will conduct the
work of the Council with your customary efficiency. I
would also like to express to Ambassador Juan Antonio
Yafiez-Barnuevo, the Permanent Representative of
Spain, our thanks for his stewardship of the Council
last month.

The Government of Jordan stresses the need for
the Israeli Government fully and immediately to halt
its acts of violence and destruction in the Gaza Strip
and throughout the occupied Palestinian territory, to
put an end to its policy of deliberate destruction of
Palestinian infrastructure and homes and to cease
forthwith its acts of extrajudicial killing, the imposition
of collective punishment and its other practices against
the Palestinian people. We reiterate our call to Israel to
comply with the provisions of the Fourth Geneva
Convention. Israeli military policies will only lead to a
further deterioration of the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory and will escalate tensions in the
region.

The international community must thus take the
necessary measures to prevent Israel from persisting in
the deplorable, destructive policy it has begun in Gaza,
and must stress its rejection of all such Israeli
practices, which are a violation of international law
and international humanitarian law.

The Palestinian people have the right to self-
determination and to exercise their sovereignty over
their territory. The Israeli withdrawal from the Gaza
Strip must therefore be complete and carried out on the
basis of the road map. It must be a step towards ending
Israeli occupation of all the occupied Palestinian
territory. However, carrying out plans that aim at
converting the Gaza Strip into a besieged province
isolated from the rest of the Palestinian territory would
not mean an end to occupation. Rather, it would
contravene the norms of international law and signed
agreements, and would, indeed, be fatal to the two-
State solution.

Once again, we condemn the killing of civilians,
whether on the Palestinian or the Israeli side. We
maintain that the essential problem in our region is that
of occupation. The time has indeed come to address
that problem in a serious and sustained fashion. We
adhere to the principle of ending the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict on the basis of the two-State solution, the road
map, the terms of reference and the principles of the
peace process. We therefore welcome the Quartet's
adherence to the two-State solution and to the need to
achieve progress within the peace process, as expressed
in the statement recently issued by the Quartet in New
York.

