Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Bolivian presidency of the Security
Council for convening today's important debate and for
its resolution on mine action, in which France is actively
participating. I would also like to thank Assistant
Secretary-General Zuev and Ms. Nathalie Ochoa Nifio
for their very illuminating briefings.

The threats posed by anti-personnel mines and
explosive remnants of war, as well as the ongoing use
of cluster munitions, are a serious and major concern in
today's world. That is further compounded by numerous
challenges posed by the growing use of improvised
explosive devices with an ever-increasing death toll.
Recent news of incidents in Mali, where we have all
already been hard hit, has been particularly notable.
But this worrisome observation applies in fact wherever
civilians, local forces and troop-contributing countries
are confronting this scourge of modern conflict on a
daily basis. These weapons can kill and maim right
away or at a later date, randomly striking long after
they have been laid. They make no distinction between
civilians and troops.

Given this extremely acute threat, we have moral
and legal obligations - not just an obligation related
to security concerns - with respect to the populations
we must protect, the personnel we deploy, and the host
States with which we collaborate. I am also thinking of
the first teams on the ground - the civil and military
mine-clearance experts. I would like to pay tribute to
them for their ongoing and unstinting commitment as
they risk their lives. What they do is key because it
saves lives every day, not only by protecting civilians
from these weapons, but also by creating the security
conditions for Blue Helmets to be deployed and
humanitarian personnel to reach populations in need.

Anti-personnel mines, explosive remnants of war
and improvised explosive devices form a complex whole.
The presence of mines in residential and cultural areas,
the spread of unexploded ordnance, and entrapment by
improvised explosive devices are particular challenges.
To address them, we must garner specific expertise and
resources. As in many other fields, there can be no one
single response, but rather a series of tailored, distinct
but complementary measures whose consistency must
be maintained and strengthened.

We should first provide actors on the ground, be
they troops or deployed forces, with the operational
means necessary for their action. Specialized
non-governmental organizations should also be
supported, as they work tirelessly in extremely
dangerous areas. New technologies must play a role in
foreseeing and mitigating threats. Accordingly, I would
like to commend all of the Secretariat's innovative
initiatives in this area. I would also like to pay tribute
to the outstanding work of the United Nations Mine
Action Service, under the particularly effective and
dynamic leadership of Agnes Marcaillou, together with
other United Nations bodies.

We also have a major responsibility in terms
of assistance, particularly in the areas of training
and awareness-raising. It is indeed important to let
susceptible countries to build their own know-how,
so that they do not have to depend on that of others.
That also means stepping up our education efforts to
improve local populations' understanding of risks. Such
prevention efforts are an essential part of our work and
should be part of the clearing and security programmes
undertaken to protect the civilian populations.

In that context, France's efforts focus in particular
on supporting the security sector reform in various
partner States. We support the training of national
bodies and provide assistance to non-governmental
organizations deployed in relevant countries. Like
Handicap International, these non-governmental
organizations are doing an admirable job. In order
to ensure stability, France, working in an essentially
humanitarian framework, supports specialized training
in a number of post-crisis countries. We also support
demining programmes, particularly in the Middle East
and Africa, in close cooperation with our partners. For
example, we support such regional initiatives as the
Development Centre for Post-Conflict Operations in
Mine Clearance and Decontamination in Benin.

However, operational activities cannot simply be
the sum of individual efforts. The complexity of the
threat requires multiple stakeholders engaging in a
coordinated response, based on the diversity ofexpertise
and respective means. The Mine Action Support Group,
currently chaired by Italy, is an excellent example of this.
France also works closely with the European Union and
the main non-governmental organizations involved.

Bolstering our resources on the ground will finally
be coupled with the need to ensure the universalization
and the full implementation of the legal tools at our
disposal. The Convention on the Prohibition of the Use,
Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel
Mines and on Their Destruction comes to mind as a
reference instrument for combating anti-personnel
mines, as does the Convention on Cluster Munitions,
signed in Oslo, which bans cluster munitions. Many
countries today share the same objectives as those
conventions, even if they are not yet signatories. And
some are considering becoming signatories, which we
must encourage and facilitate.

In the face of ever-increasing casualties due
to such weapons, time is short. We are duty-bound
morally, politically and legally to intensify our efforts
and strengthen their coherence so as to minimize the
bloodshed caused by those deadly devices. I pledge
France's full support.

