The Secretary-General: As members know, it
was on my initiative, and with the support of the
Council, that in April of last year, Mr. Volcker, Justice
Goldstone and Professor Pieth were asked to conduct
their inquiry. I took that initiative not with a View to
deflecting blame or to forging a political weapon
against anyone, but with the sole purpose of
uncovering the truth. I was convinced that only by
revealing the full truth, however painful, could the
United Nations regain its credibility and establish what
changes were needed.

Mr. Volcker himself remarked, when presenting
his first interim report, that few other organizations
would have opened themselves to independent scrutiny
as fully as this one has. And indeed, the truth as
revealed in the successive interim reports of the inquiry
and in this full report today is painful for all of us.
There can be few people, either in the Council or in the
Secretariat, who will take pleasure in hearing or
reading the conclusions that the inquiry has reached.

Yet I believe we should all be profoundly grateful
to Mr. Volcker and his colleagues for the work they
have done and the report they have produced. I have no
doubt - no doubt at all - that the Organization will
benefit from it.

My colleagues and I have only just received the
full report, as Council members have, and therefore it
would be premature for me to give a detailed response
at this stage. But there are some things that I am ready
to say now.

The report is critical of me personally, and I
accept the criticism. Earlier this year the Committee
concluded that I did not influence, or attempt to
influence, the procurement process. And I am glad to
note that that conclusion is reaffirmed.
But I accepted then, and still accept, the
conclusion that I was not diligent or effective enough
in pursuing an investigation after the fact, when I
learned that the company that employed my son had
won the humanitarian inspection contract. I deeply
regret that.

The evidence of actual corruption among a small
number of United Nations staff is also profoundly
disappointing for all of us who work in the
Organization.

But, while I have not yet had time to study the
full text of the report, I am gratified to see that two
essential points are made in the preface. First, the
Committee notes that the programme did succeed in
restoring and maintaining minimal standards of
nutrition and health in Iraq, while also helping
maintain the international effort to prevent Saddam
Hussein from acquiring weapons of mass destruction.
Secondly, it observes that the wholesale corruption
within the programme took place among private
companies manipulated by Saddam Hussein's
Government.

More important, however, are the Committee's
findings about the general management of the
programme, which was characterized by weak
administrative practices and inadequate control and
auditing. Most important of all is the way those
findings reflect on the system of decision-making,
accountability and management throughout the
Organization. Here too, as chief administrative officer,
I have to take responsibility for the failings revealed,
both in the implementation of the programme and,
more generally, in the functioning of the Secretariat.

The report also finds that many of these problems
were rooted in an unclear demarcation of roles and
responsibilities among the Council, the 661 Committee
and the Secretariat - and in particular in the Council's
decision to retain substantial elements of operational
control within the 661 Committee, composed of
national diplomats working under highly politicized
instructions from their home Governments, yet willing
to take decisions only when there was unanimous
consent among all the 15 members. This, of course,
calls for reflection by Member States.

There are hard lessons for all of us to learn. They
are lessons about the importance of accountability,
particularly of having clear lines of responsibility and
reporting, so that all officials and all parts of the
Secretariat know exactly where their responsibilities
lie. They are lessons about oversight, particularly about
the need for mechanisms to ensure that when oversight
reveals deficiencies, someone takes prompt action to
repair those deficiencies. And, above all, they are
lessons about the need for the United Nations to
maintain the highest possible standards of integrity and
effective performance.

We shall have to study all these lessons, and all
the Committee's recommendations, with great care. It
may well be that we shall have to propose specific new
reform measures to put them into practice.

But one thing should be clear right now. The
Inquiry's findings underscore the vital importance of
proposed management reforms, many of which are at
this very minute being negotiated by Members in the
General Assembly with a view to their adoption, as
part of a broader agenda of political and institutional
change, by next week's summit.

As the Council knows, I have already embarked
on new reforms in areas where I have discretion -
reforms designed to improve the performance of senior
management, to strengthen oversight and
accountability, to increase transparency and to ensure
the highest standards of ethics, notably by creating a
new ethics office. But there are many key decisions
that only the General Assembly can make.

As the Inquiry's report says, we cannot be sure,
however much we might wish it, that fresh
emergencies will not sooner or later impose on us new
tasks as complex as the oil-for-food programme.

Therefore, it is vital that we review fully the rules
governing our budgetary and human resources. The oil-
for-food programme is only the most extreme example

of the wide range of new types of operation that
Member States have called on the Secretariat to
undertake in the last 15 years. It surely illustrates the
point that our rules must allow us to attract, retain and
develop a cadre of professionals with appropriate skills
to manage such operations, to move them from post to
post in a fair and practicable way and to rationalize the
budgetary process, which at present is far too heavy,
time-consuming and bureaucratic.

Even more obviously, it is vital that we build a
stronger and better-resourced oversight structure and
ensure that it is fully independent both from the
Secretariat and from political interference by Member
States. One important element in this new structure
would be the independent oversight advisory
committee proposed in the draft outcome document
submitted by the President of the General Assembly,
which corresponds closely to the Committee's
recommendation of an independent auditing board.

But it is no less vital that the Secretary-General
himself should be allowed to carry out his functions
effectively, taking day-to-day decisions on the
deployment of staff and resources without having to
wait for prior approval from the General Assembly,
this Council or their various committees. As the report
says, one of the fundamental problems with the oil-for-
food programme was that neither the Security Council
nor the Secretariat leadership was clearly in command,
and that turned out to be a recipe for the dilution of
Secretariat authority and the evasion of personal
responsibility at all levels. In future, the respective
roles and powers of the different parts of the
Organization must be clearly defined so that the
Secretary-General knows precisely what is expected of
him and Member States can hold him fully accountable
for the results.

As I told the General Assembly negotiators last
week, I know that none of you want a Secretariat that
can always blame its failings on Member States, or
Member States blaming their failings on the
Secretariat. You want a Secretariat that is given clear
instructions by Member States and then takes
responsibility for its success or failure in carrying them
out.

The findings in today's report must be deeply
embarrassing to us all. The Inquiry Committee has
ripped away the curtain and shone a harsh light into the
most unsightly corners of the Organization. None of
us - Member States, the Secretariat, agencies, funds
and programmes - can be proud of what it has found.
Who among us can now claim that United Nations
management is not a problem or is not in need of
reform?

On the contrary, as the Volcker report puts it,
reform is imperative if the United Nations is to regain
and retain the measure of respect among the
international community that its work requires.

Next week's summit gives world leaders a golden
opportunity to enact such a reform. But the negotiators
are leaving it perilously late. There is a grave danger
that the opportunity will be missed. I hope that I am
wrong.

