Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from French):
The United Nations operation in Haiti is without doubt one
of the great success stories of the Organization in recent
times. It has made it possible to consolidate the democratic
transition in that country by helping the Government to
establish a public force that respects the law and is capable
of maintaining public order and security. France, which has
a special relationship with Haiti and provides it with
bilateral aid, has contributed to the United Nations Mission
by providing a major portion of the civilian police
component.

President Preval, in a letter addressed 31 May 1996 to
the Secretary-General, stressed the fact that the Haitian
police was not yet able to shoulder its responsibilities and
requested a six-month extension of international assistance.
That request was supported by the General Assembly of the
Organization of American States in a resolution adopted on
6 June. The Secretary-General, in his report of 5 June,
recognized that despite the progress made by the Haitian
police, assistance should be continued. He proposed the
establishment of the new United Nations Support Mission
in Haiti.

France lent its support to the Secretary-General's
proposal. It was our belief that a sudden interruption in
assistance to Haiti could in fact compromise the results
obtained thus far, as any deterioration in the situation in
Haiti could have a negative impact on the democratic
process and on regional stability.

The resolution is based on the basic elements of the
Secretary-General's proposal. In order to make consensus
possible, certain elements of that proposal relating to the
duration of the mandate and the strength of the Mission
were not incorporated in their entirety. However, thanks
to the efforts that Canada and the United States have
agreed to make, the nature and the resources of the future
Mission are not affected.

The French delegation voted in favour of the
resolution and welcomes its adoption by consensus. This
unanimity attests to the United Nations success in Haiti.

France's contribution to the new Mission should be
comparable to the one it made to the United Nations
Mission in Haiti.

