Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
should like to thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe for his briefing
and express appreciation for the contributions to
today's debate made by the observer of Palestinian and
the representative of Israel.

Before I turn to the Israeli-Palestinian issue, I
would like to reiterate the United Kingdom's deep
concern about the crisis in Syria, which is entering its
fourteenth month. On 21 April, the Security Council,
through its unanimous adoption of resolution 2043
(2012), took the important step of authorizing the
United Nations Supervision Mission in Syria,
consisting of 300 unarmed military observers, with an
additional substantive civilian component. It did so
despite the failure of the regime to meet its
commitments under resolution 2042 (2012) and the
absence of a sustained cessation of violence.

The Mission that we have authorized and
Mr. Kofi Annan's six-point proposal offer the last
opportunity for the Syrian regime to reverse course and
allow a peaceful solution to the crisis. It is essential
that the Syrian Government now meet its commitments
on troop movements and heavy weapons, and ensure
the conditions that will allow the Mission to operate
effectively, such as unhindered freedom of movement
and access. The Council will be receiving regular and
frequent reports, starting tomorrow. The failure of the
regime to meet its commitments, or any attempt to
hinder the work of the Mission, must be met with real
and robust consequences.

Much of the international community's attention
is rightly focused on the crisis in Syria, but we must
not forget the ongoing plight of the Palestinian people,
who have struggled for too long for their rights and
dignity. Our shared goal remains a two-State solution.
We all firmly believe that negotiations towards such a
solution are the best way forward, and that any such
negotiations should be based on the 1967 lines, with
equivalent land swaps, a just solution for refugees,
security arrangements that respect Palestinian
sovereignty and protect Israeli security, and Jerusalem
as a joint capital of both States. We remain fully
committed to that goal, and welcome the Quartet
statement released on 11 April (see SG/2182).

Despite an almost universally shared
understanding of the objective and the parameters of
the solution, there remains a depressing lack of
progress. With every day that passes, the very notion of
the two-State solution is undermined. I have three
points to make on the way forward.

First, in the immediate term, we must collectively
guard against further threats to the two-State solution
and act to prevent deterioration on the ground. We
were therefore disappointed by the announcement on
4April of renewed Israeli settlement activity. As the
occupying Power of the Palestinian territories, the
Israeli Government has an absolute requirement to
uphold international law and fulfil its commitments.
We and our European Union partners are clear that
systematic, illegal Israeli settlement activity poses the
most significant and live threat to the viability of the
two-State solution. We condemn the decision to publish
tenders for 872 units in the Israeli settlement of Har
Homa, across the Green Line in East Jerusalem. The
Israeli Government's policy is illegal under
international law, counterproductive, destabilizing and
provocative.

Although we welcome the difficult decision taken
earlier this year by the Israeli Government to evacuate
the single-house settlement of Beit HaMachpele in
Hebron, what is required of the Israeli Government is of
a significantly greater order of magnitude. The United
Kingdom urges the Israeli Government to desist from
further settlement announcements, to revoke previous
announcements, and to remove - not legalize -

illegal outposts from across the West Bank, as required
under international law and the Road Map. If it fails to
do so, it will further damage the prospects for a two-
State solution and undermine the long-term security that
this would deliver to Israelis and Palestinians alike.

Similarly, Palestinians must also play their part in
ensuring conditions conducive to a peaceful settlement.
Rocket fire from Gaza - such as that which led to the
crisis last month that left eight Israelis injured, 26
Palestinians dead and dozens more injured, and caused
widespread disruption to normal life - must stop.

Secondly, over the longer term, we must continue
our full support to the Palestinian Authority. The
United Kingdom will continue to be one of the
principal supporters of the Palestinians' State-building
efforts, assisting them in tackling poverty, building
institutions and boosting their economy. We welcome
the focus of the Quartet's statement on Area C.
Increasing Palestinians' autonomy in Area C and
throughout the West Bank is necessary to move the
Palestinian economy away from aid dependency and
towards self-sustainability.

Thirdly, a sustainable solution requires a
sustainable approach to Gaza. Gaza should have a
thriving economy, yet it is one of the highest per capita
recipients of aid in the world. Israel must ease the
movement and access restrictions that make life so
difficult for the people of Gaza and are doing ongoing
damage to its economy. Such restrictions do not help
the peace process. We understand Israel's security
concerns, but if any peace deal is to be sustainable,
Gaza must be economically viable.

There is no doubt that a lasting peace between
Israelis and Palestinians would bring enormous
benefits to both of them and to the region. We will
continue to urge both sides to show the political
leadership and courage needed to make progress
towards that goal.

