As we celebrated the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations last month, we were reminded that on the day the Charter was signed in 1945, only four of the 850 delegates present were women, namely, Bertha Lutz of Brazil, Minerva Bernardino of the Dominican Republic, Virginia Gildersleeve of the United States and Wu Yi-Fang of China. We have come a long way since then. On 31 October 2000, the Security Council adopted resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security. A true milestone, this text recognizes the importance of integrating the gender aspect in peace and security initiatives. This resulted in a series of resolutions on women's rights in conflict situations, making a clear contribution to the four pillars of the women and peace and security agenda, that is, prevention, protection, participation and relief and rehabilitation. It has also paved the way for the creation of a solid set of implementation tools - the establishment of the Office of the Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict and the Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security. To date, nearly 90 countries have adopted national action plans for the implementation of the objectives of the women and peace and security strategy, and several regions have adopted regional frameworks, such as the 2019 European Union Action Plan on Women, Peace and Security. Belgium is currently implementing its third national action plan. The realization of women's rights and gender equality, the full and equal participation of women in all decision-making processes, combating violence against women and girls and promoting sexual and reproductive health and rights are long-standing priorities in Belgium's domestic and foreign policies. This year, Belgium has committed to increasing its annual contributions to projects specifically aimed at combating gender-based violence and - in the light of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic - to allocating a special budget for preventing and addressing gender-based violence. Work within the local context is essential in this regard, and we are prioritizing women and women-led organizations. Belgium supports the essential efforts of its partners in these areas, such as UN-Women, the Oxford Famine Relief Organization, Plan International, the International Committee of the Red Cross, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and others. For example, in the Democratic Republic of Congo, one of the three target countries of the Belgian national action plan, Belgium supports projects in the east of the country to strengthen grass-roots organizations that tackle issues of gender-based violence, sexual and reproductive rights and the training and empowerment of rural women, such as Mamas for Africa in South Kivu. As a result, considerable progress has been made. But, as the Secretary-General has said, many challenges remain. Women are still underrepresented in many global decision-making bodies and peace processes. This is particularly the case in some peace and security processes, such as counter-terrorism and disarmament. We must learn from, and be inspired by, good examples. For instance, in the Central African Republic, the Peacebuilding Fund financed a project on women's political participation. With the support of Belgium, the United Nations Development Programme and UN-Women set up a working group to influence discussions on the electoral code and make the text gender-sensitive. We must push for minimum standards, while ensuring that women are fully involved as equal partners and from the earliest stages of every political and peace process. The peace agreement on Colombia signed in Havana is exemplary in this regard. We stress the importance of the meaningful participation of women in the peace negotiations on Afghanistan in Doha. We must give civil society the means to act. In this regard, we are concerned about the increasing threats to women human rights defenders and the difficulties faced by women peacemakers. By empowering civil society leaders and women human rights defenders and combating the negative stereotypes and structural obstacles they face, we can ensure that women can participate fully in peacebuilding. We must have a zero-tolerance policy towards reprisals against civil society activists. In Libya, for example, civil society activists and women politicians face increasing reprisals. In July, it had been a year since a member of parliament, Siham Sergewa, was abducted from her home. Calls to investigate her abduction and ensure accountability for her abduction have not been heeded. These attacks were an attempt to intimidate other women, journalists, and human rights activists involved in political life. We must intensify our efforts to prevent violations of women's rights and hold the perpetrators of such acts accountable. The Council can apply sanctions against perpetrators of conflict-related sexual violence - for example, in South Sudan. In order to improve our implementation strategies, we need to fill the gaps in data collection and increase our knowledge on the most pressing issues for women and girls. Donors must commit to conditioning their contributions to the implementation of gender-responsive planning, including by providing sustained and robust funding to women's organizations. Throughout its 20 years of working to advance the women and peace and security agenda, the Council has shown remarkable unity. Let us continue on this path. We must take action to advance gender equality and leave no one behind.
