Mr. Valle (Brazil): Mr. President, my delegation
wishes to thank you for having convened this open
debate on the subject of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. We are grateful to the Secretary-
General for his comprehensive report on this important
topic and for the concrete recommendations he has put
forward. I also express my appreciation to Under-
Secretary-General Jan Egeland for his presentation
today and to his whole team in the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs for their
dedicated work.

The Council has been discussing this thematic
item on a regular basis over the last five years. With
civilians accounting for the vast majority of victims in
armed conflicts in many regions of the world, we need
to persevere in our efforts to push forward this vital
agenda.

My comments today will focus on a few issues
arising from the Secretary-General's report, starting
with a certain level of progress that has been achieved.

Indeed, we have made efforts to ensure that
prominent provisions regarding the protection of
civilians are part of our regular discussions and
deliberations. As a result, peacekeeping mandates have
been broadened to include humanitarian access, the
safety of United Nations and associated personnel and
protection of refugees and returnees, among other
relevant protection themes. Taking into account the fact
that these important measures have heightened the
profile of United Nations peace operations, we are
advancing, in practical terms, towards the
strengthening of the protection of civilians on the
ground. On a case-by-case basis, we are managing to
integrate what has been agreed at the thematic level.

Cote d'Ivoire and Haiti are two recent examples
of the Council's willingness to allow United Nations
troops to protect civilians under imminent threat of
physical violence, without prejudice to the
responsibility of the host Governments.

In that respect, the aide-memoire on the
protection of civilians has been an important tool for
the design of peacekeeping mandates. Although its
application requires a more systematic approach, one
could argue perfectly well that the aide-memoire has
been adequately employed according to the specific
challenges in each concrete situation. We are glad to
see the Council moving in the right direction also with
regard to other provisions of resolutions 1265 (1999)
and 1296 (2000).

In spite of the progress made, the Secretary-
General rightly asserts that further action is required in
a number of areas. It is essential that the most
vulnerable groups, such as women and children, as well
as others, including refugees and internally displaced
persons, be effectively protected. The recruitment and
use of children as soldiers is appalling, let alone the
extensiveness of sexual and gender-based violence.
While discussing peacekeeping mandates, the Council
needs to be steadfast in promoting the rights and
specific protection needs of the most vulnerable. The
inclusion of child-protection and gender advisers in
peace operations has been an important step in that
regard.

The use of the Guiding Principles on Internal
Displacement by an increasing number of Member
States is also a positive step and should continue to be
encouraged. The Secretary-General points out the fact
that humanitarian access is, in a number of cases, either
denied or obstructed, thereby affecting over 10 million
people in need, which is a matter of serious concern.
States have the primary responsibility for the delivery
of assistance to their own populations in need. But if
they are unable to do so, they must comply with their
international obligations and ensure the safe and
unhindered access of humanitarian personnel in order
to allow them to undertake efficiently their task of
assisting the affected civilian population. We find it
particularly worrisome that most of the people in need
of assistance and protection in the Darfur region of the
Sudan have been remained beyond the reach of
humanitarian relief organizations.

It is also imperative to protect the protectors.
Indeed, the issue of safety and security of humanitarian
personnel must continue to be a matter of high priority
in the United Nations system. It is most regrettable that
humanitarian workers have been broadly targeted while
trying to provide some hope for the underprivileged.
They have increasingly become victims of deliberate
violence. Attacks against humanitarian personnel
thwart international measures to bring assistance and
have a clear impact on, and connection to, the issue of
ensuring access.

The report also addresses the lack of support for
the so-called forgotten emergencies. It is distressing
that humanitarian assistance is not always provided on
the basis of need. While funds are poured into relief
assistance in cases of highly visible emergencies that
mobilize public opinion, resources dwindle when it
comes to laying the foundations for future recovery and
development. We would like to underline the
worrisome trend that disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and rehabilitation (DDRR) programmes
remain continuously under-resourced, especially in the
rehabilitation and reintegration phases, compromising
disarmament and demobilization efforts.

Referring to situations of transition, Under-
Secretary-General Egeland noted during a recent
debate in the Council that "progress on security and
political developments needs to be accompanied by
corresponding progress on the humanitarian, social and
economic fronts if the peace is to take hold"
(S/PV.4980, p. 3). Hence, if we do not address this
funding gap between relief and development we risk
treating only the symptoms of the disease while its root
causes remain untouched. An illustrative case is the
challenge posed by the promotion of Haiti's social and
economic development.

In many cases, nations ravaged by conflict have
also been severely hit by HIV/AIDS, a condition that
has been appropriately described as a double
humanitarian challenge. Given the devastating human,
social and economic impact of HIV/AIDS, we need to
ensure that the longer-term development implications
of the pandemic are properly addressed.

Needless to say, all parties to armed conflict must
fully comply with the provisions of international law,
especially humanitarian, human rights and refugee law.
The role that the International Criminal Court can play
in bringing to justice those who have committed war
crimes, crimes against humanity, genocide and other
serious violations is of fundamental importance. The
Court is therefore an important element in addressing
problems of impunity.

Here, we need to reaffirm the importance of the
widest possible dissemination of international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law and
principles during armed conflict. The regional
workshops organized by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, including the
recent one held in Mexico for the Latin American and
Caribbean region, have contributed to disseminating
information related to this issue. The involvement of
regional players is an important factor in improving
opportunities to address at the regional level issues
related to the protection of civilians, especially when
conflicts cannot be handled within the confines of the
States and when regional organizations are in a more
favourable position to deal with the matter. In that
respect, we welcome the progress that has been made
in West Africa to address challenges related to cross-
border flows of refugees.

Furthermore, in order to look for more
complementarity, the Security Council can work in
close coordination with the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council in the field of the
protection of civilians. The Council should not be
exclusive in its activities. For instance, the critical
issue of funding for humanitarian missions is beyond
the Council's purview. At the same time, it is precisely
because the efforts of the international community to
address that problem still fall short of what is needed to
end the suffering of civilians in armed conflict that the
Council must continue to be fully engaged. We should
then try to find the best approach to share
responsibilities. In that regard, we recall that General
Assembly resolution 46/182 continues to provide the
framework to ensure strengthened humanitarian
coordination, including with regard to principles of
neutrality, impartiality and humanity for the provision
of humanitarian assistance.

Brazil has long understood that the protection of
civilians in armed conflict must be afforded priority
consideration on the United Nations agenda. The
suffering inflicted upon civilians by distinct patterns of
conflict is truly a matter of fundamental concern. The
Council will be able to provide political guidance to
the system if it adopts a victim-centred approach. Once
the victims are placed at centre stage, not only as
recipients of aid but also as bearers of rights, our
debates can produce concrete measures to improve the
situation on the ground.
