The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the observer of the Holy See to the
United Nations to participate in this meeting.

I now give the floor to the observer of the Holy See.

Brother Carroll (Holy See): The Holy See thanks
the presidency of Egypt for bringing the topic of
countering the narratives and ideologies of terrorism
to the attention of the Security Council and the
international community.
The theme of this open debate is extremely
important, because it calls us to strike terrorism at
its very roots and where it must primarily be fought,
namely, in the hearts and minds of men and women, in
particular of those who are most at risk ofradicalization
and recruitment by terrorist groups.

The narratives and ideologies of present-day
terrorist groups are well known. They do not attempt to
conceal their purportedly religiously inspired beliefs,
values and principles. Terrorist groups identify multiple
enemies, so that those who respond to their propaganda
can legitimately attack those enemies wherever they
may be, whether in Paris or in Brussels, in Istanbul, in
Aleppo, in Baghdad, or elsewhere.

Countering the narratives and ideologies of
terrorist groups is a grave responsibility of all of us.
It should be recalled, however, that by building their
ideological narratives that justify their horrendous
acts of violence with tendentious interpretations and
an abusive use of scripture texts, terrorists groups are
throwing down the gauntlet principally to religious
leaders, in particular for them to refute the falsehoods
and condemn the blasphemies and narratives of those
ideologies. Religious leaders and people of faith must
be at the forefront in delegitimizing the manipulation of
faith and the distortion of sacred texts as ajustification
for violence. Anyone who considers himself or herself
a believer while planning and carrying out actions
against the fundamental rights and dignity of every
man and woman must be condemned.

The fight to unmask the lies behind the narratives
and ideologies of present-day terrorist groups summons
all religions to unite in confronting not only the
unacceptable misuse of religion by these groups, but
also all forms of religious bigotry, stereotyping and
disrespect for what people hold sacred. Religious
leaders must be the first to demonstrate what the fourth
meeting of the Pontifical Council for Interreligious
Dialogue and the Royal Institute for Inter-Faith Studies
of Amman, held in the Vatican on 7 May, called the
humanizing and civilizing role of our religions.

That brings us to the fundamental importance of
education in countering narratives and ideologies of
terrorism. Much of terror groups' success in recruiting
is based on misinformation and the distortion both
of history and the meaning of sacred texts. Objective
education can counter such false narratives. We
commend the Marrakesh Declaration on the Rights
of Religious Minorities in Predominantly Muslim
Majority Communities for urging Muslim educational
institutions and authorities to conduct a courageous
review of educational curricula that addresses honestly
and effectively any material that instigates aggression
and extremism, leads to war and chaos and results in
the destruction of our shared societies.

My delegation believes that the more religion is
manipulated to justify acts of terror and violence, the
more religious leaders must be engaged in the overall
effort to defeat the terrorism that hijacks it. Spurious
religious fervour must be countered by authentic
religious instruction and the example of authentic
communities of faith. There is a strong nexus between
religion and diplomacy and between faith-based
informal diplomacy and the formal diplomacy of States.
Strengthening that nexus would be wise diplomacy,
given its enormous potential for confronting terrorism
at its roots.

Measures to counter the narratives and ideologies
of terrorism must address the root causes on which it
feeds, and which make even the most outrageous claims
of terrorist groups sound credible. Young people who
join the ranks of terrorist organizations often come
from poor immigrant families disillusioned by the lack
of integration and values in some societies. Those who
feel excluded from such societies or live on their fringes
are immediately attracted to terrorists proclaiming
themselves to be freedom fighters. Governments should
engage with civil society to address the problems of
communities that are most at risk of radicalization
and recruitment and to achieve such communities'
satisfactory social integration.

Certain terrorist groups have excelled in the art
of cyber recruitment, giving them transnational and
borderless reach. Their access to cyberspace must
be denied in order to prevent their narratives and
ideologies from poisoning the hearts and minds of
millions everywhere, cut off their financing activities
and disrupt their coordination of terrorist attacks.

The Holy See is convinced that ifwe are to win the
minds and hearts of our children and young people and
prevent them from joining terrorist groups, we must
build inclusive societies and prevent illicit trafficking
in arms. We must build bridges rather than walls, and
engage in dialogue rather than in mutual isolation.

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Iraq.


