Mr. Lewicki (Poland): At the outset, I would like
to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, for her briefing and
for her tireless efforts aimed at strengthening peace,
stability and democracy in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Allow me also to thank Ms. Mbela for
sharing with us civil society's views and expectations.
Let me seize this opportunity to stress that Poland
highly values the input of civil society into the Security
Council's work because civil society quite often
provides us with a reality check on the ground.

Like other delegations, Poland welcomes the
progress achieved this year in the implementation of
the electoral calendar, as well as the visible and active
involvement of all national stakeholders in the electoral
preparations. Poland hopes that the constructive
commitment of all the parties will be maintained until
the end ofthe election campaign and in the post-electoral
period. We are highly encouraged by Ms. Zerrougui's
words that all stakeholders remain committed to the
electoral process. In that context, we reiterate our call
on the Democratic Republic of the Congo authorities to
organize truly fair, credible, transparent and inclusive
elections on 23 December.
Poland continues to recognize the building of trust
among all political and social actors as a precondition
for the establishment of an environment conductive
to credible elections. We encourage all stakeholders
to continue their engagement through dialogue in
order to build political consensus, especially on key
contentious issues, including the voting machines and
the voter register. Let me also reiterate that respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms remains key
to a democratic transition of power and the stability
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In this
context, persistent reports of restrictions of freedom
of expression, freedom of assembly and violations of
media freedom are of great concern to us.

We are also worried about shrinking space for civil
society, as a strong and active civil society remains an
essential element of a vital democracy. Furthermore,
the awarding of the Nobel Peace Prize to Dr. Denis
Mukwege underscores the urgent need to address in
an effective way the sexual violence faced by so many
women in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Poland encourages the Democratic Republic of the
Congo Government to pursue dialogue, fully implement
the confidence-building measures contained in the
Saint-Sylvestre agreement, ensure a level playing field
for all the parties and open public space. We urge the
Democratic Republic of the Congo authorities to release
all political prisoners remaining in detention, including
civil society activists and human right defenders.

We note the Government's recent initiative on
women's participation in elections, and encourage the
authorities to increase their engagement in this regard.
The fair and safe participation of both women voters
and aspiring women candidates in the ongoing electoral
process needs to be assured.

The situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has a significant impact on the stability ofCentral
and sub-Saharan Africa. Poland calls on all regional
and subregional organizations, as well as neighbouring
States, to continue their coherent and effective support
for the political process in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. In that context, we welcome the assistance
provided by the Southern African Development
Community to the electoral process.

In conclusion, the upcoming elections mark an
opportunity to take an indispensable step towards
lasting security and development of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We express the hope that this
chance will not be wasted and that the ambitions of the
Congolese society will be fulfilled.

