Mr. Wittig (Germany): Germany and the
overwhelming majority of Council members supported
the draft resolution that was submitted by Morocco on
behalf of the Arab States. However, two permanent
members of the Council chose to exercise their veto.
That is to say that, after more than 11 months of brutal
Violence and repression by the Syrian Government;
after more than 5,500 deaths; after the killing of almost
400 children; and after far too many peaceful protesters
have been detained, tortured, raped and abused, today
the Security Council again failed to assume its
responsibilities and to live up to its mandate to
maintain international peace and security.

In short, the people of Syria and the region have
been let down again, and that is a crying shame -
even more so in the light of the recent massacres in
Horns; even more so in the light of one the bloodiest
days of the Arab Spring; and even more so on the
tragic thirtieth anniversary of the Hama massacre. And
that is the real scandal.

Germany's position is very clear. The Council
should urge Al-Assad to stop the killing. His regime
has to put an immediate end to the violence. It has to
stop the massive, gross and systematic violation of
human rights. That was the first major element of the
draft resolution before us (S/2012/77).

Many of the demands expressed in the draft
resolution were actually accepted by the Syrian
Government on 19 December 2011. The Syrian
Government agreed to the cessation of violence, to the
release of all political prisoners, to the withdrawal of
its armed forces, and to the unhindered freedom of
movement of observers and journalists. According to
the League of Arab States, however, none of those
commitments was fully met by the Syrian Government.

Last Tuesday, this Council heard a remarkable
plea by the League ofArab States (see S/PV.6710). The
Arab States urged the Council not to let the Syrian
people down; they urged the members of the Council to
support them in resolving the crisis in Syria. That was
the second major element of our draft resolution - to
answer the call from Arab States and large parts of the
international community to fully support the initiative
of the League of Arab States, which is aimed at finding
a political, Syrian-led solution to the crisis. That was
the call of the draft resolution.
12-22356
The draft resolution did not foresee an arms
embargo or a sanctions regime, as we had wished for;
nor did it mandate a commission of inquiry into human
rights violations, as we had advocated. We regret that it
did not, but we negotiated in a spirit of compromise,
and we were ready to make substantial concessions.
The draft also did not call for regime change, as some
maintained. What it did, however, was to support a
political framework set out by the League of Arab
States. That framework is intended to facilitate a
Syrian-led political transition to a democratic and
plural political system, because that is what it is all
about - to have the Syrian people itself decide on its
own political future. That is the way for peace and
security to best be achieved, in Syria and beyond. And
that is what the majority here in the Council agrees
upon. We regret that two Council members disagreed.

The violence in Syria has to stop. A political
dialogue has to begin under the auspices of the League
of Arab States. There is a political way out of this
crisis. We are afraid, however, that today's decision
will spur further violence and make it harder to reach a
political solution. Nevertheless, Germany will continue
to work with all partners in the region to support the
League of Arab States.

As much as we regret today's decision, let me
reassure members of the Council that Germany remains
ready to work with all of them to overcome our
division and to bridge the gaps. We owe that not only
to the Syrian people, but also to the mandate of this
Council, which is the maintenance of peace and
security.

