Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Permit me at the outset, Madam President, to
congratulate your brotherly country, Lebanon, on
presiding over the proceedings of the Council for this
month. We would also like to thank your predecessor
for his presidency last month.

We followed with interest the briefings by the
Chairmen of the Committees in the course of this
meeting. My country, Syria, has always condemned
terrorism as aggressive, unjust and criminal activity
targeting the lives and property of innocent people. We
have stressed the need to combat international
terrorism at all levels, in all its forms and
manifestations and in conformity with the principles
and purposes of the United Nations Charter and the
provisions of international law.

It is well known that Syria has been one of the
primary victims of the scourge of terrorism and
foresaw its dangers since its earliest manifestations. In
the mid-1980s, Syria was among the first countries to
call for the promotion of international efforts to
eradicate international terrorism. In addition, it has
called for the establishment of an effective global
strategy to combat terrorism, including through an
international conference under United Nations auspices
to address that phenomenon by elaborating a specific
and clear-cut definition of the concept of terrorism that
distinguishes it from the legitimate struggle for
freedom of peoples chafing under the yoke of foreign
occupation. That right has been entrenched in
international norms and instruments.

Any serious international effort to combat the
phenomenon of international terrorism cannot
disregard the need to combat State terrorism, which is
the most dangerous type. A clear case in point are the
crimes perpetrated by Israel against the Palestinian
people in the occupied territories. This was made quite
clear in Israel's aggression against Gaza and against
Syrian citizens in the occupied Syrian Golan, and prior
to that its aggression against Lebanon in 2006. Such
State terrorism - not to mention the nuclear terrorism
practiced continuously by Israel against all States of
the region - is recognized as a documented and
designated war crime and an explicit violation of
international law, resolutions of international
legitimacy, Security Council resolutions and human
rights instruments.

Syria, proceeding from its belief in the pivotal
role of the United Nations in the fight against terrorism
at the international level, cooperates fully with the
three Security Council Committees established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and
1540 (2004). My country has established joint national
committees with all the relevant organs to monitor the
optimal implementation of those resolutions and to
achieve the best form of cooperation with the
Committees in their implementation. This cooperation
is inspired not only by my country's interest in fully
implementing the resolutions of international
legitimacy and Security Council resolutions, but also
by the urgent need to cooperate with the Committees
with a view to eradicating terrorism.

That is all the more so since Syria has suffered
for decades under the scourge of terrorism and terrorist
operations carried out on its territory, the most recent
of which was the Al-Qazzaz operation of 2008. Council
members will remember that the Security Council
condemned that operation at the time.

Syria reiterates that terrorism poses an ongoing
threat to international peace and security. We also
emphasize our commitment to the relevant
international counter-terrorism resolutions. We are
convinced of the need for the United Nations to play a
central role in combating terrorism at the international
level and in crystallizing an international consensus on
this issue.

My country is of the view that the Security
Council's counter-terrorism Committees can contribute
to coordinating the international effort to combat
terrorism. Yet we note the existence of a certain degree
of discrimination practiced by the Committees in
dealing with the Member States. For instance, we
notice a concentration on certain States or geographic
groups and not others. While the Committees request
some States to submit reports on the implementation of
terrorism-related resolutions, they fail to issue such
requests to others.

Syria is making strenuous efforts to combat
money-laundering and the financing of terrorism. The
Syrian Commission on Combating Money Laundering
and the Financing of Terrorism acceded to the Egmont
Group of Financial Intelligence Units. The Group's
membership includes the financial intelligence units of
108 States and is responsible for receiving and
addressing reports of financial operations suspected of
money-laundering or financing terrorism. My country's
efforts are acknowledged internationally in the Group's
joint evaluation report, which states that Syria has
managed in recent years to adopt important domestic
measures and legislation on this score, alongside
relevant international efforts. The relevant entities in
Syria are undertaking a study on amending the 2005
law on money-laundering and financing of terrorism in
line with international efforts in this respect.

We would also refer to decree No. 30 of 2010,
issued by President Bashar Al-Assad, on banking
confidentiality, which regulates the work of financial
institutions. The decree seeks to strike a balance
between the banking confidentiality of financial agents
and the measures necessary to combat money-
laundering operations and the financing of terrorism.

Syria has participated in numerous workshops on
combating terrorism, including the Doha workshop on
implementing resolution 1540 (2004) and a regional
workshop held in Abu Dhabi from 28 to 30 June 2009,
organized in cooperation with the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime. Syria also participated in
the workshop on national counter-terrorism focal
points held in Vienna in 2009. My country has also
presented a national report to the 1540 Committee on
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).

As is well known, Syria was one of the first States
to sign the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) in 1968. Syria stands against the
possession of nuclear weapons by any State. Moreover,
we signed an IAEA Comprehensive Safeguards
Agreement in 1992. As is well known, since then Israel
has been the only party in the Middle East in possession
of a colossal arsenal of nuclear weapons; it is the only
party in the region that refuses to accede to the NPT or
to permit any IAEA supervision of its installations. This
is evident in its position on the current NPT Review
Conference. There have been dangerous repercussions
from Israel's failure to comply with the Treaty, which
demonstrates its lack of respect for resolution 1540
(2004), for the IAEA and for all international efforts
aimed at achieving nuclear disarmament.

In conclusion, Syria reaffirms its ongoing call for
the Middle East to be freed of nuclear weapons. In that
context we refer to the draft resolution we submitted to
the Security Council in 2003 during our membership of
the Council (see S/2003/1219), calling for freeing the
Middle East region of nuclear weapons.

