Ms. Power (United States ofAmerica): I thank you,
Foreign Minister Mahamat again for being here with us
in person. The United States greatly appreciates Chad's
leadership and its work to focus the Council on the
nexus between terrorism and transnational organized
crime. I also thank Foreign Minister Wali and Minister
Asselborn for their presence here today, which serves
to underscore the critical importance of these issues. I
particularly appreciated Luxembourg's attention to the
impact of these issues on the welfare of children, an
issue that Luxembourg insistently raises with regard
to all the challenges we face, and a critical part of
Luxembourg's legacy on the Council. The United States
is very eager to support Nigeria and Chad and the other
other multinational partners in the effort against Boko
Haram, a monstrous movement.

While the motivations of terrorists and
transnational criminal organizations may differ, their
use of brutal violence and the insecurity, fear and
suffering that they cause are often remarkably similar.
Terrorists and transnational criminal organizations are
increasingly learning from one another's sophisticated
tactics to raise funds, to move people and arms and
to spread the fear that is a critical source of their
power. We see this cross-pollination between terrorist
groups and transnational organized crime all around
us. Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM), Boko
Haram, the Al-Nusra Front and numerous other
terrorist organizations raise tens of millions of dollars
annually through kidnapping for ransom. In Somalia,
Al-Shabaab has filled its coffers through illegal and
environmentally devastating charcoal exports. Of the
$250 million worth of charcoal estimated to have been
exported from Somalia in 2013 and 2014, 30 per cent
is estimated to have gone to Al-Shabaab. AQIM. and
other terrorist groups regularly obtain arms through
Maghreb and Sahel trafficking networks, relying on
the same trade routes as transnational smugglers. And
extremist groups raise cash through a variety of other
criminal activities that cross borders, from selling
drugs to stealing natural resources.

The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
is another example of the increasingly similar modus
operandi between those groups. While continuing
to carry out deadly attacks propelled by its sadistic
ideology, ISIL is also increasingly operating like a
profit-driven criminal organization. Using fear, threats
and attacks, ISIL extorts money from local businesses
and traders and robs from banks and households alike.
Working through long-established regional smuggling
networks, ISIL transports oil across borders, netting
roughly $1 million a day through black market oil
sales. There are credible reports that ISIL is profiting
from Syrian and Iraqi so-called blood antiquities, sold
by criminal middlemen to unscrupulous or unknowing
buyers worldwide.
Those new sources of financing allow extremist
groups to diversify their revenue streams and reduce
the risk of disruption of the funds they need to carry out
their horrific attacks. As terrorist criminal activities
become more entrepreneurial and business-minded,
the Security Council needs to better understand
their tactics. We must develop and deploy a set of
sophisticated tools to disrupt those expanding networks
and cut off the funds that they are generating. To that
end, the Council should prioritize three tasks.

First, the Council should build greater international
cooperation, needed to fight the inter-related problems
of terrorism and organized crime. We have taken
steps to address that urgent need, including resolution
2170 (2014), on ISIL, and resolution 2178 (2014), on
foreign terrorist fighters. We have established a robust
international legal framework under the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,
the United Nations Convention against Corruption and
the three United Nations drug control conventions that,
taken together and implemented effectively, provide
common parameters and tools for recognizing and
responding to different forms of transnational crime.

Building on that work, the Council should
encourage Member States to do more to collectively
address transnational threats. For example, greater
international cooperation should facilitate the
exchange of information and analysis about terrorists
and crime networks. For its part, the United States
has effectively used the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime as the basis for
international legal and law enforcement cooperation
against transnational organized crime with more than
55 countries. Our use of the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime and bilateral
treaties has led to the return of nearly 30 fugitives to face
prosecution in the United States. Greater cooperation
is needed both among and within Governments so we
can bring together experts from the law enforcement,
military, diplomatic and intelligence communities.
This is why today the Council called on Member
States to work together to secure their borders, counter
illicit financing and money laundering and implement
international best practices and existing conventions.

Secondly, the Security Council should acknowledge
that weak governance both encourages and is exacerbated
by the terrorist use of crime. Terrorist groups and
criminals gravitate towards places with rampant
corruption and impunity. For this reason, strengthening
the criminal justice systems in vulnerable countries is
one of the most effective ways to fight transnational
organized crime. Since our collective security is only
as strong as our weakest link, we have a shared interest
in building stronger, more transparent governance and
justice institutions beyond our own borders. Military
measures alone will not be enough.

Thirdly, the Security Council should call on States
to provide assistance to those States most affected by
these terrible threats. Tackling these challenges requires
deploying all the tools we have, from innovative law
enforcement and criminal justice tools to financial
measures and sanctions. Yet all States do not currently
have the same ability to take these steps. Member
States should therefore identify areas where targeted
assistance is most needed and focus support in those
places. We particularly welcome the role of the United
Nations counter-terrorism bodies, particularly the
Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee's monitoring team, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, in
identifying threat and capacity gaps.

We have come through a horrific week, as others
have mentioned, of terrorist attacks. On Tuesday, the
Pakistani Taliban killed 145 people, 132 of them kids
aged 5 to 17. It was an appalling attack on a school. A
young student named Zeeshan told a reporter, "I saw
militants walking past rows of students shooting them
in the head". On Wednesday, more than 230 bodies of
people believed to have been executed by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant were found in a mass
grave in Syria's Deir ez-Zor province. And yesterday
we learned that more than 100 women and children
were kidnapped and 35 people killed during a weekend
raid in the northeastern Nigerian village of Gumsuri,
believed to have been carried out by Boko Haram.

We know that we must do more to prevent these
attacks, not only in Pakistan, Syria and Nigeria, but in
all of our countries. We must dismantle the groups that
threaten our collective security, but we cannot achieve
that goal without tackling the organized criminal
networks that extremists increasingly rely upon to fuel
their terror. That is the work before us and we must
succeed.
