Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): We thank the Lithuanian
presidency for organizing this useful and timely debate
and Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson for his
comprehensive and thoughtful briefing.

We hope that today's debate will help the Council to
focus its attention on protecting journalists in situations
of armed conflict, as part of the broader debate on the
protection of civilians. Independent journalism is vital
for a free society, to hold the powerful to account, and
for citizens to be informed and actively engaged. As a
former journalist, myself, I know the risks journalists
take to unveil and uphold the truth.

Freedom of the media is widely regarded as an
enabling right, because it helps to secure a wide range
of other universal human rights. It is the unhindered
functioning of the media that promotes transparency
and accountability in the conduct of public affairs
and, of course, in governance. The information age in
which we live has made the role and contribution of
journalists even more crucial, more so in situations of
armed conflict. The media not only bears witness to
facts on the ground and provides authentic information;
it also shapes opinion and assists in presenting moral
and political choices in conflict situations.

There is an obvious relationship between the
crucial role journalists play on the front lines and the
growing threats to their safety and security. Violence
against journalists and their deliberate targeting should
be unacceptable. The culture of impunity that has
come to endanger their work and jeopardize their lives
in those situations should be brought to an end. My
country, Pakistan, unequivocally condemns all attacks
and violence against journalists in the performance of
their professional duties. We share the international
outrage on the recent beheading and summary
execution ofjournalists by terrorist organizations. That
barbarism must come to an end and the safety of media
professionals should be fully assured.

Resolution 1738 (2006) adopted an action-oriented
approach to the safety ofjournalists in armed conflicts.
It sent a strong signal to parties in armed conflict to
comply with their obligations under international law.
Apart from condemning attacks against journalists, it
also called for ending impunity in that context. General
Assembly resolution 68/163 outlines a comprehensive
framework for the protection of journalists that
envisages legislative, awareness-raising and other
important measures. The Human Rights Council has
also taken a lead role in strengthening the normative
agenda in that regard. Such frameworks, norms and
enforcement mechanisms should be strengthened.

The most dangerous places for journalists remain
conflict zones, especially areas controlled by terrorist
groups and non-State actors. Achieving the delicate
balance between freedom of movement and reporting
and the safety ofmedia workers is crucial. The challenge
is not only to strengthen the means to assure the safety
ofjournalists in conflict situations, but also to ensure
that they are not exposed to avoidable risks.

Today, as many regions of the world descend into
chaos and conflict, threats to journalists have become
ever more complex. Several new trends are now in
evidence: the increased use of terror tactics, rising
threats to journalists' lives and kidnapping for ransom
in conflict zones, the danger posed to female and
freelance media workers in particular and the media's
resort to private armed escorts for their protection.

The current international legal framework for
the protection of journalists is robust. Among other
provisions of international law and norms, article 79 of
Additional Protocol 1 to the Geneva Convention clearly
identifies journalists engaged in professional missions
in areas of armed conflict as civilians, provided, of
course, they take no action that prejudices their status
as a civilian. Despite those provisions, deliberate
violence againstjournalists is on the rise.
This alarming trend calls for innovative approaches
and responses. We would like to offer the following
suggestions: greater understanding and awareness
and full and effective implementation of existing
provisions of international law; and a well-coordinated
and comprehensive international awareness-raising
campaign that highlights the prevailing provisions in
international law and underscores the consequences of
their violation.

As impunity remains a disturbing trend, efforts
should be intensified to ensure that perpetrators of
attacks against journalists are brought to justice.
Governments and local authorities must share all
available facts and relevant intelligence information for
a clearer understanding of the security situation, the
environment in conflict zones and tactics of warring
groups and non-State actors. For their part, journalists
should give due consideration to the briefings and
advice of official authorities. They should also respect
local laws, regulations and traditions. Practices like
embedded journalism need to be carefully reviewed
from the perspective of their impact on the safety of
journalists. This is also essential to ensuring their
impartiality.

Journalists covering conflict situations should be
given the requisite training and practical guidelines
to cope with the changing nature of conflict and the
tactics of terrorist groups. The role of peacekeeping
missions in the protection of journalists should be
strengthened by providing additional resources, and
media professionals may be identified as a special
category of persons to be protected.

Finally, we hope our deliberations today will guide
future strategies to ensure the protection ofjournalists
in a world that is transforming faster than our ability to
manage the full ramifications of that change.

