Mrs. Nl'lfiez Mordoche (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): I have the honour to address the Security
Council on behalf of the 118 member States of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries (NAM).

The situation of instability in the Middle East as a
result of Israel's ongoing military occupation of the
Palestinian territory and other Arab territories since
1967. It continues to be a matter of serious concern not
only for the region but for the entire international
community.

Since last year the situation has been further
exacerbated by Israel's continued pursuit of illegal
policies and practices, including incessant military
attacks against Palestinian civilians and properties,
continuing construction of settlements and the Wall in
the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, and continued imposition of all forms of
inhumane and unlawful measures of collective
punishment on the Palestinian civilian population,
particularly in the Gaza Strip. The Syrian Golan is still
occupied, and the situation in Lebanon remains
complex.

The Non-Aligned Movement has repeatedly
called on the Security Council to assume its
responsibilities and exercise its authority, in
accordance with the Charter, to address the situation in
the occupied Palestinian territory, where the
Palestinian people have continuously suffered under
Israel's brutal military occupation of their land since
1967 and where their fundamental human rights,
including the right to self-determination and the right
of the Palestine refugees to return, have been denied
since 1948.

NAM. is very much aware of the great negative
impact of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and the Arab-
Israeli conflict on peace and security. Thus, bearing in
mind Security Council resolution 1850 (2008), adopted
just two days ago, NAM. calls upon the Council to
actively follow up and implement this resolution and
reiterates its call for the implementation of all of the
Council's relevant resolutions, which would contribute
greatly to the achievement of a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace.
The Movement emphasizes that the primary
impediment to the exercise of the inalienable national
rights of the Palestinian people and to the achievement
of the two-State solution for peace continues to be
Israel's campaign of unlawful settlements. That
campaign has included the vast confiscation of land,
the construction and expansion of settlements, the
transfer of settlers, the construction of the Wall, the
construction of bypass roads that only Israelis may use
and the imposition of a permit regime and other severe
restrictions on movement in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem.

NAM. reiterates its strong condemnation of all
illegal Israeli settlement activities and measures,
including in and around occupied East Jerusalem and
in the Jordan Valley, which are aimed at illegal de facto
annexation of more Palestinian land. NAM. calls for the
immediate, complete cessation of all such illegal acts
and for Israel's compliance with all of its obligations
under international law and relevant United Nations
resolutions and full respect for its commitments in this
regard in the context of the peace process.

In this connection, NAM. also expresses its great
concern at the rising incidence of acts of violence,
harassment and intimidation by Israeli settlers against
Palestinian civilians, their properties and agricultural
land, and calls on the occupying Power to take all
necessary measures to put an end to settler violence
and lawlessness and to hold the perpetrators of crimes
against Palestinian civilians accountable for their
actions.

The deplorable recent events in Hebron - where
extremist Israeli settlers set fire to Palestinian homes
and orchards, shot at Palestinian civilians and
desecrated Palestinian mosques and graves - illustrate
the real danger of the illegal presence of Israeli settlers
in the occupied Palestinian territory and their
destructive impact on the prospects for achieving
peace, security and stability.

NAM. also condemns Israel's continuing unlawful
construction of the Wall in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including in and around East Jerusalem, in
flagrant challenge to and disrespect of the Advisory
Opinion of the International Court of Justice and in
violation of the General Assembly resolution ES-lO/ 15
of 20 July 2004, which affirms the illegal character of
the construction of the Separation Wall and called for
its cessation and dismantlement.
08-6603]
The Movement of Non-Aligned Countries is
deeply concerned by the huge physical, economic and
social devastation caused by such illegal and
destructive Israeli colonization practices, which are
dividing the occupied Palestinian territory into
separate, walled-in enclaves and isolating East
Jerusalem from the rest of the territory, completely
undermining the unity, integrity and contiguity of the
Palestinian territory. They are destroying entire
communities, displacing thousands of Palestinian
civilians and isolating tens of thousands more
Palestinians in isolated cantons. NAM. reiterates its
demand that Israel, the occupying Power, scrupulously
comply with its obligations as reflected in the Advisory
Opinion and with Assembly resolution ES-lO/15.

In flagrant violation of international law, and
despite commitments made in the context of the
Middle East peace process and agreements reached
therein, and in total contradiction to the spirit and goals
of this renewed peace process, Israeli has actually
escalated such illegal activities recently, seeking to
advance its attempts to alter the demographic
composition, character and status of the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, and to
impose an illegal unilateral solution.

The Movement of Non-Aligned Countries
submitted two letters to the President of the Security
Council, urging the Council to seriously address this
critical issue, including through the adoption of a
resolution. Regrettably, once again, the Council failed
to act, despite the firm position it had adopted in
previous resolutions on the issue of illegal settlements
in the occupied Palestinian territory. It remains unable
to implement its own resolutions.

NAM. reiterates its condemnation of all of Israel's
illegal settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, and stresses the
dangers of such continuing illegal and unilateral Israeli
measures. The international community, including the
Security Council, should undertake the necessary
actions to compel Israel, the occupying Power, to abide
by international law and to immediately and
completely stop all settlements and the construction,
expansion and planning of the Wall in the occupied
Palestinian territory.

At the same time, NAM. remains gravely
concerned by the appalling humanitarian crisis in the
Gaza Strip as a result of Israel's punitive blockade of
08-66031

the area in collective punishment of the Palestinian
civilian population. The occupying Power continues its
closure of all border crossings of the Gaza Strip,
obstructing the movement of persons and goods,
including the delivery of vital humanitarian assistance
such as food, medicines, fuel and other basic materials,
which all remain in short supply. Israel even continues
to hamper the work of the United Nations agencies that
are trying to provide desperately needed aid to the
Palestinian people, who are facing rising poverty,
hunger and disease as a result of this cruel siege.

Such illegal Israeli measures must be vigorously
condemned. The international community must act to
bring an end to this siege of the Gaza Strip to allow for
the free movement of persons and goods in order to
alleviate the humanitarian crisis being endured by the
Palestinian people. In addition, the international
community must insist that the occupying Power abide
by all its obligations under international law, including
humanitarian and human rights law, with regard to the
Palestinian civilian population under its occupation.

The Government of Lebanon has continuously
endeavoured to stabilize the situation on its territory
following Israel's ruthless aggression and serious
violations against the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Lebanon. The Non-Aligned Movement
once again expresses its satisfaction at the measures
taken by the Lebanese Government to implement
resolution 1701 (2006). The Movement also welcomes
the deployment of the Lebanese Armed Forces along
the northern and eastern borders of Lebanon to ensure
security and stability there.

NAM. remains deeply concerned by Israel's
continuing land and air violations of the Blue Line, in
contravention of resolution 1701 (2006). We strongly
urge Israel to put an end to the occupation of the
northern part of Ghajar, on the northern side of the
Blue Line, and to immediately refrain from any
violation of Lebanese sovereignty or of resolution 1701
(2006) and from any provocation of the Lebanese
Armed Forces or the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon.

The Movement demands the prompt settlement of
the issue of the Shaba'a farms with full respect for
Lebanese territorial integrity, as stipulated in resolution
1701 (2006). We urge all parties to cooperate in
protecting Lebanon's sovereign rights in that area, and
3
we note the important efforts of the Secretary-General
in that regard.

The Movement is fully aware of the enormous
challenge facing Lebanon as a result of the 1.2 million
cluster bombs launched by Israel during its attack on
that country. The Movement once again condemns
Israel's use of such weapons and deplores the resulting
death toll. NAM. strongly urges Israel to provide the
exact locations of those deadly weapons as well as
maps of the landmines planted during its occupation of
southern Lebanon.

The Movement congratulates the people and the
leaders of Lebanon and totally supports the Agreement
reached in Doha on 21 May 2008. In that connection,
the Movement welcomes the election of the new
President of the Republic, the establishment of a
national unity cabinet and the adoption of the electoral
law. Likewise, the Movement welcomes the convening
of two sessions of the national dialogue on ways to
strengthen the State's authority over all its territories in
order to guarantee the sovereignty and security of the
State and the people of Lebanon. The Movement also
welcomes the agreement banning the use of weapons
and violence as a way to settle disputes.

The Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms once again
that all measures and actions taken or to be taken by
Israel, the occupying Power, to alter the legal, physical
and demographic character and institutional structure
of the occupied Syrian Golan, as well as Israel's
measures to apply its jurisdiction and administration
there, are null and void and without any legal effect.
We also reaffirm that all such measures and actions,
including the illegal construction and expansion of
Israeli settlements in the Syrian Golan since 1967,
clearly violate international law; international
agreements; the Charter and relevant decisions of the
United Nations, including Security Council resolution
497 (1981); and the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War of
12 August 1949, and pose a challenge to the
international community.

The Non-Aligned Movement condemns the recent
Israeli settlement activities in the occupied Syrian
Golan. The Movement demands that Israel abide by
Security Council resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw
completely from the occupied Syrian Golan to the
borders of4 June 1967.
The members of the Non-Aligned Movement
condemn the act of aggression committed by forces of
the United States of America in Iraq against the Syrian
Arab Republic on 26 October 2008 and express its
deep concern over the negative consequences of that
action for peace, security and stability in the Middle
East.

NAM. expresses its great concern at the scant
progress made in the peace process despite its
re-establishment following the Annapolis conference in
November 2007, the resumption of direct bilateral
negotiations between the Israeli and Palestinian sides,
and the tremendous efforts to promote the Arab Peace
Initiative. While negotiations and meetings continue
between the two parties, the process continues to be
directly obstructed and undermined by Israel's
continued implementation of illegal policies and
practices in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, and by its disrespect for the
commitments it has undertaken in the peace process.

NAM. urges all parties involved, including the
Security Council and the Quartet, to make the efforts
necessary to promote the peace process and thus
achieve a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the
Middle East based on Security Council resolutions 242
(1967), 338 (1973), 425 (1978), 1397 (2002) and 1515
(2003), the principle of land for peace and the
implementation of the Arab Peace Initiative and the
Road Map.

Finally, the Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms its
support for the Middle East peace process and hopes
that the current efforts will finally bring an end to the
occupation of all Arab territories occupied by Israel

since 1967 - the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, and the occupied Syrian
Golan - and the achievement of the two-State

solution. The Movement reaffirms its unwavering
commitment to finding a just and peaceful solution to
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and to ensuring that the
Palestinian people exercise their inalienable rights,
including their right to self-determination and
sovereignty in their independent State of Palestine,
with East Jerusalem as its capital.

