The President (interpretation from French): I
would like to recall the decision that was taken at the
4156th and 4157th meetings. The Council extended
invitations, in conformity with the Charter and with
rules 37 and 39 of its provisional rules of procedure, to
the members of the Political Committee for the
Implementation of the Ceasefire Agreement of Lusaka
and to the representative of Zambia and to the
representative of the Organization of African Unity,
and to the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The Security Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached during its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document 8/2000/587, which contains the text of a
draft resolution established during its earlier
consultations.

I give the floor to the Minister of State for
Foreign Affairs and Regional Cooperation of Uganda,
in his capacity as Chairman of the Political Committee
of the Lusaka Agreement, Mr. Amama Mbabazi.

Mr. Mbabazi (Uganda) I wish, on behalf of the
Political Committee, to express our great appreciation
once again for the invitation you extended to us when a
United Nations team led by Ambassador Holbrooke
came to our region. We have appreciated these two
days of interaction. As I said, we had come with the
hope and confidence that this interaction would give
greater impetus to the implementation of Lusaka.

I am sure that you all now realize, after this
intensive interaction over two days, that the Political
Committee once again reaffirms its total commitment
to the Lusaka Accord and does appreciate the
commitment and support this Council gives to the
Lusaka Agreement for the ceasefire in Congo. We
therefore will go with the confidence that this
interaction will result in faster and effective
implementation of Lusaka.

We as a Political Committee have issued a
statement which I would like to read out to you:
"At the invitation of the United Nations
Security Council, the Political Committee for the
Implementation of the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo met in joint session with the Security
Council in New York on 15 and 16 June 2000.
The meeting reviewed the implementation of the
Ceasefire Agreement, with particular emphasis on
cessation of hostilities; conditions for the
deployment of the United Nations Organization
Mission in Congo (MONUC); disarmament,
demobilization, resettlement and reintegration of
members of the armed groups; the humanitarian
situation, including the release of prisoners of
war; and inter-Congolese political negotiations -
our national dialogue.

"The Political Committee reaffirmed the
commitment of the parties to the Agreement as
the only viable means to finding a peaceful and
sustainable solution to the problem of the Congo.
To this end the Committee informed the Council
that the Agreement, although it has suffered
violations, generally has held.

"With regard to cessation of hostilities, the
Political Committee briefed the Security Council
on the measures taken to address the ceasefire
violations. Among these are the adoption of the
Kampala disengagement and redeployment plan
and the subsequent drawing up sub-plans for each
area, which will form the basis of active
disengagement of forces.

"The Committee regretted the recent
fighting in Kisangani between Rwandan and
Ugandan forces and briefed the Security Council
on the steps taken by the two countries to bring
the situation back to normalcy. In this regard the
representatives of Rwanda and Uganda confirmed
that the fighting had stopped and that the
withdrawal of their forces from Kisangani has
commenced, with effect from Friday, 16 June
2000, in accordance with the agreement reached
between the two countries with the assistance of
MONUC.

"The non-State parties of the agreement also
affirmed that they would respect the
demilitarization of Kisangani and would have no
forces in the area in a radius of 100 kilometres.
The withdrawal will be completed within one
week.
"On the question of conditions for the
deployment of MONUC, the Political Committee
reaffirmed the assurances for the security,
protection and freedom of movement of MONUC,
its personnel and equipment, and therefore called
upon the Security Council to expedite the
deployment, as this would enhance the security
situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and thereby accelerate the pace of the
implementation of the Ceasefire Agreement.

"The Political Committee informed the
Council of the adoption, during its recent meeting
in Lusaka, of the mechanisms for the
disarmament, demobilization, resettlement and
reintegration of members of all armed groups.

"Regarding the release and exchange of
prisoners of war, the Political Committee
announced that all the parties had complied with
the requirements of the International Committee
of the Red Cross and Red Crescent and that the
release and exchange of prisoners commenced on
16 June 2000, when a total of 181 prisoners of
war were exchanged, mainly involving Rwandan,
Zimbabwean, Namibian and Democratic Republic
of the Congo forces.

"On the national dialogue, the Political
Committee informed the Security Council of the
efforts of the facilitator to start the inter-
Congolese political negotiations, including the
recent preparatory meeting in Cotonou, Benin.
The Committee regretted that not all of the parties
attended the meeting and, in this regard, called on
all the Congolese to honour their obligations
under the Agreement.

"The Political Committee appealed to the
Security Council and to the international
community at large to provide necessary and
adequate resources to the facilitator of the inter-
Congolese political negotiations and to the Joint
Military Commission to enable them to discharge
the important tasks assigned to them under the
Ceasefire Agreement.

"The Political Committee expressed its
appreciation to the Security Council for
convening the second joint meeting and looked
forward to the continuation of these consultations
on the Democratic Republic of the Congo peace
process."

