Ms. Tachco (United States of America): I thank
our briefers for their presentations today. In the context
of the evolving threats posed by the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction, today's debate reminds
us of the importance of the full implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). The is committed to assisting
States and international organizations in their efforts
to prevent non-State actors from developing and
acquiring nuclear, chemical or biological weapons and
their delivery systems.

We also align ourselves with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Spain on behalf of the
Group of Friends of resolution 1540 (2004).

Despite the progress made over the past 13 years,
significant gaps remain in the implementation of the
resolution's obligations, particularly in the areas of
chemical and biological security and controlling
means of delivery. We must work more smartly as
we move forward. The 2016 report (see S/2016/1038)
on the comprehensive review of the status of the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) along with
resolution 2325 (2016), adopted in December 2016,
provide guidance on how to achieve future progress.
Today I am going to touch on a few of those challenges
and discuss ways whereby we might overcome them.

Recently, we have seen the horror of
chemical-weapon attacks by States and non-State
actors in the Middle East, particularly in Syria.
The confirmed use of the deadly nerve agent VX in
Malaysia is even more shocking. Those trends are
unsettling and alarming, which is why the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) must work to hold States more accountable
for preventing the use and spread of chemical weapons
and ensuring effective control over such materials. As
part of our commitment to stopping the use of chemical
weapons, we need to work together to help States in
promoting best practices on chemical security to
detect and prevent the misuse of chemicals. Moreover,
the comprehensive review and resolution 2325 (2016)
called for increased assistance through matchmaking
and dialogue. The exchange of expertise and assistance
is extremely valuable to States, to the Committee and to
the global non-proliferation regime.

While resolution 1540 (2004) is aimed at deterring
non-State actors, its obligations are binding on Member
States. It is therefore troubling that the Syrian regime
has continued to use chemical weapons. We call on all
Member States that oppose the use of chemical weapons
to urge President Al-Assad to cooperate with the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
and cease using chemicals as weapons. President Trump
made that clear this week. Moreover, Syria's continued
use of chemical weapons will only increase the risk that
elements of its chemical weapons programme could fall
into the wrong hands.

The 1540 Committee must also continue to work
towards strengthening the global nuclear security
architecture and increase cooperation among
international organizations, such as the International
Atomic Energy Agency and INTERPOL. We must
help States build their capacity to secure nuclear and
other radioactive materials, convert research reactors
from highly enriched uranium to low enriched uranium
and address critical gaps to counter the smuggling of
nuclear and other radioactive materials.

The comprehensive review and resolution
2325 (2016) also highlighted the need for States to
establish effective control over materials that could
be used for weapons of mass destruction, including
through the development of national control lists
to monitor production and the movement of such
materials. To prevent the illicit trade in weapons of
mass destruction-related materials, the United States
is providing training and technical assistance and
detection, inspection and interdiction equipment to
border and customs authorities all over the world.

Last year's report and resolution 2325 (2016) also
recommended that the 1540 Committee give greater
consideration to the evolving nature of the risk of
proliferation and the rapid advances in science and
technology. Such developments could lower the barriers
to the development of weapons of mass destruction,
thereby making the mitigation of those risks even more
complex and challenging. The United States is eager
to work with others to ensure that we strengthen key
obligations under resolution 1540 (2004). The 1540
Committee and resolution 2325 (2016) are key tools in
stemming the spread of weapons of mass destruction
and helping to maintain international peace and
security.

