Last month, the members of the Security Council called on all parties to ensure a sustained period of calm throughout the country and reaffirmed the need for the full implementation of resolution 2254 (2015). That signal from the Council was timely, following the Secretary-General's call for an immediate global ceasefire and my appeal for a nationwide ceasefire in Syria and all-out effort to combat the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). Let me appeal to the Council to preserve this common purpose. I strongly believe that Syria needs a ceasefire arrangement that results in sustained calm and is nationwide in scope - one that does not see new assaults across lines of contact and that enables Syrians to access the equipment and resources necessary to combat COVID-19. We cannot afford hostilities, which would undoubtedly lead to another surge in displaced vulnerable communities - something that we witnessed in horror only two months ago. We cannot afford such a scenario before the pandemic; the price now would only rise ever higher. Over the past month, I have maintained active channels with the Syrian parties. I have also spoken with foreign ministers and senior officials from a range of key players, including Russia, Turkey and Iran, whose Foreign Ministers recently conferred virtually; the United States; the European Union and many European States; and the League of Arab States and several Arab countries. I have appreciated the engagement of all with my efforts to facilitate progress on the political track and to sustain ceasefire arrangements. I will be continuing active engagement with these and other interlocutors in the days and weeks ahead. I welcome the fact that there has been significant calm in many areas of Syria, especially relative to the apexes of violence of previous years. We have not witnessed all-out offensives or further displacements since early March. Russian-Turkish arrangements have taken hold in the north-west and I do see a positive difference on the ground, including compared with previous arrangements. The level of incidents is low. Six Russian-Turkish joint patrols have taken place. They have been challenged, but there have been responses to those challenges, too. I appeal to all relevant parties to address internationally proscribed terrorist groups in a cooperative and targeted manner so as not to compromise the existing calm and the COVID-19 response, and so as to ensure full respect for international humanitarian law and the protection of civilians. I also note that the different ceasefire arrangements between Russia, Turkey and the United States in the north-east also broadly continue to hold. But this is an uneasy and fragile calm in both north-western and north-eastern Syria, and there is the constant risk of escalation in Syria. Just yesterday, a bomb in a market in Afrin reportedly killed more than 40 people. Security conditions in southern Syria are concerning. A worrying resurgence by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) in desert areas in central and eastern Syria has continued. I am also concerned about reports of Israeli airstrikes in rural Homs and Damascus, the most recent of which was reported this past Monday. The Syrian Government has continued to take increasingly significant steps to combat COVID-19, as have, in areas outside Government control, the Syrian Opposition Coalition and other de facto authorities. International donors have pledged and provided financial and material support. Under-Secretary-General Lowcock will brief the Council this afternoon on the United Nations family's efforts to help build capacity to test and treat COVID-19 in Syria. While testing remains limited, the officially reported COVID-19 caseload in Syria is comparatively low: 42 reported cases in areas controlled by the Syrian Government, | reported case in the north-east and no reported cases in the north- west. We all hope that these low numbers will continue, but in Syria as in all countries there is the risk of a major COVID-19 outbreak. The trend lines in the coming weeks will be very important, as will a ramping up of testing and treatment capacity in all parts of Syria, along with information sharing among all parties. Syria faces many challenges that can hamstring a response to the pandemic. Syria also lacks sufficient health professionals and medical equipment and supplies. The health-care system is degraded in some areas and destroyed in others, following nine years of armed conflict. We all saw the recent findings of the Secretary- General's Board of Inquiry, a terrible reminder of what has happened in this conflict. Let me reiterate the need for full, sustained and unimpeded humanitarian access, using all modalities, including scaled-up cross-line and cross-border access. As part of the global efforts, the Secretary-General has appealed for the waiver of sanctions that may undermine the capacity of the country to ensure access to food, essential health supplies and COVID-19 medical support to respond to the pandemic. This has been affirmed to the Syrian Government. The United Nations and I, personally, have directly engaged concerned States so that all humanitarian exemptions to sanctions remain available and are fully utilized to combat the COVID-19 pandemic. I note the positive response of different countries to the United Nations in this respect. Turning to the economic situation, after nine years of conflict and a wide range of factors and measures, Syria faces extremely grave economic conditions. We have recently seen price increases and shortages, among other further worsening trends. The measures rightly taken by the authorities to combat COVID-19 in Syria have, as in all countries, also had an economic impact. I have long urged the parties to move to large-scale and unilateral releases of detainees and abductees and more meaningful actions on missing persons. The pandemic makes this humanitarian imperative more urgent than ever. I continue to urge the Syrian Government and all other Syrian parties to follow the lead of other Governments around the world in releasing detainees. We really need to see this happening as part of all the efforts to stem the spread of the virus in Syria. The need for an all-out effort to combat COVID-19 in Syria was conveyed to me on Monday in consultations with civil society actors in all different parts of Syria via our Civil Society Support Room, which included many medical non- governmental organizations and other grass-roots organizations. They are doing all they can to raise awareness and support local communities. They reflected the diversity of the challenges facing the various parts of the country and a common belief that more can and needs to be done to support the efforts under way. The Syrian Women's Advisory Board has been convening virtually every week since the risk of a COVID-19 crisis emerged. I spoke with its members yesterday. They expressed support for a sustained ceasefire throughout the country, and the wish that access be granted for medical staff and the provision of food, medicine, medical supplies and equipment to all regions of Syria without delay or impediment. They emphasized that women are at the forefront of community-based initiatives to raise awareness and prevent the spread of COVID-19, and explained how they are taking on additional caregiving responsibilities at home due to the movement restrictions. They also noted a heightened risk of domestic violence in isolation settings and a fear of the potential marginalization of women as the COVID-19 response gradually pushes some to assume more traditional roles. They stressed that nothing should obstruct the advancement of the political process, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015). In that regard, I briefed the Council last month that the agenda for the next session of the Constitutional Committee had been agreed between the co-Chairs. It will be important to build on that with a substantive discussion during the next round. The Committee was clear in its dealings with me that reaching an agreement during that session on national foundations and principles is not a precondition to moving to other items in subsequent sessions. I remain in regular contact with the Committee on how to resume the meetings in Geneva as soon as the situation allows. I have also been in touch with the civil society members of the Committee and will continue to do so. We are still exploring whether any preparatory work can take place in the meantime. I urge all members to be diligently preparing for renewed work. I reiterate my appeal for a nationwide ceasefire and an all-out effort to ensure that Syrians across the country will have access to the equipment and resources needed to combat and treat COVID-19. I stand ready to work with the Government, the opposition and all relevant players on the ground, as well as with key countries with weight and influence. I urge all relevant players to come together in a joint effort to support sustained calm and to help scale up the response to the pandemic. That is the only responsible path and the only one that can pave the way for progress on the broader political process to implement resolution 2254 (2015). There is no military solution to the Syria crisis. We must act on the basis of our common humanity, help build trust and confidence - including via reciprocal measures - and begin to move towards a political settlement that can meet the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people and fully restore Syria's sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence.
