Mr. Skoog: I have the honour to speak on the behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member States. Turkey, Montenegro, North Macedonia, Serbia, Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova align themselves with this statement. Out of respect for all the subsequent speakers this afternoon and possibly tomorrow, I have abbreviated my statement considerably. The full version is available online. I want to start by conveying our sincere condolences to the families who lost loved ones in the tragic plane crash outside Tehran yesterday morning. Congratulations to you, Sir, and to Viet Nam for assuming the presidency of the Security Council. The EU welcomes your choice of topic for today's open debate. For almost three quarters of a century, the Charter of the United Nations has not only served as the legal basis of this Organization but has also stood as an enduring symbol of multilateral cooperation and the rules-based international order. Written at the end of the darkest days in the history of humankind, the Charter represented new hope for the peoples of the world. The United Nations Charter is as relevant and important today as it was when first signed. Upholding agreed rules and norms is the only starting point we have for handling increasingly complex challenges. The Charter and the multilateral cooperation that it has established have been a remarkable success. There has been a clear decline in violence and in the type of inter-State conflicts that the Charter was designed to handle. It works for all of us - countries that have military might and economic dominance and those that do not. We all benefit. The Charter serves us all. At the same time, we must recognize that new types of threats are on the rise, including hybrid warfare, foreign interference and violent extremism. Fundamental global developments, climate change, changing demography and disruptive technology will continue producing new kinds of challenges to peace and security. We have to continue finding ways to prevent and handle these challenges by developing, strengthening and reforming the multilateral system. Our only point of departure for tackling complex, interconnected, global challenges is multilateral cooperation that binds us all. The United Nations Charter is at the very core of that. While we live in an era of unprecedented quantity and range of multilateral structures, the multilateral system is also increasingly being challenged. New competition and tensions are undermining the system. Widely accepted treaties and agreements seem to be put into question. It has been argued that this is the result of a shift of power, and the seemingly powerlessness of multilateralism in the face of modern challenges; that the legitimacy of the multilateral system is vanishing and that the ideals it represents are out of date. But let us base our discussion here today on facts. Sidelining the multilateral system and returning to the rules that predate the United Nations Charter would bring us back to something that we, not least us Europeans, know all too well - chaos and violence. Power is not a zero-sum game, and respect for the international, rules-based system, is in everybody's best interests. The unfolding escalation in the Middle East is an extremely serious case in point. It could jeopardize regional security and strengthen global terrorism. The EU is deeply concerned about the latest increase in violent confrontations in Iraq and underlines the need for de-escalation and dialogue and for respecting Iraqi sovereignty. The only way forward is a regional political solution in line with international law. In this context, the EU attaches great importance to preserving the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action and to its full implementation. It is a fundamental element of the global nuclear non-proliferation architecture and crucial to the security of the region and of the world. At the same time, in a fractured world it 1s essential that all Member States allow the United Nations to play its role as a platform for dialogue. The message of the new leadership of the European Union is clear. The EU is and will continue to be a guardian of multilateralism, standing up for the rules-based international order, including the protection of human rights, with the United Nations and its Charter at its core. The EU will continue to support the institutions that have served us so well and the rules and norms that have laid the foundation for the progress we have seen and benefitted from over the past 75 years. To uphold the multilateral system and respect for the United Nations Charter is not only in the interest of all member states; it is also the responsibility of all Member States. The EU and its members are will consistently put cooperation over confrontation and multilateralism over isolationism, stick to our commitments and willingly help others stick to theirs.
