Mr. Alday Gonzalez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the Spanish delegation for convening today's
open debate and for its introduction of the concept note
(S/2015/793) to guide our discussion, and we grateful
for the briefings presented by the President of the
General Assembly, the Vice-President of the Economic
and Social Council and Deputy Secretary-General
Eliasson,

The growing participation of Member States in
open debates such as today's demonstrates clearly
that there has been gradual improvement in the
working methods of the Council and provides a clear
signal of the interest of the majority in advancing
the goal of providing the entire membership with
more transparency, accountability, inclusiveness and
efficiency. We particularly acknowledge the boost
that the elected members of the Security Council have
given to the process in recent years, and we hope that
the countries elected by the General Assembly last
week to sit on the Council from January next year will
strengthen that dynamic.

My delegation wishes to acknowledge the
meticulous work carried out by the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency (ACT) group through
various working groups to improve the ways in which the
Council and other United Nations organs can improve
the interaction among them, and between each of them
and the other Member States. We therefore welcome the
support of ACT members for the political proposal to
restrict the use of the veto in cases of genocide, war
crimes and crimes against humanity, as put forward by
the Foreign Ministers of France and Mexico last month
here at Headquarters. We hope that the complementary
initiative on the part of ACT members will also enjoy
the wide support of Member States when it is formally
presented on Friday at the commemoration of the
seventieth anniversary of our Organization.

Mexico sees the veto as a responsibility, not
a privilege. When a permanent member uses it to
block action against mass atrocities, it does so in
contravention of the Charter. Limiting the use of
the veto in such situations is a moral imperative
and a principle underlying the accountability of the
permanent members of the Council to the international
community.

We also call on the Security Council, in the
discharge of its role as guarantor of international
peace and security, to do a better job in its advisory
role to the Peacebuilding Commission, and to enhance
its interaction with countries contributing troops
and police to peacekeeping operations, with timely
consultations on the definition, amendment or renewal
of mandates.

In recent years, we have found that the flow of
information to non-Council members on what is
discussed in this Chamber has improved. The desire
of some countries on the Council to inform their
counterparts, coupled with the work of analysis and
dissemination undertaken by non-governmental
organizations and academia, has also contributed to that
improvement. In that context, I thank the delegation of
Venezuela, which, in its capacity as representative of
the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States, has
on a daily and consistent basis shared information on
the work and agenda of the Council with the rest of the
regional Group.

We also believe that the issue of whether or not
to hold monthly wrap-up sessions at the end of each
presidency reflects the sharp division of views prevalent
within the Council on its working methods. There are
those who have resolved to strengthen the transparency
that must prevail in the Security Council, and those
who resist, reinforcing the stereotype of secrecy that
has often characterized this Chamber, which inhibits
a more transparent relationship between those who sit
around this table for two years or on a permanent basis
and those who are spectators.

We welcome the result of the process on revitalizing
the work ofthe General Assembly regarding the election
of the next Secretary-General. The active involvement
of the membership and civil society enables us to move
forward. We commend the Presidents of the General
Assembly and the Security Council for working in a
coordinated manner to implement the provisions of
the resolution. We believe that a clear timetable for the
selection process and the holding of forums in which
we can meet and exchange views with the candidates,
perhaps using the Arria Formula format, would be
very useful to the entire membership and would meet
the objective of promoting greater transparency in the
election of the next Secretary-General.

Similarly, we hope that the spirit of cooperation
we saw in the revitalization of the work of the General
Assembly will be transferred to the intergovernmental
negotiations on Security Council reform. We appreciate
the work done by Ambassador Rattray as facilitator of the
intergovernmental negotiations during the Assembly's
sixty-ninth session and hope that his successor or
successors can build on the lessons learned in the past
twelve months so that they can facilitate progress with
absolute transparency and objectivity.
Mexico believes that reforming the structure of the
Security Council is possible if all parties place political
will and commitment before any other consideration in
the negotiations. We need a more effective, transparent
and representative Security Council that is able to
adequately respond to the challenges that arise in the
international agenda.

