Mr. Niehaus (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of
the member States of the Rio Group in my capacity in
the pro tempore secretariat.

First, Mr. President, allow me to congratulate
you, and through you, the Republic of Mauritius, on
your accession to the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of January. I would also like to
congratulate the representatives of Bulgaria,
Cameroon, Guinea, Mexico and Syria for their recent
accession to this organ. Together with the other
members of the Council, they now have the
responsibility to represent the interests and will of the
rest of the Members of the Organization in order to
make the Council a more effective, transparent and
democratic organ.

The Rio Group most categorically condemns
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, wherever
and by whomever committed. We acknowledge that
terrorism victimizes the innocent civilian population as
a whole and that it threatens the entire international
society. We believe that there is no political,
philosophical, racial, ethnic or religious justification
for this crime. Therefore, we condemn the perpetration
and financing of all terrorist acts, and we express our
deepest censure of the despicable acts of 11 September.

The Rio Group endorses the content of Security
Council resolution 1373 (2001). It constitutes a firm,
necessary and innovative response to the extremely
grave criminal acts of 11 September, aimed at re
establishing international security in accordance with
the Council's own sphere of competence. For this
reason, we reiterate our unwavering commitment to
continue combating terrorism in conformity with that
resolution.

Our efforts to eradicate this scourge require an
authentic exercise of universal cooperation in order to
defend the basic principles of human coexistence and
to ensure peace, security and development for all
mankind. As this crime is a transnational phenomenon,
only multilateral action can counter it successfully. The
Rio Group is ready to participate in all multilateral
forums supporting all initiatives necessary to combat
terrorism, reaffirming in this way the basic values of
peaceful coexistence of all nations, peoples and
persons.

Respect for human rights and democracy in all
spheres constitutes the best line of defence against
terrorism. The struggle against this scourge should not
become an excuse to disregard fundamental rights. On
the contrary, it should be a reason to reaffirm them.
True and sustainable peace springs from mutual
respect, dialogue and the rejection of violence.

The members of the Rio Group are well aware
that political repression, extreme poverty and the
violation of human rights feed extremism and
terrorism. The multilateral strategy against terrorism
must tackle the problems of extreme poverty, hunger,
destitution, illness and the lack of housing and
education. A holistic strategy, that ensures respect for
human dignity in all fields and in conformity with the
commitments enshrined in the Millennium Declaration,
is required.
We are confident that the current emphasis on the
fight against terrorism will neither stop the
programmes for the eradication of poverty nor
consume the meagre resources devoted to the
promotion of human rights and economic and social
development. It is necessary to conceptualize the
struggle against this scourge within the broader context
of the entire international agenda.

We believe that the fight against international
terrorism should not lend itself to fuelling ethnic
hatreds or promoting discord among the different
religions and civilizations. We are convinced that the
fight against this crime should guide us to build more
open and tolerant societies, based on a true culture of
peace and life.

The Rio Group acknowledges that in order to
prevent terrorism, it is necessary to create institutional
and police procedures that protect the public
effectively, without prejudice, to the full respect for the
international commitments in the area of human rights.
Special attention should be given to the dangerous
relationship between the international drug trafficking
networks and the terrorist groups, as well as to the
illicit trafficking in arms. We believe that an integral
strategy against this scourge should include the
eradication of drug trafficking and money-laundering.
Such a strategy should also prevent the transfer of
weapons to all extremist and rebel groups and to the
Governments that support them.

The fight against terrorism requires strengthening
and broadening international cooperation in all fields.
In particular, it is necessary to increase the transfer of
technology, bilateral cooperation in the area of training,
and financial assistance to all those countries that
require it.

Last November, pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001), the Rio Group convened a meeting of legal
experts in Santiago, Chile, to consider the prevention
and suppression of terrorist acts, as well as the
implementation of the Security Council's decisions in
this matter. The document of conclusions, which I have
requested be distributed as an official document of the
Council, condemns the acts of terrorism, warns of the
challenge that terrorism poses to existing juridical
structures, and emphasizes that the combat against
terrorism should be carried out within the framework
of the rule of law, international law and human rights.

At that meeting, a fruitful exchange of opinions
on the legislation existing in each member State was
held, and it was seen that the members of the Rio
Group have created adequate mechanisms to implement
the provisions of resolution 1373 (2001). The
document of conclusions reflects the firm intention of
Rio Group members to ratify those international
treaties on terrorism adopted within the United Nations
system that they have not yet ratified.

The Rio Group experts noted that it is necessary
to make greater efforts in the struggle against
terrorism. They indicated that it is necessary to
strengthen the mechanisms of judicial cooperation and
extradition, to make progress in the legal definition of
terrorist conduct and in assigning penalties
commensurate to the seriousness of those acts, and to
develop mechanisms to prevent and suppress terrorist
financing activities. The experts recommended
expediting the work on the new inter-American
convention on terrorism that is being drafted within the
framework of the Organization of American States
(OAS), as well as creating an information system to
compile laws and administrative regulations on this
matter.

At the same time, within the framework of the
OAS, the Inter-American Committee on Terrorism
seeks to bolster regional cooperation with the View to
prevent, combat and eradicate terrorist acts and
activities through the direct exchange of information
among the competent national authorities.

Resolution 1373 (2001) has opened new lines of
communication between the Security Council and the
Member States of the Organization. The unprecedented
response to the request for national reports included in
that resolution should be noted. The member States of
the Rio Group have endeavoured to fulfil that request,
as is evidenced by the various reports presented. We
believe that the consideration of these reports should
become an opportunity for constructive dialogue in
which areas for possible improvement are suggested.

I should like to conclude by expressing the Rio
Group's gratitude to the Chairman of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001),
Ambassador Jeremy Greenstock, and to his Vice-
Chairmen for their excellent work and leadership, and
for their ongoing work of engaging in dialogue with
and providing information to the other Member States
of this Organization.

