Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I appreciate the fact that all
Council members have spoken. Together with some
colleagues, including Kuwait, I had indicated that we
would like to discuss the political process and have a
conversation with Mr. De Mistura on the way forward.
However, I understand and respect the President's
decision that that will not be possible today. But I hope
that we can do so very soon.

Having just heard the intervention by the
representative of Syria, I would like to say a few words.
I will not go through the several inaccuracies in his
statement, including a reference to a remark I made.
I would like to say - and I do so on behalf of Kuwait
as well - that we should all support the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and the
work it conducts on everyone's behalf.

The following is a joint Sweden-Kuwait. I would
like to make three points on the humanitarian situation.
First, as the Secretary-General stated in his report,
we are deeply concerned about the fact that 2018
has seen

"a collapse in the ability of the United Nations
and its humanitarian partners to reach people
across conflict lines from within the Syrian Arab
Republic." (S/2018/619, para. 42)

Only a fraction of people in need are being reached,
and there is negative trajectory with regard to
humanitarian access in Syria. In their dialogue with
Damascus, we encourage those with influence - and
this is an opportunity to say this directly to the Syrian
representative 4 to step up to the signing of facilitation
letters for convoys, United Nations regular programming
to areas recently retaken by Government forces and
the approval of visas for United Nations personnel,
including OCHA staff.

Secondly, we condemn the continued attacks
against medical facilities, of which there has been an
increase in 2018. We deplore the continued removal and
rejection of medical items from humanitarian convoys.
Such acts may constitute war crimes.

Thirdly, we welcome the report of the Secretary-
General on the review of United Nations cross-border
operations (S/2018/6l7). As cross-line access is almost
non-existent, the cross-border modality continues to
be a crucial part of the humanitarian response. It is a
life-saving modality, as 2.67 million lives depend on
cross-border humanitarian assistance. We note that the
scrutiny of United Nations cross-border operations in
Syria, as well as of the accountability mechanisms in
place, is at a level similar to or higher than that in other
comparable humanitarian operations.

Finally, I would like to commend the United Nations
for its efforts with regard to the humanitarian situation.
We look forward to hearing more in due course about
the work on implementing the recommendations. We
assure Mr. Ging and his staff of our full support.

