The President (spoke in Arabic): I wish to
welcome the Secretary-General, Ministers and the
other representatives present in the Security Council
Chamber. Their participation is an affirmation of the
importance of the subject matter under discussion.

In accordance with rule 37 ofthe Council's provisional
rules of procedure, I invite the representatives of
Albania, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belgium,
Brazil, Canada, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Egypt,
Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Guatemala, Hungary, India,
Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Italy, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Lebanon, Luxembourg, Maldives,
Malta, Montenegro, Morocco, the Netherlands,
Pakistan, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, the Republic of
Korea, the Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, the Syrian
Arab Republic, Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine and the
United Arab Emirates to participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this briefing: Mr. Peter
Neumann and Mr. Scott Atran.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Tete Antonio, Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations; His Excellency Mr. Thomas
Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations; and His Excellency
Mr. Nassir Abdulaziz Al-Nasser, United Nations High
Representative for the Alliance of Civilizations, to
participate in this meeting.

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2015/231, which contains the text ofa letter
dated 27 March 2015 from the Permanent Representative
of Jordan to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.

I now give the floor to the Secretary-General.

