Mr. Mbanefo (Nigeria): The Nigerian delegation
wishes to express its appreciation to you, Madam
President, for convening this very important meeting
on children and armed conflict. Its is essential and
indeed right for the Security Council to focus on the
plight of children in armed conflict in view of the
recent escalation of intra-State conflicts in the different
regions of the world, particularly in Africa. This
meeting is also a testimony of the commitment of the
Security Council, under your presidency, to intensify
efforts to bring to an end the exploitation of innocent
children by warlords to achieve their goals through
armed conflict. It will also, one hopes, mobilize
international public opinion against all those who have
wrought horrendous havoc on innocent children of the
world.

In the past years, the world has watched with
horror the carnage of wars in the continent of Africa in
which civilian populations have endured unimaginable
suffering and hardship. Particularly gruesome is the
image of the brutal activities of the Revolutionary
United Front (RUF) rebels in Sierra Leone who
blatantly offended the decency of humanity by
indiscriminately cutting off the limbs of hundreds of
men, women and children in the face of a helpless
Government. It is sad to note that some of those who
participated in committing these heinous crimes were
children recruited by the various belligerent groups.
Those children, between 7 and 14 years of age, are
robbed of their innocence and exposed to hard drugs.
They are manipulated to become the perfect killing
machines. Instead of playing with toys and other
children in their communities, they are armed with
AK-47 rifles. Rather than go to school, their classroom
is the battlefield where they are taught to kill.

Besides the phenomenon of the child soldier,
these societies are further traumatized by the
horrendous injuries inflicted on these innocent
children. Sierra Leone typifies an unacceptable phase
of brutality in a conflict situation. How do families
cope with a situation where all the children have no
arms or limbs? How do communities cope with a
population of armless citizens? These are very
pertinent questions the Security Council and indeed the
international community need to address in fashioning
measures to deal with those who perpetrate these
atrocities.

Another regrettable aspect of this situation is the
fact that a dependency syndrome has been unwittingly
created in these societies. Because these societies are
ravaged by war, they are not in a position to fashion
any meaningful and well-funded programme of
rehabilitation. In this regard my delegation wishes to
pay special tribute to non-governmental organizations,
which have been very active in assisting these helpless
children.

It is also necessary to commend Mr. Olara Otunu,
the Secretary-General's Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict, for all he has been able
to do to focus world attention on this unacceptable
phenomenon.

Obviously, a permanent solution to this problem
is the prevention of conflict. African leaders are
deploying their best efforts not only to resolve the
raging conflicts on our continent but also to prevent
them. A major effort in this regard is being nurtured
within the framework of the Conference on Security,
Stability, Development and Cooperation in Africa
(CSSDA). Its major thrust is to build African capacity
for the prevention, management and resolution of
conflicts.

Since we all acknowledge that the traumatic
experiences of children which I characterized earlier
are unacceptable, it therefore behoves the Security
Council and the international community to devise
ways and means of preventing the recurrence of this
phenomenon. There must be rules to protect our
children in conflict or war zones from becoming
instruments of war. Their involvement in wars is much
more worrisome than their involvement in productive
labour. The Security Council should therefore work out
procedures and mechanisms for bringing the
perpetrators, who must be seen as criminals, to justice.
If we fail to do this in a decisive manner, we will be
surrendering the future of the world's children to the
whims and caprices of warlords.

The Security Council must act now.

