Mr. Diop (Mali) (spoke in French): Allow me, first
of all, to say how pleased we are to see a friendly country
such as Argentina presiding over the Security Council
for the month of October. I would also like to extend my
sincere congratulations to the United States of America
on its memorable presidency last month, during which
two major events were organized: the Security Council
summit on foreign terrorist fighters (see S/PV.7272)
and the meeting on Ebola (see S/PV.7268).

It is with great pleasure that Mali welcomes the
first report of the Secretary-General on the situation
in our country (S/2014/692) pursuant to resolution
2164 (2014). The Government of Mali fully supports
the observations of the Secretary-General. I would
like in particular to draw attention to paragraph 46 of
the report. With your permission, Madam President,
I would like to quote the content of the report, which
fully reflects our Government's point of view. The
report underscores:

"The ongoing talks in Algiers present an
opportunity that cannot be missed, if Mali is to
find a sustainable solution to the recent crisis. All
armed movements in Mali should cease hostilities
immediately and prioritize the preparations for the
cantonment process, as provided by the preliminary
agreement, in order to show their commitment to
peace and security and to build confidence during
the talks. Moreover, all parties should recognize
the sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of the
Malian State. I encourage all parties to negotiate in
good faith and in a spirit of inclusiveness so as to
address all grievances. I also call on all parties to
strongly condemn, reject and actively combat acts
of terrorism, recognizing that they are criminal
and unjustifiable, regardless of their motivation,
wherever, whenever and by whomever committed."
(S/2014/692, para. 46)

I would also like to sincerely thank the Secretary-
General for those remarkable observations and to
say that that is the kind of message that I, myself,
need in Algiers in my capacity as lead negotiator for
the Government side. That is also what the President
of the Republic of Mali, His Excellency Mr. Ibrahim
Boubacar Keita, said in other words on 24 September
from the rostrum of the General Assembly at its sixty-
ninth session (see A/69/PV.15) and at the high-level
meeting on Mali, which he was fortunate to co-chair
with Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon.

Allow me now to make four comments with regard
to the report under consideration.

First, Mali has consistently honoured its
commitments and responded to the relevant United
Nations resolutions and the Council's calls for peace
and the involvement of the international community by
making a formal commitment to inclusive inter-Malian
talks on 16 July in Algiers. Furthermore, to give the
Algiers process as much credit as possible, the northern
communities and civil society organizations have also
been involved in the talks and they were heard by all
the parties, including the team of mediators. It is clear
that, in the course of the negotiations, the Government
of Mali categorically rejected and continues to reject
any request to establish a federation or a new State in
the Malian State, which runs counter to the Malian
Constitution and the relevant United Nationsresolutions,
and also runs counter to the commitments made in the
Algiers process road map. In that regard, the armed
movements must be realistic and accept the hand offered
to the Government of Mali, which has made offers to
address the deep-seated aspirations of the populations
of the northern regions, especially in terms of the self-
government of communities and the management of
local issues within a renewed and shared governance.

Secondly, the Security Council should use all
of its influence to induce the armed movements that
have signed the road map in Algiers to agree to work
together to negotiate in good faith in order to facilitate
the conclusion of a comprehensive and final peace
agreement; strictly respect the ceasefire agreement
of 23 May 2014 and the declaration of cessation of
hostilities of 24 July 2014; distance themselves from
terrorist groups and other drug traffickers who are
subject to sanctions; and, lastly, resume the cantonment
process of their units as soon as possible, in accordance
with the relevant Security Council resolutions and the
Ouagadougou preliminary agreement.

Thirdly, the resurgence of jihadists and drug
traffickers in northern Mali and the upsurge in
attacks against the troops of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA), the Security Council must urgently
take the necessary measures to ensure that MINUSMA
receives the appropriate resources to fully execute its
mandate and protect civilians and peacekeepers, who,
unfortunately, pay a heavy price on the ground even as
I speak.

Fourthly, everyone knows that the head of the
terrorist group Ansar Eddine, Iyad ag Ghali, who
has long been on the Counter-Terrorism Committee
list, is freely travelling around northern Mali. He
has solemnly sworn allegiance to the Islamic State
organization through a sensational press statement. My
country, like all countries in the Sahel, again runs the
risk of becoming the destination of hordes of terrorists
who have been forced out of other parts of the world.
MINUSMA has already suffered heavy losses in terms
of human life, and I take advantage of this opportunity
to extend to MINUSMA, troop-contributing countries
and the families of the victims of terrorism in Mali
my deepest condolences on behalf of the President of
the Republic of Mali, his Government and the entire
Malian people. However, this cannot continue. The
international community must send a strong signal to
terrorists. That is, unfortunately, the only message they
will understand.

In that regard, the Council should undertake,
as quickly and urgently as possible, with members'
permission, a review of MINUSMA's mandate and a
strengthening of its capabilities and resources to enable
it to address the upsurge in violence on the ground
in connection with Operation Barkhane. Perhaps
the Council should consider establishing a rapid
intervention force capable of effectively combating
terrorists. In any case, it is crucial to prevent the links
with Daesh from solidifying and inflaming the Sahel
region. To do so, the Security Council must demand
full cooperation from the armed groups in northern
Mali in the fight against terrorism, in accordance with
the commitments undertaken by them in Algiers six
weeks ago.

I take this opportunity to warmly thank the
Secretary-General, the members of the Security
Council and the mediation team of the Algiers process,
led by Algeria. We welcome Algeria's outstanding
work done at head of the mediation team. We reiterate
to it the full confidence of the Malian Government in
its ability to lead us to a comprehensive and definitive
peace agreement. We would like to thank all of our
partners and the international community for having
clearly reaffirmed their unwavering commitment to
the territorial integrity, sovereignty, unity and secular
republican form of the Malian State at the high-level
meeting on Mali held in New York on 27 September
on the sidelines of the general debate of the sixty-ninth
session of the General Assembly.

I cannot conclude without mentioning the faith
that I have in the Algiers process, along with my friend
Herve Ladsous, who is with us on this occassion, as well
as the excellent cooperation we have with MINUSMA
under the direction of our partner in Algiers Albert
Koenders, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, who has made a personal commitment to the
process. He is a great diplomat to whom I pay tribute
for the outstanding work he has done in Mali.

