Mr. Richardson (United States of America): The
United States appreciates the opportunity to participate in
today's special meeting of the Security Council to lay out
our case for justice. It was interesting to listen to the
Foreign Minister of Libya. He makes what may seem to be
a compelling argument. But, as the great American
President John Adams once said, "Facts are stubborn
things".

The United States welcomes this opportunity to
publicly lay out the facts and set the record straight on
this case.

Unfortunately we must begin with the events of nine
years ago this past December, when a terrorist bomb blew
Pan Am flight 103 out of the sky over the town of
Lockerbie, Scotland. Two hundred and seventy innocent
people from 21 countries, including 189 Americans, were
killed that evening. Some of their family members are
here in the gallery to witness this debate. Evidence of
Libyan complicity in their untimely deaths and the
subsequent search for justice is at the core of the
sanctions against Libya and our discussions today.

I have listened to Libya and its supporters argue that
sanctions are subjecting the Libyan people to widespread
humanitarian suffering. I have listened to Libya complain
that the mechanisms and procedures currently in place to
deal with humanitarian issues are inadequate.

I have listened to Libya and its supporters argue that
the recent ruling by the International Court of Justice
requires that sanctions against Libya be suspended.
Simply put, these assertions are false.

First, let me address the issue of the recent decision
by the International Court of Justice. The rulings in no
way question the legality of the Security Council's actions
affecting Libya or the merits of the criminal cases against
the two accused suspects.

The rulings of the Court involved technical,
procedural issues. Contrary to the assertions of the Libyan
Government, the Court is not calling for the review or
suspension of Security Council resolutions. The Court has
made clear that it was not dealing with the substance or
the merits of the case.

In 1992 the International Court of Justice specifically
rejected this interpretation of its review of Libya's claims.
In reality, the Court has simply said that the parties must
now argue the legal merits of the case. And while the
case is proceeding, Libya must finally adhere to the will
of the international community, comply with its obligation
pursuant to Security Council decisions and turn over the
two accused suspects for a fair trial.

 

Let me turn now to the claims of humanitarian
suffering in Libya.

Today, Libya remains the wealthiest country in Africa
on a per-capita basis. Immunization coverage for children
is over 90 per cent. As the chart behind me demonstrates,
Libya is importing more medical instruments today than it
did prior to the imposition of sanctions. And a 1996 report
on maternal and child health in Libya put forward by the
Arab League and the Libyan Government states that

"Childhood mortality estimates reflect a steady
decline, particularly during the last five years".

The fact is, United Nations sanctions against Libya are
targeted sanctions, imposed to address aspects of Libyan
involvement in international terrorism but specifically
designed to prevent suffering among the Libyan people.
These sanctions do not prohibit the importation of food,
medicine or clothing. They do not close Libya's land or sea
borders, and they do not prevent Libya from selling its oil
on the open market.

In fact, Libyan oil production under sanctions remains
steady. The income from this oil has fluctuated with the
price of oil, but industry estimates conclude that in 1997,
Libya earned nearly $10 billion from the sale of oil - I
repeat, $10 billion. So if Libya is suffering economically,
it is certainly not because of United Nations sanctions.

The Libyan Government has claimed that United
Nations sanctions hinder medical treatment for its people.
Once again, the facts tell a different story. The sanctions
regime has always permitted exceptions to the air embargo
for approved medical evacuation flights. And as the
Chairman of the sanctions Committee recently stated,
procedures for approving these flights work well with
Libyan cooperation and permit flights to be approved on
very short notice, sometimes even within a matter of hours.
In fact, the number of approved medical evacuation flights
has increased every year since sanctions were imposed.

Finally, the Libyan Government has repeatedly and
erroneously claimed that sanctions prevent Libyan pilgrims
from making the Hajj to Saudi Arabia. The United States,
as well as every member of the Security Council, has no
intention or desire to prevent the Libyan people from
fulfilling their religious obligations. For the past three
years, the United States has supported sanctions Committee
approval of direct flights from Libya to Jeddah on third-
country aircraft for Libyan pilgrims. These flights have
enabled all Libyan pilgrims, thousands of Libyans, to fly
directly to the Hajj, a privilege that few other countries
can provide. More Libyans have flown to the Hajj since
sanctions than at any time before them; witness the chart
once again.

Let me also say a few words about the Petrovsky
report, which the Libyan Government claim buttresses
their allegations of humanitarian suffering. The Petrovsky
mission adhered to its mandate, which was simply to
listen to Libyan views. It did not agree with, endorse, or
confirm the claims of the Libyan Government. In fact, the
report underlined that Libya has failed to respond to or
take advantage of efforts by the United Nations to
respond to its complaints.

Indeed, I would invite the Libyan representative to
read the recent report put out by the Secretary-General
evaluating the Scottish legal system.

This report concludes,

"that the accused would receive a fair trial under the
Scottish judicial system. Their rights during the pre-
trial, trial and post-trial proceedings would be
protected in accordance with international standards.
The presence of United Nations and other
international observers can be fully and easily
accommodated. A trial by jury would not prejudice
the accused's right to a free tria ." (S/1997/99I, annex, part IX)

If Libya truly wants these sanctions lifted, its course
of action is clear: surrender the two suspects so they can
receive a fair trial in the appropriate criminal court.
Regrettably, all the assertions made today by my Libyan
colleague simply evade the main issue at hand, and that
is the search for justice.

We are not here today because of United Nations
sanctions, and not because of the simply absurd notion
that the United States seeks the permanent imposition of
sanctions against Libya.

We are here today because, six years ago, following
two of the most extensive - extensive - criminal
investigations ever undertaken, compelling evidence was
presented to indicate that Libyan intelligence operatives
placed the bombs that destroyed Pan Am flight 103 and
Union de transports aerens (UTA) flight 772. The
international community condemned these horrific acts of
terrorism and imposed sanctions upon Libya so that the

 
men responsible would soon be brought to justice. Six years
later, we are still waiting.

My Government does not enjoy this situation. It is not
our goal to see Libya reduced to an international pariah. In
fact, we look forward to the day when these sanctions can
be removed and Libya once again is a member in good
standing of the international community.

But that day cannot and will not come until the
victims of Pan Am 103 and UTA 772 receive the justice -
the justice - that they so richly deserve.

