Mr. Roet (Israel): Iwould like to begin by expressing
Israel's immense appreciation to the courageous men
and women of United Nations peacekeeping forces, in
our area and worldwide. They risk their lives to protect
civilians and to maintain stability and security in
hotspots around the world. We applaud their courage
and their willingness to dedicate their lives to the
promotion of peace, and we pray for their safe return
home to their families and loved ones.

I would also like to thank the Senegal and the
President of the Security Council for convening this
important debate.

It has become increasingly urgent in recent years
to deal with this issue. For Israel, asymmetrical threats
are not just a theoretical notion, but a very real and
important issue. Israel has been living with the reality
of such terrorist threats for many years, on all fronts.
As we cope with this unfortunate reality on a daily
basis, so do the United Nations peacekeeping missions
that operate within Israel and in its neighbouring
States - the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL) and the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (UNDOF). The problematic security
environment created by terrorist groups and non-State
actors in the area endangers United Nations personnel
as well as their peacekeeping operations.

UNIFIL plays a key role in upholding resolution
1701 (2006) and helps maintain stability in our conflict-
fraught region. Operating in southern Lebanon, a
territory that is controlled by a terrorist organization,
requires both courage and commitment. I would like to
take this opportunity to thank the troop-contributing
countries for their ongoing support, and UNIFIL Force
Commander Major General Michael Beary of Ireland
for his leadership and efforts to ensure stability in the
region. I would also like to emphasize that Israel is
committed to fully cooperate with UNIFIL and is ready
to collaborate in preparation for the upcoming strategic
review in February.
While recognizing the important role of UNIFIL,
we must not forget that there is still much work to be
done on this front, as the internationally designated
terror organization Hizbullah, a proxy of Iran, remains
a primary factor of instability and chaos in the region.
In paragraph 8 of resolution 1701 (2006), the Council
called for

"the disarmament of all armed groups in Lebanon,
so that there will be no weapons or authority in
Lebanon other than that of the Lebanese State".

Unfortunately, as we have stated many times in the past
in the Chamber, the resolution has never beem fully
implemented. In fact, even though there are more than
10,000 UNIFIL peacekeepers on the ground, Hizbullah
increased its arsenal from 7,000 rockets to over 120,000
in the 10 years since the adoption of resolution 1701
(2006) - I repeat, 120,000 rockets.

Hizbullah is embedding its arsenal in the civilian
infrastructure of southern Lebanon, stationing rocket
launchers and storing weapons caches in or adjacent
to schools, hospitals and private homes. We have, in
the past, provided the Council maps that prove that fact
beyond a shadow of a doubt. Yet, regardless of that proof
and the extensive presence ofUNIFIL in the area, we do
not see that information reflected in UNIFIL reports.
That error must be corrected. What we do see in the
reports is a worrisome trend of obstructing UNIFIL's
movement in southern Lebanon. These incidents
prevent UNIFIL from fulfilling its mandate in full. We
expect UNIFIL to report on any and all such incidents
that compromise its ability to properly monitor the area
and to provide a comprehensive account of the situation
on the ground.

Hizbullah has made it clear, in word and deed, that
it not only aspires to attack Israel with rockets from
Lebanese territory, but that it is also actively trying
to carry out attacks within Israeli territory. Just last
month, it came to light that Hizbullah had created
a terror infrastructure in Ghajar village. Hizbullah
operatives recruited individuals from the village who
were involved in drug trafficking and instructed them
to carry out deadly terror attacks in the city of Haifa,
Israel's third most-populated city, and other potential
locations in the heart of Israel. It is only thanks to the
vigilance of Israeli security forces that those deadly
attacks were prevented and many lives were saved.

Hizbullah poses a threat not only to the people of
Israel and Lebanon but to the stability of the entire
region. That organization, founded and supplied by
Iran, has been taking part in the conflicts in Yemen
and Syria, assisting the Al-Assad regime in ruthlessly
slaughtering the Syrian people and prolonging the
devastating war in Yemen.

Hizbullah's connection to Iran is no longer a
secret - it is actually proud of it and openly speaks
about it. Its leader, Hassan Nasrallah, admitted himself
that

"Hizbullah's budget, its income, its expenses
come from the Islamic Republic of Iran. Just
as we receive the rockets that we use to threaten
Israel, we are receiving our money".

These words constitute not only a violation ofLebanon's
obligations under resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701
(2006), but also a violation by Iran of resolution 2231
(2015), which prohibits Iran from transferring arms or
related materials. Lebanon, a United Nations Member
State that claims to be a sovereign and independent
State, cannot be absolved of its responsibility to uphold
those resolutions nor of its duty not to allow a terrorist
organization in its midst.

The United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force, which was put in place to ensure the upholding
of the 1974 ceasefire agreement between Syria and
Israel, has experienced the devastating effects ofa war-
torn country. Following the kidnapping of UNDOF
personnel from the Philippines and Fiji by terrorist
groups in Syria in 2013 and 2014, respectively, and the
inability of the Syrian regime to ensure the safety of
the peacekeepers, the peacekeeping mission was forced
to withdraw from the area of separation. As such,
UNDOF has been operating solely on the Israeli side of
the Golan Heights since September 2014.

Since then, Israel has been supporting and
facilitating the work of UNDOF and will continue
its support in order to allow UNDOF to carry out
its mandate safely and securely. We welcome the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations decision to
begin a gradual return to the area of separation and will
continue to work with UNDOF in order to facilitate
a gradual and coordinated redeployment. Israel
understands that UNDOF requires security guarantees
for the mission's personnel in the light of the situation
in Syria, and therefore has established temporary
procedures for their crossing between the Alfa and
Bravo sides in order to facilitate their movement.

UNDOF plays a crucial role in maintaining
stability along the border, especially given the series
of spillover attacks from Syria to Israel, which have
unfortunately increased over the past year. During
the month of September alone there was a total of six
instances in which rockets launched from Syria landed
next to towns and villages inside Israeli territory, thus
risking the lives of Israeli citizens. Thankfully, thus
far, such rocket attacks have not resulted in casualties.

I would like to reiterate that Israel holds the
Government of Syria responsible for all actions that
take place within Syrian territory, and demands that
the Syrian regime abide by the 1974 Disengagement of
Forces Agreement between Israeli and Syrian Forces.
We will not tolerate any kind of spillover from Syria,
and will take all the necessary measures to protect our
civilians from harm.

Let me take this opportunity to thank the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Member States that contribute troops in order to
maintain the United Nations presence and activities,
despite the unstable situation in Syria. We also thank
UNDOF Force Commander Major General Jai Shanker
Menon of India for his strong leadership in the light of
the many challenges he faces.

We cannot confront the evil of today with the
equipment and technology of yesterday. In too many
cases, United Nations peacekeepers lack the equipment
and technology to fulfil their mandate and to fully
protect both civilians and themselves. Israel looks
forward to supporting United Nations peacekeeping
operations in their important work, and has much to
offer in terms of cutting-edge technology, the protection
of civilians and the protection of peacekeepers. Israel
is working together with the United Nations in the
area of medical assistance to provide first-aid training
to United Nations staff in order to standardize that
important skill set throughout all United Nations
peacekeeping missions. Israel has also recently offered
to assist the United Nations in reducing the ecological
footprint of its peacekeeping operations by introducing
Israeli technology in the areas of renewable energy
and water treatment. We look forward to continuing
to engageme and cooperate with United Nations
peackeeping missions in those areas and others. While
we recognize the important role that peacekeeping
missions play in maintaining international peace and
security, we pray that one day our children will live in
a world in which peacekeeping missions will no longer
be needed.

