Mr. Spatafora (Italy): I wish, first of all, to
warmly thank Mr. Guehenno for his clear and
comprehensive briefing on the Secretary-General's
report on the situation in Afghanistan (S/2008/159). I
also wish to acknowledge the participation and the
presence in the Chamber of the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Eide. We
are pleased by the appointment of such a skilled and
experienced diplomat to this challenging position. The
higher the expectations - and they are very high -
the stronger the support he will need when he embarks
on this trip. I wish to assure Mr. Eide that he can count
on us.

I would also like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having convened this meeting in the broadest possible
format. The long list of speakers before us bears
witness to the keen interest of large sectors of the
membership in this issue. It also shows how many
friends Afghanistan can rely on in its quest for peace,
stability and development. It is a privilege for us to
have the opportunity to listen to our partners from all
constituencies before embarking on the final stages of
our work on the resolution to extend the mandate of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA).

We feel humbled by the responsibility to steer
this process in the Council, but also feel that we have a
guiding star role here. I think that this guiding star idea
has been captured by the Secretary-General in
paragraph 64 of the report when he writes,

"The guiding principle of UNAMA actiVities is to
reinforce Afghan leadership and strengthen
international cohesion in support of that
leadership." (S/2008/159, para. 64)

It has to be clear for all of us that the
strengthening of the leadership and the ownership of
the Afghan Government is at stake. We will proceed by
giving the utmost consideration to all the views that
will be expressed during this debate. First of all, we
have noted the Secretary-General's report and how
Under-Secretary-General Guehenno has said very
clearly that the mandate is appropriate and sufficiently
broad and that it has to be sharpened. I think that we
must do exactly that, keeping in mind the six areas
highlighted in the Secretary-General's report.

Italy fully aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the Permanent Representative of Slovenia
on behalf of the European Union. I will only add a few
complementary comments on the challenges that the
Council is confronted with.

The main message that we can draw from the
Secretary-General's report is that the international
community needs to stay the course in Afghanistan,
possibly with evolving modalities but certainly with
unchanged determination. That is what our Afghan
friends are asking for. The enemies of peace and
stability have shown that they are ready to exploit any
sign of weakness and fill all gaps that might be created.
We pay tribute once again to the victims of all
nationalities caused by the senseless violence that
Afghanistan is enduring. Such a death toll can not be
tolerated and must be stopped.

The mutual trust between Afghanistan and its
partners is indispensable if we are to counter the
opposition forces. The international community must
trust the good faith of the Afghan authorities, and the
Afghan authorities, on their part, must trust the genuine
and unbiased commitment of its partners. Such
background of trust must be maintained, even when it
is felt by either side that mistakes are made. These
misperceptions - because this is what it is all about;
perceptions and misperceptions - cannot infringe on
the commonality of our strategic goals; they can be
corrected through dialogue and mutual understanding.
The scary alternative would be the unravelling of our
partnership and the success of our common enemies.

We remain convinced that the United Nations
must continue to determinedly play its irreplaceable
role as guarantor of our partnership and mutual trust.
Our common commitment is nurtured by the
legitimacy that only the United Nations can provide.
5
With this in mind, we cannot ask the United Nations to
do more in terms of coordination, without a genuine
commitment by every international actor to comply
with the United Nations coordination role. It should
also be clear that such an essential role must continue
to go hand in hand with the continuous reinforcement,
I repeat, of Afghan ownership and leadership in all
sectors, ranging from security to the provision of
services to the population. The Joint Coordinating and
Monitoring Board (JCMB) embodies, as the Under-
Secretary-General Guehenno has so appropriately
emphasized, those guiding principles by its very nature
and composition.

In our View, therefore, it should be further
strengthened and enabled to fulfil its monitoring
functions in accordance with the Afghanistan Compact.
Such functions become all the more relevant as our
common efforts to meet the benchmarks and timelines
of the Compact face increasing challenges.

The report of the Secretary-General and today's
briefing forcefully describe the nature of the challenges
in the areas of security, governance, electoral
preparation, socio-economic development, regional
cooperation, human rights protection, gender equality,
humanitarian assistance and counter-narcotics. The
European Union Presidency will address in detail our
shared concerns in these areas.

I will simply add that, against this background, it
is certainly appropriate to organize a high-level,
midterm review of the implementation of the Compact,
in order to refocus and reprioritize our efforts. We are
therefore ready to offer our contribution to the
preparation of the international conference that France
has so aptly and kindly offered to host.

Similar events are instrumental in giving a fresh
impetus to initiatives on the ground, as proven by the
effective follow-up to last year's Rome Conference on
Justice and Rule of Law in Afghanistan. We have noted
with particular satisfaction, in this regard, the good
news contained in the report of the Secretary-General
on the launch of the National Justice Programme.

Finally, I would like to address the fundamental
question of the contribution to be provided by the
Security Council. Sometimes the developments on the
ground appear to frustrate the requests and
expectations expressed around this table, but this does
not mean that the Council should shy away from
fulfilling its role as enshrined in the Charter. It is our

responsibility to give focused and clear guidance to
UNAMA for it is in this area we can indeed make a
difference.

In this regard, we believe that the
recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General, in paragraphs 63 and 64, offer a
unique opportunity to provide such guidance. Given
the wide-ranging nature of the mandate, we agree that
there is a need to further build on the indications
contained in resolution 1746 (2007) in order to identify
a number of priority actions for the UNAMA, as we
were saying before.

We are ready to work with Security Council
members in order to translate into consensual language
the well-advised recommendations of the Secretary-
General, while carefully considering, at the same time,
any additional suggestions. We are sure that the vision
and the skills of the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Eide, will be instrumental to
effectively implement the refocused and prioritized
mandate.

Let me also reiterate once again that UNAMA
needs from the international community not only clear
guidance, but also all the political support and the
resources required to fulfil its challenging tasks.

We also believe that the resolution to be adopted
should seriously address a number of horizontal issues
included on the Council's agenda, namely, the
protection of civilians, children in armed conflict and
women, peace and security, all which are dramatically
relevant in the case of Afghanistan. Our general
discussions on these issues must be followed up when
discussing country-specific mandates.

I will conclude by reiterating Italy's unwavering
commitment to assist our Afghan friends, as long as
requested, in their endeavour to enjoy peace, stability
and development after decades of conflict. I believe
that our continued contributions, contributions dating
from 2001, along with the sacrifice of our troops,
validate such commitment more eloquently than any
words.

