Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union and the
countries aligning themselves with this statement.

We warmly welcome the presence of the Foreign
Minister of Timor-Leste, His Excellency Mr. Jose
Ramos-Horta.

Since the public meeting of the Security Council
held on 23 January (see S/PV.5351), the United
Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL) has
continued to provide its invaluable support to Timor-
Leste. We commend UNOTIL, under the leadership of
the Special Representative, Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa,
for its commitment and contribution. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
and analytical end-of-mandate report on UNOTIL
(S/2006/251).

The European Union is pleased to note that the
process of handing over critical State functions to the
Timorese authorities has gained speed. In particular,
we recognize the taking over of the functions of the
treasury, the first indictment for corruption by the
Office of the Inspector-General and the beginning of
the work of the Office of the Provedor for Human
Rights and Justice as welcome and important steps in
Timor-Leste's progress towards full assumption of
State functions. We view the assumption of all
functions related to the question of international
technical advisers by the Capacity Development
Coordination Unit of the Office of the Prime Minister,
which is expected to take place after 20 May, in a
similar light.

Recent events surrounding the dispute within the
defence forces of Timor-Leste and the ensuing riots in
Dili show that the situation remains volatile. Continued
attention needs to be paid to the security sector. The
current reports concerning a mass exodus from Dili
caused by rumours about impending renewed fighting
are a worrying sign of the current security climate in
Timor-Leste. The European Union shares the
Secretary-General's assessment that the national police
is still a nascent force lacking sufficient experience and
resources. Even though the overall performance of the
Border Patrol Unit has improved, it still faces a number
of considerable challenges, operating under even more
difficult circumstances than the police. Furthermore,
there are worrying reports about an increase in the
number of cases of mistreatment and intimidation by
the police and an inadequate or slow response to such
allegations. Much remains to be done. The
accountability and transparency of State institutions
must be ensured.

The 2007 presidential and parliamentary elections
will be at the centre of the consolidation of democracy
in Timor-Leste. Transparency, inclusiveness and, above
all, fairness in the election process will be decisive for
the legitimacy of the results. We welcome the
beginning of a dialogue on the electoral process. We
hope that the planned wide consultations on the draft
electoral laws will secure the broadest possible support
for the electoral framework. The organization of the
2007 elections and the provision of a safe environment
represent formidable challenges for Timor-Leste.
International support for the election process will be
crucial for its success.

It is in that context of consolidating the
remarkable achievements in reconstruction and State-
building and in laying the groundwork for successful
elections in 2007 that the question of the future United
Nations presence after the end of UNOTIL's mandate
arises. The European Union believes that the Secretary-
General's recommendations for the establishment of a
small integrated United Nations office for one year are
a good starting point for discussion on the nature of a
follow-on mission, taking into account the wishes
expressed in that regard by the Government of Timor-
Leste and the requirements set out by the Security
Council in the letter by its President of 28 March
(S/2006/196). The establishment of a follow-on
mission would go a long way in securing the
international community's considerable investment
over the past seven years and in supporting the
Government at this critical juncture.

We are convinced that justice regarding the
serious human rights violations in Timor-Leste in 1999
must be achieved. We welcome the Secretary-General's
intention to submit soon a report on justice and
reconciliation for Timor-Leste with a practically
feasible approach, including possible support by the
United Nations. We are pleased to note that the
preservation of copies of the records of the serious
crimes process has been ensured as a basis for possible
future steps to ensure accountability for the crimes of
1999.

The long-term success of Timor-Leste will, to a
large degree, depend on success in the economic field.
The determined efforts by Timor-Leste to attain the
Millennium Development Goals warrant the continued
full support of the country's multilateral and bilateral
partners. We welcome the efforts to enhance the
coordination and integration of the activities of
UNOTIL and the United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes. We support the envisaged elaboration of a
common country programme, while taking account of
the contributions of bilateral donors and the
international financial institutions.

Since 1999, the European Union and its member
States have been reliable development partners for
Timor-Leste, contributing more than €700 million,
which amounts to half of all the external assistance
provided. Today, we would like to congratulate Timor-
Leste on completing the ratification process of the
Cotonou Agreement, by which it became a full member
of the African, Caribbean and Pacific group of
countries. Timor-Leste is now a member of a political
and economic body in which 14 other Pacific island
countries, 63 African and Caribbean countries and 25
European Union members cooperate politically,
economically and in the field of trade. That new
partnership reinforces the central cooperation objective
of poverty reduction and adds a political dimension
and an innovative trade relationship. Timor-Leste will
now benefit from EU support in the framework of the
European Development Fund.

As previous speakers have said, Timor-Leste is a
true success story of United Nations peacebuilding.
There are, of course, considerable challenges ahead.
But the European Union is convinced that Timor-Leste
will continue to consolidate peace and democracy and
will make progress towards long-term sustainable
development. The European Union will continue to
play its part in that successful development effort.

