The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance with
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure,
I invite the representative of Timor-Leste to participate
in this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

After consultations among Council members, I
have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf.

"As the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT) completes its mandate on
31 December 2012, the Security Council commends
the remarkable achievements made by Timor-Leste
over the past decade, as well as its contribution to
important regional and global initiatives.

"The Security Council welcomes the
considerable progress that has been made by Timor-
Leste in strengthening the institutional and human
resources capacities of State institutions, including
in the security, justice and governance sectors,
which play crucial roles in safeguarding stability
and promoting democracy.

"The Security Council also welcomes the
successful presidential and parliamentary elections
conducted in 2012, which have helped to consolidate
Timor-Leste's democratic institutions.

"The Security Council recognizes the
important contribution of UNMIT to promoting
peace, stability and development in Timor-Leste,
including through its work to strengthen the
capacity of the Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste.
The Security Council expresses its appreciation for
the efforts of the Mission and the United Nations
country team, under the leadership of the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General.

"The Security Council applauds the
Government and all Timorese for their steadfast
collaboration and partnership with UNMIT and the
United Nations country team since the Mission's
establishment, including during the jointly owned
transition process, which reinforced, inter alia, the
principle of national ownership to the benefit of all
and could serve as a model of joint collaboration for
other missions.

"The Security Council notes that the
Government of Timor-Leste has indicated that the
United Nations will continue to be an important
partner in the new phase of the development of the
nation. The Security Council therefore welcomes
the ongoing engagement of the Secretary-General
and the United Nations country team in support of
the efforts of the Government of Timor-Leste as it
seeks to preserve and consolidate its peacebuilding
gains and in order to promote sustainable
development, the rule of law and the strengthening
of human rights institutions, as well as tackle other
remaining challenges.

"The Security Council underscores the
importance of continued support to Timor-Leste
as it embarks on the next stage of its development,
beyond UNMIT, and notes the willingness of
the United Nations and bilateral and multilateral
partners to continue, as requested by the Timorese
authorities, to play a significant role in this regard."

This statement will be issued as document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2012/27.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.15 am.
