The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity.

First of all, we thank Mr. Hedi Annabi for his very
useful briefing.

Taking into account the main focus of the report of the
Secretary-General, Bangladesh believes that it is important
that the implementation of the Dayton Peace Accord be
accelerated. The Council needs to give strong signals to all
key actors to extend their full support for the
implementation of the Peace Accord.

We commend the newly elected Government of
Croatia, which has pledged to cooperate with Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We hope that it will put its pledge into
action through its influence on the Bosnian Croat
authorities to redouble their efforts for the peace process.

Similarly, we hope that the Bosnian Serb authorities
will also be given support by the Serbs to this end.
Support of these two crucial actors is critical if the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH)
is to make considerable headway in its mandate.

The key role in the engagement of the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina is in the
areas of police restructuring and the consolidation of the
judicial system. A yardstick for the success of United
Nations involvement will be the amount of progress that
can be made in these areas. We welcome the important
initiatives launched recently, but note from the Secretary-
General' 5 report that progress is dependent on overcoming
the political and other factors causing obstruction and
delays. We hope that, with the willingness and
cooperation of all parties concerned, considerable
headway in the efforts of UNMIBH will be possible in
the coming days.

In conclusion, Bangladesh would like to emphasize
that the international community, particularly those having
influence in the region, has to redouble efforts to see to
it that the Dayton Accord is speedily and fully
implemented.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I now call on the representative of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to make a statement.

