Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Hedi Annabi for updating us on the
situation in Kosovo. A number of positive
developments have taken place in Kosovo since we last
met in the Council for an open discussion, in July. We
look forward to the report of the Secretary-General, as
just mentioned by Mr. Annabi, and to its introduction
by Special Representative Mr. Bernard Kouchner.

For today's debate we would like to make the
following points. First, regarding municipal elections:
we welcome the announcement by Mr. Bernard
Kouchner that the municipal elections in Kosovo will
be taking place on 28 October, a date set at the
recommendation of the Chairman of the Central
Election Commission and in consultation with the
Interim Administrative Council. The international
community has long been supportive of elections being
held in the fall of this year. We are happy to note that
the projected time-frame is being maintained. The
municipal elections will be the first major step towards
the establishment of duly elected institutions in
Kosovo. We are also encouraged by last month's
signing of the municipal elections law, which resulted
from elaborate discussions with local bodies and
consultations with international organizations.

Secondly, regarding voter registration: we also
welcome the successful end of the registration of
Kosovo's population last month in preparation for the
election. The registration of more than 1 million people
within Kosovo and 150,000 outside is a big step
forward. We regret, however, that the Serbs, numbering
about 100,000, did not register. We emphasize the
importance of the full participation of all ethnic
communities in local administration in order to restore
peace and security.

My third point concerns the security situation. A
number of violent incidents have erupted in different
parts of Kosovo, including Mitrovica, in recent months.
The leaders in Kosovo must do more to end the cycle
of violence. We call on the Kosovars, irrespective of
their ethnic origin, to unite against those who disrupt
peace and are a threat to peaceful coexistence and to
building a safe, democratic, multi-ethnic future for
Kosovo.

We support the ongoing efforts of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) to improve security, the rule of law and the
return of refugees and internally displaced persons. As
the elections near, UNMIK should concentrate more on
security aspects. We are concerned that political
violence could increase with the approach of the
elections. Every step should be taken to hold the
election campaigns in a secure and peaceful manner.

Fourthly, as regards the judiciary: the judiciary in
Kosovo has been dysfunctional for quite some time,
mainly on account of a lack ofjudges. We welcome the
appointment earlier this month by the head of UNMIK
of an additional 139 judges and prosecutors and 309
lay judges to the Supreme Court, to the district,
municipal and minor offences courts in different
regions of Kosovo, and to the commercial court in
Pristina.

The effective functioning of the judicial system is
an essential prerequisite of law enforcement. The
additional judges and prosecutors will definitely
contribute to the re-establishment of the rule of law in
Kosovo.

My fifth point concerns missing persons and
detainees. We have made references to this continuing
problem a number of times in the Council. The
relatives of the persons who remain captive suffer
constant agony and anxiety. We saw this ourselves
during the Visit of the Security Council mission to
Kosovo last April. The continuation of this situation
breeds mistrust and undermines attempts to build inter-
ethnic harmony. The sooner the problem of the missing
persons is brought to a satisfactory end, the better will
be the outlook for a return to peace. In this context, we
reiterate our support for the appointment of a special
envoy of the Secretary-General for missing persons and
detainees.

My sixth point relates to economic activity. The
pace of economic activity in Kosovo needs to be
boosted. That would provide jobs for the Kosovars and
would allow them to look forward to the future rather
than being haunted by the misery of the past. We are
encouraged by the launching of road repair programme
in Kosovo by the European Agency for Reconstruction.
Improving the infrastructure is definitely the most
important investment for stimulating economic activity.

In conclusion, I would like to say that restoration
of peace in a region which has been a hot spot of
conflict and inter-ethnic Violence for a long time is a
task of immense complexity. The notable progress
made recently shows that it is not impossible. Let me
conclude by paying a special tribute to the untiring
efforts of Mr. Bernard Kouchner in leading the efforts
of the United Nations to establish peace and security
and to further reconciliation in Kosovo. We commend
him for carrying out a formidable job most admirably.

