Mr. Cappagli (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, I would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Vieira de
Mello, for the full briefing he has just given us. I would
also like to thank Ambassador Andjaba for his
excellent and skilful leadership of the Council's
mission.

As a member of the Security Council mission that
recently visited East Timor and Indonesia, I was able to
see the excellent work done by Mr. Vieira de Mello and
his team. The progress made in implementing
resolution 1272 (1999) has been remarkable. On behalf
of Argentina, I would therefore like once again to
extend our thanks and appreciation to all the personnel
of the United Nations Transitional Administration in
East Timor (UNTAET) and to the tireless and dynamic
Transitional Administrator for East Timor, who have
been the driving force behind the amazing
transformation in East Timor this year.

There is no need to enumerate the excellent
initiatives taken and the achievements made by
UNTAET. The Special Representative of the Secretary-
General described some of them in his briefing.
Similarly, the report of the Security Council mission
also highlights some of those accomplishments.
Nevertheless, we must not underestimate the current
problems in areas such as reconstruction and the
administration ofjustice, nor should we underestimate
the magnitude of the challenges that will arise pending
the full independence of the territory. The commitment
of the international community to East Timor must
therefore remain unchanged and continue even beyond
independence.

The Security Council mission was also able to
assess the implementation of resolution 1319 (2000),
particularly in the western part of the island of Timor.
In this connection, we attach particular priority to three
issues: resolving the refugee problem; improving
security conditions, especially with regard to disarming
and dissolving militias; and establishing a process that
will culminate in bringing to justice those responsible
for the violence in East Timor in 1999 and those
responsible for the recent murder of international
humanitarian personnel working for UNTAET.

We consider the recent adoption of human rights
legislation and the proposal to establish ad hoc courts
in that regard to be significant advances. While we
welcome the initiatives taken by the Government of
Indonesia in those three areas, we also believe that
additional measures, such as those described in the
mission's report, should be taken. In that connection,
we trust that the positive approach taken by the
authorities in Jakarta will be reflected in concrete
action that will yield definitive solutions to the
problems I have mentioned.

We are pleased that the Joint Border Commission
will meet next Thursday in Jakarta; that there was
recently a return to East Timor of a significant number
of refugees, including former Indonesian Armed Forces
(TNI) reservists from East Timor (MILSAS); and that
there was a decision by the Indonesian authorities to
solve the problem of pensions.

