Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Let me begin by thanking
the presidency of China for convening this open debate.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.

Indonesia associates itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran on behalf of Non-Aligned Movement.

Indonesia takes note with grave concern the
increasing incidents of terrorist attack in many places
throughout the world. The attacks are a grim reminder
for us to redouble our global efforts to defeat terrorism.
In that regard, the role of the United Nations, including
the Security Council, in our multilateral cooperation
to counter terrorism becomes more and more critical.
Along that line, Indonesia underlines the importance of
the forthcoming biennial review of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in June. The
review will present a good opportunity to take stock
of what we have and have not done in implementing
the Strategy, which has been in place for 10 years,
as well as to discuss the Plan of Action to Prevent
Violent Extremism, as mandated by General Assembly
resolution 70/254. Indonesia hopes that the review
will lead to a more solid and effective framework of
cooperation in addressing global terrorism.

To take advantage ofthis discussion, I would like to
highlight three pertinent points, as follows.

First, security measures alone will not suffice in
defeating terrorism. The Security Council must further
contribute to making the United Nations system's more

robust and coherent and take concrete measures against
terrorism. The Council, for example, must be firm and
united and work harder in conflict management and
resolution, in light of the fact that several terrorist groups
have for years been using conflict areas as safe havens
to build the groups. Prolonged conflicts and injustices
have also been identified as promoting conditions
suitable to the breeding of terrorist motivation.

Secondly, working with States to increase their
capacity remains an essential role that the Council
should continue to focus on through the Counter-
Terrorism Committee and its Executive Directorate.
Capacity-building programmes must be developed
based on the objective needs of respective State. It
is of the utmost importance for the Council, and the
United Nations system, to work with States and
regional organizations, if necessary, in developing and
implementing a comprehensive strategy to counter
terrorism. There is an urgent need to strengthen
mechanisms for the real-time exchange of intelligence
information among Members.

Prevention must also continue to be at the centre of
our strategy. To our understanding, there exist personal
and communal motivations to embrace radicalism
or extremism, and to commit acts of terrorism. All
those motivations are shaped further by a complex
intertwining of political, social and economic
conditions. This unique but intricate dynamic is
sometimes different from one country to another.

In that regard, Indonesia sees the merit of building
networks of civil society organizations from different
parts of the world that focus on sharing information
on local dynamics and their ramifications outside
the country or region, as well as best practices in
addressing them. These networks will complement
the work of Governments in identifying conditions
conducive to terrorism and formulating the necessary
responses. Soft measures in a preventive approach
must be emphasized, such as through education; the
participation of civil society organizations and media,
including social media; and strengthening the roles of
families, women and youth.

The strategy should also appreciate the efficacy of
dialogue in promoting respect and tolerance, and aim at
strengthening the engagement of public and community
leaders, as well as religious and cultural understanding
and approaches. We also must address the increasingly
worrying trends of terrorism, such as the movement of
foreign terrorist fighters to and from conflict areas, the
flow of financial resources of terrorist groups, and the
use of digital technology to spread terrorist narratives
and terrorist recruitment.

Lastly, Indonesia underscores the danger of
associating terrorism with any religion, nationality,
civilization or ethnic group. This careless practice is
not only entirely incorrect, but also creates a larger
problem. It is inconsistent with international standards
and norms as enshrined in various treaties, and runs
counter to our efforts to generate coordinated and
coherent approaches at all levels.

My delegation is very much in agreement with the
assertion made by the Secretary-General at the Geneva
Conference last week, to the effect that the extremists
seek to divide us and to make us turn on each other.
This we must avoid. Terrorism is not the problem or
fault of a single country or a few countries; it is a global
challenge. In the face of the dreadful threat of global
terrorism, our unity is needed more than ever.

