Mr. Konuzin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the presence of the Secretary-
General at this meeting of the Security Council and the
participation of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
Jamaica and the Bahamas.

Moscow shares the international community's
deep concern about the wave of violence and human
rights abuses that has engulfed Haiti along with the
seizure of a number of cities, armed conflict and
widespread turmoil, resulting in great loss of human
life.

We firmly condemn the acts of violence in Haiti.
In the alarming situation that is developing, we call on
all forces in Haitian society to put an end to violence
and to undertake peaceful dialogue in order to
overcome existing differences and problems by
political means, on a democratic, constitutional basis.

We support the efforts of the Organization of
American States (OAS) and the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM), and those of other interested States,
aimed at providing Haitians with the help they need to
normalize the situation. We are prepared to give
constructive consideration to proposals about what else
the United Nations might do in that sphere.

We are gravely concerned about the fact that the
latest developments reveal the deterioration of an
already difficult humanitarian situation in Haiti, with
the people being provided only intermittently with
food, drinking water, fuel and medicine. We View as
unacceptable the actions of those who impede the work
of international humanitarian organizations in Haiti.

Against that backdrop, we greatly appreciate the
endeavours of the staff of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and of the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and
other specialized agencies of the United Nations
system. In the present difficult conditions, they
continue their efforts to ensure delivery of the food and
other humanitarian assistance that is needed in Haiti.
We call on all parties concerned to cooperate actively
with them to ensure the safety and security of
humanitarian personnel and of United Nations
facilities.
Clearly, Haiti also has a great need for ongoing
comprehensive economic, financial and technical
assistance from the international community so that it
can get back on its feet and overcome the protracted
social and economic crisis that has engulfed it. As in
many other developing nations, stabilization in Haiti
ultimately depends on remedying the extremely
difficult social and economic situation that, in the end,
is the source of all its other ills.

