Mr. Isnomo (Indonesia): To begin with, my
delegation wishes to extend its heartfelt condolences
to Pakistan for the deaths of over 100 innocent people
as a result of the terror attack that took place today in
Peshawar. We join previous speakers in expressing our
fullest sympathy for the Victims and their bereaved
families and relatives.

Mr. President, we would like to express our
appreciation to you for organizing this debate on the
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations, in particular the African
Union (AU), in the maintenance of international peace
and security. My delegation also thanks the Secretary-
General and the African Union High Representative for
Mali and the Sahel for their respective briefings.

Indonesia associates itself with the statement made
by the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

The contributions of regional and subregional
organizations to the maintenance of international peace
and security, particularly in promoting dialogue and
confidence-building, conflict prevention, peacebuilding
and peacekeeping, cannot be overemphasized. Indeed,
it has been established that regional organizations, on
account of their knowledge of their regions, are well
positioned to understand the root causes of many
conflicts closer to home and therefore to influence their
prevention or resolution.

As a founding member of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations, Indonesia has historically and
vigorously promoted the significant role of regional and
subregional organizations, as they can fundamentally
generate security and prosperity in their respective
regions. Indonesia has also strongly promoted
interregional activities between Southeast Asia and
other regions.

In that spirit, during Indonesia's presidency of
the Council in November 2007, we initiated an open
debate on this particular agenda item, resulting in
a presidential statement (S/PRST/2007/42). That
presidential statement clearly stated, inter alia, the
importance of promoting the identification and
further development of modalities that enhance the
contribution of regional and subregional organizations
to the work of the Council in maintaining international
peace and security, in accordance with Chapter VIII
of the United Nations Charter. It further stressed the
need to strengthen the interaction between the Security
Council and regional organizations.

Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations, particularly
between the United Nations and the African Union,
is a major multilateral commitment that we must all
continue to encourage, support and contribute to.
Indonesia supports the enhancement of cooperation
and partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union, in whose region most of the conflicts
have occurred. We are encouraged by the fact that
various important initiatives and activities have been
developed between the United Nations and the AU.
Moreover, the deepening of United Nations-African
Union partnerships has also been intensely increased
in the field of peacekeeping operations and special
political missions. We agree, however, that this
partnership continues to be challenged by several
elements, as stated in the concept note for today's
meeting (S/2014/879, annex).

It is our view that cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations will be viable and
sustained when it is developed on the basis of equal
partnership. That is also the case with respect to
cooperation between the United Nations and the AU
in the context of peacekeeping operations and political
missions. We therefore welcome the adoption today
of presidential statement S/PRST/2014/27, which
reiterates, inter alia, the importance of establishing
a more effective relationship between the Security
Council and the African Union Peace and Security
Council, as well as formulating cohesive positions and
strategies in dealing with conflict situations in Africa.

Indonesia agrees with the Council's emphasis
on encouraging the United Nations and the African
Union to take concrete steps to strengthen their
relationships and develop a more effective partnership.
We also highlight the need to enhance the United
Nations-AU predeployment joint planning and joint
mission assessment processes to promote common
understanding and increase effectiveness of United
Nations peacekeeping operations. We also agree
that there is a need to enhance the predictability,
sustainability and flexibility of financing regional
organizations, including the African Union, when they
undertake peacekeeping under a Security Council
mandate.

In order to guarantee closer collaboration between
the United Nations and regional organizations, it
is pertinent to ensure that there not only is a legal
foundation for such cooperation, but also mutual trust
and confidence, which can be built and sustained
through regular dialogues as well as comprehensive
sharing and exchange of knowledge and expertise.
My delegation also encourages the enhancement
of regular discussions between the Secretariat and
regional organizations in order to better identify and
understand the needs of both entities in ensuring
effective joint responses to security challenges. There
is no doubt that the increase in the number of United
Nations peacekeeping operations and the growing role
played by regional organizations make it particularly
necessary for the United Nations to step up its efforts
and measures in creating mechanisms for effective
cooperation with such organizations.

To conclude, Indonesia wishes to reiterate its support
for the enhancement of cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations.
We believe that the unique potential and capabilities of
regional organizations in regional confidence-building
and preventive diplomacy should be further utilized to
establish lasting peace and security.

