Mr. Ramirez Carreflo (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): First and foremost,
we would like to thank the High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Valentin Inzko, for his
briefing and to reiterate our full support for his work
on the matter.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela once
again reaffirms its full support and respect for
the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Given that
that is one of the fundamental elements of the Charter
of the United Nations, we believe that it is a principle
that cannot be violated under any circumstances. We
believe that the international community must continue
to support the implementation of the 1995 General
Framework Agreement for Peace as a way to contribute
to a peaceful solution of the differences among the
stakeholders concerned.

Today more than ever, at a moment when tensions
in the region have increased, we wish to highlight the
importance of unequivocal and clear compliance with
the Dayton Agreement. Moreover, we must bear in
mind that it is incumbent upon the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to lead the efforts related to the future of
their country. As part of that process, the ethnic groups
must continue to work together in the framework of
dialogue that fosters peace, human rights, cooperation
and social and economic development, setting aside,
once and for all, the tensions and confrontations that
tormented the region during the 1990s.
In that context, and on the basis of the principles of
impartiality, transparency and constructive work, the
High Representative must continue to play a supporting
role to promote such efforts and find common ground
among the parties through dialogue based on balanced
and prudent approaches and with a constructive
vision, leaving behind the criticisms that exacerbate
animosities, and in which the opinions and views of all
stakeholders are reflected.

The European Union's multinational stabilization
force in Bosnia and Herzegovina has carried out its
work within the framework of the mandate assigned
to it, in collaboration with the authorities, to ensure a
safe environment for all the ethnic communities. Our
country therefore welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2315 (2016), which renews its mandate for a
further 12 months.

With regard to the fight against terrorism, it is worth
mentioning that the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2016/501)refers to the issue of foreign terrorist
fighters and the sentences given to several citizens
accused of joining or attempting to join the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant. Our country supports
the efforts aimed at preventing and fighting terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations, which must be
accompanied by effective strategies against social
exclusion, poverty, violence and intolerant ideologies,
with a view to curbing radicalization, with particular
emphasis on young people. Furthermore, we must work
to effectively implement Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions that prohibit the financing,
training and transfer of weapons to such groups.

With regard to fighting impunity, we support
the work of the International Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia, which was set up to try those responsible
for the violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law that were committed during the armed
conflict in the territories of the former Yugoslavia.
Moreover, we reiterate our solidarity with, and support
for, Bosnia and Herzegovina for its firm commitment
to foster peace and stability in the country for the
benefit of its citizens.We are convinced that respect
for sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence is essential to achieving those objectives.

Finally, we call on all parties to redouble their
efforts to build confidence and work together in the
framework of international law, which is necessary for
a just and lasting solution that redounds to the benefit
of the parties and the entire region.

