Mr. Begec (Turkey): Allow me to express
our appreciation to the Uruguayan presidency for
organizing this timely debate. I would also like to thank
the Deputy Secretary-General for his statement, as well
as the Vice-President of the International Committee of
the Red Cross and the Oxfam representative for their
briefings.

Today we are confronted with increasingly complex
challenges against international peace and security.
The elimination of conflicts stands out as a challenge
that the international community still needs to deliver
on 70 years after the foundation of the United Nations.
The severe effects of conflicts on civilians constitute a
significant problem that needs addressing, Furthermore,
our world is now facing the largest humanitarian crisis
since the Second World War, with an increasing influx
of displaced populations due to protracted conflicts
and a lack of security and stability. In line with the
road map established by the Secretary-General, the
first-ever World Humanitarian Summit, to be held in
Istanbul in May, will be a major opportunity to address
the ongoing humanitarian challenges.

The most recent report of the Secretary-General
on the issue of protecting civilians in armed conflict
highlights that
"shocking levels of brutality and casual disregard
for human life and dignity have come to characterize
most of today's armed conflicts." (S/2015/453, para. 4)

Civilians are killed and maimed in targeted or
indiscriminate attacks. They are tortured, abducted,
forcibly displaced and denied access to their most
fundamental needs. Attacks on schools and hospitals
further exacerbate the already dire state of education
and health services in situations of armed conflict.
Furthermore, the unspeakable and inhumane attacks
of all terrorist groups, including Daesh and Boko
Haram, against civilians are beyond the realm of any
condemnation.

Against that background, we welcome the attention
paid to the issue of the protection of civilians at the
Security Council. Over the past 16 years, the Security
Council has established a sound normative framework
on the issue, with the adoption of various resolutions
and presidential statements. Moreover, the Security
Council's thematic mandates on children and armed
conflict and on conflict-related sexual violence have
provided opportunities to address the challenge from a
more focused perspective.

Furthermore, last year's reports - namely, the
report on the implementaiton of resolution 1325 (2000),
the report of the High-level Independent Panel on
United Nations Peace Operations (see S/2015/446)
and the report of the United Nations Peacebuilding
Architecture (see S/2015/490) - provided us with
some important recommendations. Throughout those
processes, the need to further strengthen the role of
peacekeeping operations and the United Nations efforts
for conflict prevention were highlighted. Despite the
establishment of that robust framework, the situation
of civilians on the ground, unfortunately, continues to
deteriorate. That is why we should devote more energy
and more resources, as necessary, if we are sincere in
living up to our commitments to protect civilians.

Armed conflicts create immense humanitarian
needs. In fact, 80 per cent ofthe humanitarian crises we
face today are caused or triggered by conflicts, which
generate massive suffering. Focusing on prevention or
addressing the root causes of conflicts should be at the
top of our agenda. Nevertheless, humanitarian action
should go hand-in-hand with efforts to resolve conflicts.
I would like to reiterate once again our commitment to
strengthening respect for international humanitarian
law.

As a concrete example, just across our border,
the crisis in Syria has caused the world's largest
humanitarian tragedy. United Nations assessments
indicate that the humanitarian situation inside Syria
continues to deteriorate, which has an immense impact
on civilians. As a neighbour of Syria, Turkey is deeply
and widely affected by that tragedy. According to the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, Turkey is the largest refugee-hosting country
in the world today. Turkey has been a safe refuge for
over 2.5 million Syrians who had to flee Syria for their
lives. It has also ensured that cross-border humanitarian
assistance reaches millions of people in dire need on
the Syrian side of the border, in conformity with its
international obligations and in support of the United
Nations.

The tragic reports of starvation and death emerging
from the besieged town of Madaya, Syria, are the latest
blatant examples of violations of the most fundamental
principles of international humanitarian law. As the
Secretary-General has underscored,

"[t]he town has been the victim of deliberate
starvation. Let me be clear: the use of food as a
weapon of war is a war crime."

Not only those in Madaya, but Syrians who are currently
living under siege-like conditions elsewhere should
be granted unhindered humanitarian access. Those
responsible for horrific crimes should be reminded
that impunity will not prevail, and they will be held
accountable for their actions.

Finally, I would like to draw the Council's attention
to the recent air strikes targeting civilians in Syria. Such
attacks not only undermine the prospects of a political
solution, but also exacerbate the scourge of terrorism in
the region and beyond.

