Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I would like to thank South
Africa for organizing this open debate.

As this is the first time that Brazil participates in
a Security Council meeting since the end of our
mandate, let me reiterate our pledge to continue to
cooperate with Member States in advancing the role of
the Security Council in the maintenance of
international peace and security.

Our warmest wishes for success go to Guatemala,
Azerbaijan, Togo, Morocco and Pakistan.

As the Secretary-General's report (S/2011/634)
underlines, the observance of basic rule of law
principles by the international community a
prerequisite for lasting peace, security and
development. That becomes even more important in
conflict and post-conflict contexts, in which societies
must rebuild the social fabric torn apart by armed
conflict. We welcome the inclusion by the Security
Council of the rule of law and transitional justice
dimension in its decisions.

The protection of civilians, grave violations in
armed conflict of children's rights, and women's
justice and security needs have become an important
part of the Council's concerns and mandates.

Brazil has consistently emphasized the structural
importance of the ad hoc Tribunals for the former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda in the fight against impunity
and in the quest for judicial accountability.

We also acknowledge the fundamental role of the
International Criminal Court (ICC). International
criminal accountability is a responsibility of the
international community as a whole. The increased
willingness of the Council to resort to the ICC should
be accompanied by increased responsibility of the
whole United Nations membership in providing the
necessary means to the Court. Brazil supports the
integrity of the Rome Statute and firmly opposes the
exemption from the jurisdiction of the ICC of certain
categories of individuals. We regret that exemptions
were introduced in Security Council resolutions. The
notion of selective international criminal accountability
is foreign to the values we uphold when advocating for
the cause ofjustice.

We are also in favour of increased use of the
International Court of Justice to clarify legal elements
of international disputes as a means to strengthen the
Council's actions. The President of the International
Court of Justice, in his briefing to the Council last
October, spoke about the parallel and complementary
roles of the Court and the Security Council. Indeed, the
work of the International Court of Justice helps to
uphold the primacy of law in international affairs. The
Council could further explore the advisory role of the
World Court.

The Secretary-General aptly mentions the
mutually reinforcing character of transitional justice
processes and institutional capacity-building.
Non-judicial mechanisms such as truth commissions,

commissions of inquiry, reparations and institutional
reform are valuable instruments to foster peacebuilding
and democratic governance. In developing those
initiatives, the United Nations and the Council should
be attentive, first and foremost, to the importance of
national ownership, as has already been highlighted
here. Social change will take root only if it is
nationally owned by all relevant national actors. That
implies close attention to the specificities of a given
country.

Secondly, women and children must be placed at
the centre of transitional justice mechanisms. We
commend the Council for its efforts in combating
impunity for sexual and gender-based Violence, in
promoting gender-responsive justice reforms and in
securing women's participation in all aspects of post-
conflict recovery.

Thirdly, when addressing the root causes of
conflict, the United Nations must continue to
strengthen the linkages between the rule of law and
economic and social development. Brazil warmly
welcomed the General Assembly's decision to
strengthen the Rule of Law Unit in the Executive
Office of the Secretary-General.

The multidimensional challenges of the current
peace and security agenda require that the Security
Council set the example. Accountability is crucial to
the rule of law at the national level. It should also be a
major concern with regard to the implementation of
Security Council decisions. Those elements form part
of a discussion that Brazil is promoting on
responsibility while protecting. By reinforcing
accountability with regard to the implementation of its
own decisions, the Security Council reaffirms its
commitment to the rule of law as a prerequisite to
long-lasting peace and security. The ideal of an
international order based on the rule of law should
always be a source of inspiration for all of us.

