The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Algeria, Australia, Brazil, Canada,
Chile, Cuba, Djibouti, Egypt, Finland, Guatemala,
India, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel,
Jordan, Lebanon, Malaysia, Morocco, New Zealand,
Norway, Saudi Arabia, the Sudan, Switzerland, the
Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey and the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela in which they request to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Gillerman
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table; the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter dated
19 July 2006 from the Charge d'affaires ad interim of
the Permanent Observer Mission of Palestine to the
United Nations, which will be issued as document
S/2006/553, and which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Council that will be held on
Friday, 21 July 2006, regarding the situation in
the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting in accordance with the
2
provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mansour
(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.


The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Vijay Nambiar,
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General.

It is so decided.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Jan
Egeland, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator.

It is so decided.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 20 July 2006 from the
representative of Qatar, in which he requests that an
invitation be extended, pursuant to rule 39 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure, to His
Excellency Mr. Yahya Mahmassani, Permanent
Observer of the League of Arab States to the United
Nations, to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda.

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Mr.
Yahya Mahmassani.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Mahmassani to take the seat reserved
for him at the side of the Council Chamber.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 21 July 2006 from His
Excellency Mr. Paul Badji, representative of Senegal,
in which he requests to be invited, in his capacity as
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda.
06-43869
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Paul
Badji.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Badji to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

I wish to draw the attention of members of the
Council to letters from Israel, contained in documents
S/2006/436, 463, 485, 502 and 515; letters from
Palestine, contained in documents S/2006/443, 460,
479, 489, 499, 501, 519, 538 and 554; a letter from the
Syrian Arab Republic, contained in document
S/2006/459; letters from the Islamic Republic of Iran,
contained in documents S/2006/475, 546 and 549;
letters from Malaysia, contained in documents
S/2006/491 and 548; a letter from Finland, contained in
document S/2006/511; and letters from Lebanon,
contained in documents S/2006/518, 522, 528, 529,
531, 536, 537 and 550.

I would like to welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Kofi Annan.

I shall now give the floor to Mr. Vijay Nambiar,
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General.


