Mr. Kubis: The Security Council is meeting today
with the results of Afghanistan's presidential elections
due to be announced within days but with no political
agreement yet in place on a Government of national
unity. Discussions in recent weeks stretching long
into the night have brought the teams of Mr. Abdullah
Abdullah and Mr. Ghani Ahmadzai close, but some
vital issues still have to be bridged. The protracted
deadlock deepens a crisis that has already taken a heavy
political, security and economic toll on Afghanistan.
That is the reason that I am once again briefing the
Security Council from Kabul, where my presence has
been requested in support of efforts to achieve a final
breakthrough.

There is quite simply no better way forward than
a Government of national unity led by an elected
President as certified by the Independent Election
Commission, working in partnership with the new
Chief Executive Officer. All other options are either
accompanied by heavy risks or undermine the
country's constitutional framework. Both candidates
have previously committed to the concept of such an
administration and to abiding by the election results,
subject to an audit process. Agreeing on the modalities
for such an administration has proved more difficult.
The remaining sticking points include how best to
communicate the results when supporters on both sides
genuinely believe that it is their candidate who won and
will accept no other result, regardless of the audit. If
there is no agreement by the time of the certification of
the results, new dynamics will be set in motion with the
potential to trigger further uncertainty, even the risk of
conflict. The time remaining is now short, and by that I
mean one or two days.

A legitimate, broadly accepted political transition
is needed in order to provide a robust mandate for
tackling the country's many challenges, which include
a burgeoning insurgency, a looming cash crunch
and an expanding illicit economy, in particular one
powered by narcotics. Finally, it is vital to ensure that
the international community has a credible partner for
sustained commitments of assistance in what remains
one of the most aid-dependent countries in the world.

It was at the request of the two candidates and the
Afghan authorities that the United Nations accepted a
major role in support of the electoral process, even as the
process itselfhas remained the responsibility of Afghan
election management bodies. The United Nations
accepted that role as a responsibility derived from the
very core of its mandate to support conflict prevention.
It was always understood that the Organization ran
the risk of damaging its reputation. It was, however, a
necessary risk. I want to underscore my appreciation
for the massive support from across the United Nations
family, especially the United Nations Development
Programme and the Department for Political Affairs.

With the Election Commission's final adjudication
session last Sunday, the supervisory role of the United
Nations came to an end. Our assessment was that the
audit provided a comprehensive and credible check on
the electoral process, one that was unprecedented in

scale, depth and scrutiny. Significant levels of fraud
were detected and eliminated. What was also confirmed
was that millions of women and men had turned out to
vote on 14 June in support of a peaceful, democratic
transfer of power. They have eagerly waited for months
for a long overdue agreement between the two leaders
on establishing a Government of national unity. The
serious and growing challenges that Afghanistan faces
require swift agreement on, and the establishment of,
such a Government.

A tactical shift in the insurgency and the
involvement of international terrorist groups have
given rise to attempts not merely to disrupt but also to
exert control over territory across the country. With
ground engagement emerging as the leading cause
of civilian casualties, civilians continue to bear the
brunt of the conflict. In the first eight months of 2014,
civilian casualties rose by 15 per cent as compared with
the same period in 2013, with 2,312 killed and 4,533
injured. Overall, 16 per cent more women and 24 per
cent more children were killed and injured owing to
armed conflict than during the same period in 2013.

Afghan police and army personnel are responding
courageously, and I honour all the brave Afghans killed
or wounded in the service of their country. Afghanistan's
security institutions will require sustained support.
A new administration will need to rapidly conclude
mutually agreed legal frameworks to ensure the
necessary planning and preparations for continuity
in international assistance. The confirmation of the
intent to provide ongoing support for Afghan security
institutions at the NATO Summit in Wales was most
welcome.

With the conclusion of the International Security
Assistance Force mission at the end of this year, I would
also like to take this opportunity to recognize all of
the nations that have contributed, as well as to pay my
respects to those individuals who have been wounded
and to the families of those killed.

The prolonged deadlock has also contributed to
economic stagnation in Afghanistan, with a dramatic
drop in Government revenues. A new administration
will need to undertake urgent action to avert a cash
crisis and ensure the continued smooth functioning of
Government. That will require emergency support from
donors. Yet it is longer-term economic and governance
reforms that will be vital to improving revenues and
addressing the increasing fiscal gap.

In reframing and refreshing the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework ahead of the London
ministerial conference planned for November, the
robust engagement of the new administration will
be central to ensuring clear Afghan priorities and
direction. I would urge a greater focus on a pro-poor,
rights-based agenda, including policies that address
a burgeoning and largely untaught youth population.
Mainstreaming efforts to undercut the ever-expanding
narcotics economy will also be vital, including through
intensified regional efforts.

Throughout my tenure I have placed particular
emphasis on promoting regional cooperation centred on
Afghanistan. Enhancing economic, infrastructure and
security ties within the neighbourhood will be critical
for Afghanistan's future sustainability and stability in
a stable and prosperous region. I welcome the strong
lead that China has shown in its preparations for the
Tianjin Conference on the Istanbul Process/Heart of
Asia initiatiave.

One of Afghanistan's most important and
challenging relationships is with Pakistan. Under a
new administration a reset may be possible in moving
forward on the shared challenges of border management,
economic development and counter-terrorism. A new
administration may also be a chance to breathe fresh
life into Afghan-led reconciliation efforts, for which
the United Nations stands ready to assist.

This will be my last meeting here as Head of
the Mission. It has been a challenging time to be in
Afghanistan, but it has been my privilege to serve. The
confidence placed in the United Nations by all parties,
domestic and international, even in the midst of current
events and in thinking about future peace efforts, has
been inspiring. Going forward, the United Nations
will continue to have an important role to play in both
Afghanistan and the broader region.

I would like to thank all of the members of the
Council for the support and guidance provided to me,
as well as by other Member States and international
partners, since I started in January 2012.

I also want to recognize my colleagues from the
United Nations, in particular from the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, for their hard work,
robust counsel and genuine commitment. I especially
remember my close adviser, Vadim Nazarov, and others
who have paid with their lives.
The aim of all our work and that which keeps
us committed in an often challenging, difficult and
dangerous environment is to support the aspirations of
the Afghan people for a more prosperous and secure
future in a stable and united Afghanistan. It is those
wishes that must be foremost at this critical juncture.

