Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to express
appreciation to you, Mr. President, and your team for
all the hard work throughout the course of this month
in effectively and successfully steering the activities
of the Security Council. I speak on behalf of the three
African members of the Council, and would like to
focus on the African issues that we have dealt with
under your presidency.

The briefing that the Council received on 10 August
(see S/PV.8()22) from Deputy Secretary-General
Amina Mohammed on her recent visit to Nigeria and
the Democratic Republic of Congo - accompanied
by the Executive Director of UN-Women, the United
Nations Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and the
African Union Special Envoy on Women, Peace and
Security - was very important in drawing attention
to the plight of women and girls in conflict situations.
That joint United Nations-African Union high-level
mission, which was the first of its kind, also served to
highlight the cooperation and partnership between the
two organizations in advancing the women and peace
and security agenda in Africa. We believe that agenda
should be welcomed and encouraged.

We also attach importance to the oral briefing
that we received on 15 August 2017 (see S/PV.8024)
on the activities undertaken over the past two months
since the adoption of resolution 2359 (2017) in order
to operationalize the Group of Five for the Sahel Joint
Force. The funding gap will be a major challenge, as it
hampers the full operationalization of the Joint Force.
We believe that there is an urgent need to mobilize
international support for the Force. No doubt, the
multi-faceted challenges facing the Sahel region can
be effectively addressed only through a comprehensive
strategy that encompasses security, governance,
development, human rights and humanitarian issues.
Therefore, the rapid and effective implementation of
the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, as
called for in resolution 2359 (2017), is absolutely critical.
We hope that countries of the region, in cooperation
with bilateral and multilateral partners, will redouble
their efforts in implementing the Strategy.

In the light of the current situation in the Democratic
Republic of Congo, we appreciate the briefing (see S/PV.8026) we received from the Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1533 (2004) on the activities of the Committee. We
commend the work that the Committee and its Group of
Experts have been doing in trying to address the many
difficult and complex challenges facing the Democratic
Republic of Congo and to promote peace and stability
in the country.

In that regard, the continuous efforts being made to
consult with the authorities of the Democratic Republic
of Congo and the countries of the region, including
in the context of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region, as well as to forge greater synergy
and cooperation with other regional and international
partners, is commendable. The presence of the families
of Ms. Zaida Catalan and Mr. Michael Sharp, the two
members of the Group of Experts who were mercilessly
killed while on duty, was the highlight of the meeting.
The Council's support and follow-up for the efforts to
bring the perpetrators of that heinous crime to justice
are absolutely important.

In that regard, the briefing on the report of the
Board of Inquiry that was tasked with establishing the
facts in relation to the tragic killing of Zaida Catalan
and Michael Sharp was very useful. We hope that its
recommendations will be looked at seriously so as to
avoid similar tragic incidents in the future. We wish
to reiterate that everything should be done and no
stone should be left unturned to get to the bottom of
who the criminals might be and how that dastardly
and unspeakable crime was committed. We must also
stress how critical it is to work in partnership with
the Government to achieve the desired result, and we
express our confidence that the Government will do
whatever it takes to help bring the killers to justice.

The security and humanitarian situation in South
Sudan remains a source of concern, and the briefing
we received on 24 August was not encouraging (see S/PV.8030). All parties should cease hostilities and stop
obstructions to humanitarian operations. It is important
that the Council supported the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) high-level
Revitalization Forum as the clearest path towards peace
in South Sudan, urged all parties to fully participate
in the Forum and called on IGAD to convene it
expeditiously.

The continued political impasse in Guinea-Bissau
and the lack of progress on the implementation of the
Conakry Agreement is another source of concern.
We welcome the recent visit by the Chair of Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
2048 (2012) and by the Peacebuilding Commission
country-specific configuration on Guinea-Bissau,
including their series of engagements with various
stakeholders. There is an urgent need to overcome
the impasse to create conditions for the holding of
legislative and presidential elections in 2018 and 2019,
respectively.

The centrality of the Conakry Agreement to
sustain peace, security and development in Guinea-
Bissau cannot be overemphasized. We reiterate our
call for all stakeholders in Guinea-Bissau to respect
and comply with the Conakry Agreement in addressing
the differences in the challenges facing the country.
We believe that the concerted efforts by the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the
African Union, the Community ofPortuguese-speaking
Countries, the European Union and the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau also
remain indispensable in finding a durable solution to
the political crisis in Guinea-Bissau. We also underline
the significant role played by the ECOWAS Mission in
Guinea-Bissau in ensuring the stability of the country.
We urge all international partners to continue to
extend the necessary support to address the financial
difficulties faced by the Mission in continuing to
implement its mandate.

The holding of a peaceful and credible election
will mark a significant milestone for Liberia in
its democratic transition to peacebuilding and
peacebuilding endeavours. The briefing we received
on the preparations for the upcoming presidential and
legislative elections in Liberia, in line with resolution
2333 (2016), was useful for closely following the
developments in the country. We note the start of the
election campaign process and stress the need for
Liberian political parties to remain committed to the
Farmington River Declaration, which they signed on
4 June, in order to facilitate the conducting of peaceful
and Violence-free elections to pave the way for a
successful democratic transition.
We commend the extensive engagement and follow-
up of the Peacebuilding Commission in ensuring the
smooth transition of the United Nations Mission in
Liberia (UNMIL) and developing the capacity of the
Government of Liberia. Moreover, we encourage the
cooperation among UNMIL, ECOWAS, the Manor
River Union, the African Union and other relevant
organizations in supporting the transition. We also
urge international partners to continue to extend the
necessary support to Liberia at such important juncture
in its transition.

With regard to the situation in Libya, we welcome
the appointment of Special Representative of Secretary-
General, Ghassan Salame. We appreciate his briefing
(see S/PV.8032) on his recent initial consultations with
all Libyan stakeholders. We also commend the work
done by the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) under the leadership
of Ambassador Olof Skoog, as well as the by Panel of
Experts on the monitoring and implementation of the
sanctions regime.

The need to reinvigorate an inclusive political
process under the auspices of the United Nations to
address the contentious issues in the Libyan Political
Agreement is very well recognized. While it is the
primary responsibility of the Libyan actors to achieve
an inclusive and comprehensive political solution, the
continued and coordinated efforts of the neighbouring
countries and regional organizations and the United
Nations remain critical to achieving durable peace
and stability. In that regard, we support the continued
endeavours of the African Union high-level political
committee to foster national reconciliation in Libya.
We also look forward to the upcoming African Union
high-level committee and the quartet meetings in
Brazzaville and New York, respectively, which would
help to further enhance and harmonize international
assistance for the people of Libya.

