Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
We wish to welcome you, Sir, and to thank you for
personally presiding over today's meeting. We would
also like to welcome Secretary-General Kofi Annan
and the foreign ministers who are participating in this
meeting.

Since the Lebanon-Israel conflict broke out on 12
July, China has repeatedly called upon all the parties to
the conflict to practise the utmost restraint, and has
called for the immediate cessation of hostilities so as to
avoid a further escalation of the situation and a greater
humanitarian crisis. It has been nearly a month since
the onset of the bloody Lebanon-Israel conflict, which
has killed or injured thousands of innocent civilians
and forced a million people to flee their homes. In the
conflict, even United Nations peacekeepers have not
been spared.

China condemns the excessive use of force and
attacks on civilians, civilian facilities and United
Nations personnel. We strongly advocate early Security
Council action to achieve an immediate and
comprehensive ceasefire, halt the current conflict,
maintain peace and stability in the Middle East, and
relieve the humanitarian disaster.

After rounds of difficult negotiations by the
parties concerned, the Security Council has finally
reached consensus on the resolution on the conflict in

06-4649]

the Middle East. In the course of consultations, China
repeatedly emphasized that any Security Council
resolution and framework of settlement must respect
and reflect the concerns of all parties involved,
especially the concerns of Lebanon and the Arab
countries. We believe that the resolution before us,
integrating the seven-point proposal of the Lebanese
Government, embodies some important elements,
including its calls for a full cessation of hostilities and
for the Lebanese Government to deploy its armed
forces throughout the South, together with the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), as the
Israeli army withdraws behind the Blue Line.

The resolution also lays out detailed provisions
for the new mandates of UNIFIL. Those provide a
good foundation for future efforts to achieve long-term
political solutions to the Lebanon-Israel issue. We note
that Lebanon, Israel and the Arab countries hold no
objections to the resolution. Given the above
considerations, China voted in favour of resolution
1701 (2006).

The adoption of resolution 1701 (2006) is just the
first step, and the parties concerned face more arduous
tasks. China hopes that the parties will earnestly
implement the resolution and, in particular, assisted by
Secretary-General Annan, reach consensus at an early
date on a comprehensive, lasting and fair framework
for the political settlement of the conflict and restore
local peace and stability as soon as possible. At the
same time, the international community should step up
its urgent humanitarian relief efforts for Lebanon and
help the Lebanese people to rebuild their homeland.

Finally, I take this opportunity to emphasize that,
while focusing attention on the Lebanon-Israel conflict,
the international community should not neglect or
forget the ongoing sufferings of the Palestinian people.
We hope that, with the joint efforts of Israel and the
Arab countries, and on the basis of the relevant United
Nations resolutions and the principle of land for peace,
the Middle East peace process will be revitalized and a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace achieved in the
Middle East at an early date.

