Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming
the presidency of the Council this month. Rwanda is a
friendly country that has made valuable contributions
to peace in Darfur through its participation in the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID).

I would also like to thank Mr. Ladsous for his
briefing and explanations concerning the situation in
Darfur.

I note that Mr. Ladsous' briefing emphasized that
instances of instability were caused by recent outbreaks
of tribal conflict. Council members may be aware that
a few clashes over natural resources took place in the
region in March, leading to the displacement of some
citizens. However, the situation was contained. A few
days after those incidents, a reconciliation meeting
took place between the tribes involved, as did a follow-
up conference to resolve problems relating to internally
displaced persons.

Mr. Ladsous also mentioned that some clashes
took place between the Government and rebel groups,
mainly as a result of the continued attacks carried out
by the Sudan Liberation Army-Minni Minawi. Only
yesterday, Government forces succeeded in taking
control of the headquarters and main base from which
those forces sought to take over Nyala and other areas,
and cut off trade routes.

Two weeks ago, El Tigani Seisi, Chairperson of the
Darfur Regional Authority, visited New York and met
with the Secretary-General and many members of the
Council. He described the positive developments that
have taken place in Darfur since the Darfur Regional
Authority assumed authority and began establishing
its institutions and mechanisms. At those meetings,
he also discussed the arrangements being made for the
donors conference for Darfur that subsequently take
place in Doha. It was a successful meeting, in which all
members of the Council took part. We expect that the
pledges made there will help in the reconstruction and
development of Darfur.

It is very important to note that, now that most of
their activities have been contained by the Sudanese
army, the various rebel groups in Darfur are targeting
civilian areas and cities outside of Darfur. Only two
days ago, they participated in an attack on the city
of Umm Rawaba, which is outside the Darfur region.
Alongside the Sudan People's Liberation Movement
(SPLM)-North, they attacked strategic facilities,
electric power stations and fuel depots, and robbed
markets and banks before fleeing. This confirms that
the remnants of the rebel groups in Darfur are nothing
more than bandits and outlaws without a cause, having
refused to participate in the peace process. They are led
by warlords who have made it clear that they are willing
to target innocent civilians, rob them of their property,
and intimidate and terrify peaceful communities, even
in areas outside Darfur. We must take these facts into
account when considering the situation in Darfur.

The attack launched against UNAMID forces
some time ago further highlighted the shortcomings in
UNAMID's work and performance. When faced with
attack, they surrender their weapons and even their
vehicles quite readily to the rebel forces. This matter
requires careful consideration. Whenever UNAMID
or a group of civilians have been attacked or taken
hostage, we in the Government of the Sudan have made
every effort to locate and prosecute the perpetrators.
However, we hope that UNAMID officials will also
carry out their duties by dealing with any attack on
them by such rebel groups.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/225)
also underscores notable progress in the situation in
Darfur, in particular with regard to implementing
the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. The report
reaffirms that the Government of the Sudan has
completed the transfer of funds to the Darfur Regional
Authority despite the economic difficulties that the
country has recently faced. The last step was the
transfer of $165 million, as set out in paragraph 3 of the
report before the Council.

The Council has also noted the donor conference
on Darfur, at which $3.6 billion was pledged by
participants, including $2 billion by the Government
of the Sudan. That augurs well for the implementation
of the strategy already drawn up by the Darfur Joint
Assessment Mission, comprising the Government of
the Sudan, UNAMID and international partners. In
that connection, I must express my deep gratitude to all
members. The plan sets out a time-bound and detailed
framework for the reconstruction and development
of Darfur. It will take six years to complete. The
beginning has been very promising. We hope that we
will all cooperate in implementing the strategy.

With regard to the justice and accountability
provisions of the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur, the report of the Secretary-General notes in
paragraph 5 that the Special Prosecutor for Darfur
has continued his investigation of violations of human
rights and international law and that on 24 February,
the El Fasher court sentenced six soldiers accused of
killing a community leader in Abu Zereiga to death.
There are now several cases being considered by
the Special Prosecutor, including attacks by militia
on internally displaced persons camps in the area of
Kutum. That proves to us all that there isjustice against
all those found guilty.

In other paragraphs, the report notes that there have
been constraints on UNAMID. I would like to explain
that, as we said earlier, in a very few instances, the
Government prefers that UNAMID does not enter areas
where it might face real threats. On several occasions,
the Council has noted cases and, as Mr. Ladsous
mentioned, several members of UNAMID have been
attacked. Regrettably, in that connection, I would
however like to say, for the benefit of us all, that, when
members of UNAMID face an attack by elements of
rebel groups, they react passively, if not by actually
fleeing from the scene of the attack, leaving behind
their weapons, and sometimes even their vehicles, for
the rebel groups.

As I said a month ago, such an incident took
place when they were escorting a number of civilians
to participate in a conference on internally displaced
persons and faced such an attack. They handed over
all the civilians to rebel groups. They even handed
over a vehicle. I do not know if they also surrendered
some of their weapons. Mr. Ladsous well knows the
details. I mention that incident merely to clarify that
the Government sometimes does not recommend
that UNAMID move into certain areas owing to the
danger there. What further complicates matters is that
UNAMID deploys and does not defend itself when
faced with such an attack.

With regard to visas, owing to the concern of the
Government of the Sudan, I met with Mr. Ladsous
on 7 April, a few days ago. I underscored to him that
a senior committee has been established to review
the visa issue and to expedite their issue. It was set
up under the personal direction of the President.
On 13 March, the committee met representatives of
UNAMID. A total of 644 visas were requested. At the
meeting, the Government authorities issued 412 visas.
That leaves approximately 200 visa applications still
being considered. Such information proves that there is
constructive cooperation between the Government and
UNAMID on the visa issue. In other words, there are
no obstacles to the consideration ofissuing visas.
At the beginning of my statement, I mentioned the
despicable attack on Umm Rawaba, a city in Northern
Kordofan State. In other words, it is outside Darfur.
It was attacked on the morning of Saturday, 27 April.
The perpetrators were the SPLM-North, supported by
other rebel groups. They had 100 armoured vehicles
with them. They destroyed and looted the city, where
there were no members of the Sudanese army. There
were only police officers who were protecting places
in the city such as markets, fuel depots, power plants
and water points. All that infrastructure was destroyed
by the SPLM-North, supported by the forces of Abdul
Wahid and Minni Minawi.

I leave it to Council members' wisdom to uncover
the reasons why Minni Minawi and Abdul Wahid act
in that manner. They have become true warlords. They
have robbed eight banks and pillaged all the markets
and shops in that city. They have destroyed the water
plant and the electric power station. Are those people
really interested in development and reconstruction in
the Sudan even as they go about intimidating and killing
civilians? They killed 35 unarmed civilian community
leaders in the city of Abu Kershola. That is the kind
of people Minni Minawi, Abdul Wahid and the SPLM-
North forces really are.

Compared to the events of 2003, the remaining
conflict in Darfur is based on the narrowest ofrationales.
We hope that the Council will help us to end the conflict
by enforcing sanctions against the groups that reject
peace because, when faced with constraints imposed by
the army, those groups have turned to attacking other
areas and killing civilians. I hope that when Council
members move to the consultation room to discuss this
matter, they will focus strongly on upholding standards
by enforcing sanctions against movements that reject
peace, or by whatever other means they deem advisable.

