Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): I, too,
would like to welcome back to the Council President
Tadic' and Foreign Minister Hyseni, as well as to thank
them for sharing their perspectives on the region with
us today. I would also like to welcome Special
Representative Zannier and to express our support for
his ongoing work to reconfigure the United Nations
mission in Kosovo in accordance with the report
(S/2008/692) of the Secretary-General of last
November. The United States commends the Special
Representative's dedication and productive cooperation
with other multilateral and bilateral stakeholders in
Kosovo.

As the Secretary-General's latest report
(S/2009/149) indicates, Kosovo continues to expand its
institutional framework under the Constitution
promulgated in June 2008. That Constitution is second
to none in its protection of the rights of all
communities and of cultural heritage. Kosovo has
enacted more than 50 laws to put those constitutional
principles into practice, all of them consistent with the
plan proposed by former United Nations Special Envoy
Marti Ahtisaari, which has served as a blueprint for
Kosovo's developing democracy. Kosovo has
established a foreign ministry, a national security
council and a process to privatize major public firms to
ensure greater accountability and resources. The
United States congratulates the people and Government
of Kosovo on those achievements.

Kosovo's independence is irreversible. Fifty-six
Members of the United Nations, including nine
members of the Security Council, have now recognized
the Republic of Kosovo as an independent State. With
the rise of a truly self-governing Kosovo, UNMIK's
presence has been substantially reduced and the
European Union has stepped forward as Kosovo's
primary international adviser. The United States
encourages efforts to reduce further UNMIK's presence
in Kosovo in the light of those changes.

We welcome the important role of the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), and
note the encouraging progress report that it has
provided. We are particularly pleased that EULEX
police and court officials have deployed and been
accepted throughout Kosovo and that the Mission is on
track to reach its full operational capacity. The Kosovo
Government, of course, has the primary responsibility
for the rule of law, but we welcome EULEX's efforts to
assist the Government in exercising those functions.
We all share a common goal - to see the rule of law
throughout the territory of Kosovo strengthened and
upheld in a uniform, transparent and professional
manner.

For Kosovo's multi-ethnic democracy to succeed
fully, the cooperation and active participation of the
country's Serbs are simply essential. We hope that
EULEX will continue to discuss practical issues -
police, justice and customs - with the representatives
of Kosovo's Serb community, the Government of
Serbia and the Government of Kosovo. We welcome
the statements by Belgrade authorities of their
readiness to cooperate with EULEX and to continue
their dialogue with the European Union.

We note with regret, however, the continuing
support of the Government of Serbia for parallel
structures in Kosovo. We urge the Belgrade authorities
to encourage full interaction between Kosovo's Serb
and Albanian communities, in particular by allowing
Serb police to return to their positions in the multi-
ethnic Kosovo police force.

Security is important, and my Government
condones the continued efforts of NATO in Kosovo
both through its peacekeeping force, KFOR, and its
assistance in launching the Kosovo Security Force.
That new force, with a mandate to handle civilian
protection, emergency response and removal of
explosive ordinance, is open to all Kosovo's ethnic
communities. NATO's supervision of the Force will
help to ensure that it conducts itself according to the
highest standards worthy of a democratic, multi-ethnic
and civilian-controlled security institution.

President Tadic' referred to the period March to
June 1999, when NATO countries felt obliged to take
action. The International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia recently issued a 2,900-page
decision with findings regarding that period. The
decision has detailed findings that the Government of
Yugoslavia engaged in implementing a State policy of
forcing ethnic Albanians out of Kosovo by the
hundreds of thousands, killing some in the process.
That is the legacy of 1999. It will not help Serbia to
overcome the legacy by overlooking it.

We have witnessed significant changes in the
Western Balkans over the last 10 years as countries of
the region one by one move closer to taking their place
in the Euro-Atlantic community. In that regard, we
would like to commend President Tadic on the progress
that Serbia has made in advancing reforms and
removing obstacles to its path towards the European
Union. The United States supports Serbia's aspirations
for a European future and offers our continued
cooperation in that regard.

Finally, we know that Kosovo still faces many
challenges and that the region still needs our support.
Stability in South-Eastern Europe is a high priority for
the United States. We will continue to work with
Kosovo, Serbia and other countries in the region to
promote lasting peace and prosperity and to enhance
the European and Euro- Atlantic prospects.

