Mr. Heusgen (Germany): It is a pleasure to speak
before you today, Madam President, and I thank you
for presiding over today's meeting. I also thank the
briefers, whose presence here sitting alongside us
and each other I see as a symbol, not only of the close
cooperation between the African Union (AU) and the
United Nations, but also of the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000).

To have two women leaders here is wonderful, and
in that respect we are already seeing the implementation
of resolution 2493 (2019), which we adopted yesterday.
While that is of course an ongoing process, the joint
trips to Africa with the Deputy Secretary-General
that Ms. Mohammed mentioned in her statement are a
very positive sign. I would like to thank both women
and the United Nations Office to the African Union
in Addis Ababa and the African Union for preparing
and conducting last week's field trip, which was very
well organized and extremely useful. Cooperation of
this kind between the Security Council and the African
Union Peace and Security Council is very important, as
we saw last week. From my perspective it could become
even more concrete, maybe sometimes a bit less formal
and more focused on joint analysis, joint action and
joint solutions.

As the briefers said, the cooperation between the
African Union and the United Nations must cover the
whole conflict cycle, from prevention through mitigation
and mediation to post-conflict reconstruction. In that
context, I would like to highlight two entities that have
not yet been mentioned, the Peacebuilding Commission
and the Peacebuilding Fund. We encourage all countries
affected by conflict to make use of those institutions.

As a member of the European Union I will be
forgiven for also mentioning the cooperation that takes
place between the European Union and the African
Union, as well as trilaterally with the United Nations.
What happens in Africa matters to Europe, and Vice
versa. We are one another's closest neighbours and
therefore this cooperation is very important. We support
bilateral and trilateral cooperation between the African
Union, the United Nations and the European Union at
the strategic, political and tactical levels.

I do not wish to go into the situations of specific
countries, but I will say that I share the positive
assessment of cooperation in many conflict situations
that was given by both briefers with regard to
Madagascar, the Central African Republic, the Sudan,
Somalia and the Sahel. With regard to the Sahel, I would
refer to what Ambassador De Riviere has just said on
the German-French cooperation initiative, as well
as on United Nations assistance for peace operations
mandated by the Security Council and led by the AU. I
think that we need to work harder in that area.

Turning to cooperation in general, I wish to come
back to something that both briefers mentioned. It
is important that we work together in considering
conflicts to ensure that the root causes are properly
addressed. We must do so by ensuring respect for
the rule of law and human rights and that adequate
services are rendered to the population. I was struck
by the fact that both briefers also referred to climate
change and security as a root cause of conflict. As
Ms. Mohammed mentioned, climate insecurity leads to
intercommunal conflicts, which is also something that
must be addressed.

With regard to our trip to South Sudan last
week, Germany maintains, of course, the same
position - as does everyone around this table - on the
full implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan, with regard to the transitional Government,
elections, the Constitution and a constitutional court.
Both the President and the leader of the opposition must
place their people's well-being before their own. It is
absolutely necessary that the people suffering there,
whom we saw with our own eyes, finally benefit from
a better solution.

On the situation in Libya, I would once again like
to underline how important the participation of women
in this peace process is. Ms. Mohammed highlighted
the need for the African Union to be more involved.
Again, I can only highlight that the African Union is
fully involved with the European Union and the League
of Arab States, which also plays an important role,
in the Berlin process. We can confirm that, from our
perspective, the African Union plays a key role and
that we can reach a solution only if all players involved
act together and prevent the situation from further
deteriorating. As Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya, I
once again make a plea for the arms shipping into Libya
to stop.

