Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the presence of Mr. Nasser Judeh, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Jordan, to preside over today's
open debate. I thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for his briefing. China also listened carefully to the
statements made by the representatives of Israel and
Palestine.

The question of Palestine has always been a core
issue ofthe situation in the Middle East. It has remained
unresolved for a long time, which has not only brought
severe suffering to the Palestinian people but also made
it impossible to achieve peace between Palestine and
Israel, much less peace and stability in the Middle East.
Establishing an independent State of Palestine and the

peaceful coexistence of Palestine and Israel are the
only way forward and also an important guarantee for
achieving long-term peace and stability in the Middle
East.

China has always maintained that the parties
concerned should adhere to the relevant United
Nations resolutions, the principle of land for peace,
the Arab Peace Initiative and the road map for peace
in the Middle East, and, on this basis and through
political negotiations, establish an independent State
of Palestine, with full sovereignty based on the 1967
borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital.

China supports the ongoing Palestinian-Israeli
peace talks, which are at a critical juncture. If they do
not forge ahead, they will suffer a setback. Palestine and
Israel should recognize each other's right to exist and
accommodate the other's reasonable concerns. This is
indispensable for the progress of any negotiations. We
sincerely hope that Palestine and Israel will seize this
opportunity, seek common ground and demonstrate
good will so as to promptly find a definitive solution
and promote early substantive progress in the peace
talks.

China is opposed to Israeli settlement activities
in East Jerusalem, the West Bank and other occupied
Palestinian territories. In the current circumstances,
an end to settlement activities and violence against
innocent civilians, as well as the full lifting of the
blockade against the Gaza Strip, are of critical
importance to maintaining an environment conducive
to the peace talks.

The General Assembly has designated 2014 the
International Year of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People. With the ongoing turbulence in the Middle
East, the international community should proceed
on the basis of the overall goal of maintaining peace
and stability in the Middle East, strengthen the sense
of urgency in seeking a solution to the Palestinian-
Israeli question, and enhance efforts to encourage the
relevant parties to achieve peace through talks. China
hopes that the Quartet will take concrete measures in
that regard. We support the Security Council in playing
a greater role in finding a solution to the Palestinian-
Israeli question.

China has always attached great importance to
the question of the Middle East and is committed to
promoting the peace process. In May 2013, for the first
time ever, China received simultaneous visits from
Palestinian and Israeli leaders. President Xi Jinping
put forward a four-point proposal for a solution to the
Palestinian question, fully demonstrating the Chinese
Government's sincerity and positive attitude in
promoting peace in the Middle East. In December 2013,
Chinese Minister for Foreign Affairs Wang Yi visited
Palestine and Israel and further encouraged both parties
to achieve peace through talks. China will continue to
follow the four-point proposal put forward by President
Xi Jinping, work hard to promote peace talks between
Palestinians and Israelis, and play a greater role so as to
make it due contribution to achieving a comprehensive,
just and lasting peace in the Middle East.

China has closely followed the situation in Syria.
Developments over the past three years have fully
demonstrated that military means will not settle the
question of Syria. Political settlement through dialogue
and negotiation is the only correct choice and is also
the object of international consensus. It is also, more
importantly, the direction that all the parties must
follow in the future.

We welcome and support the second Geneva
Conference on Syria, to be held on 22 January in
Switzerland. Yesterday, Chinese Minister for Foreign
Affairs Wang Yi put forward a five-point proposal
for a political solution to the question of Syria. First,
the Syrian issue must be resolved through political
means. Secondly, the future of Syria must be decided
by its own people. Thirdly, an inclusive political
transition process must be promoted. Fourthly, national
reconciliation and unity must be achieved in Syria.
Fifthly, humanitarian assistance must be delivered in
Syria and its neighbouring countries.

The second Geneva Conference on Syria will mark
the beginning of dialogue and negotiations, which
should be an ongoing process. We hope that all the
parties in Syria will work with the future of the nation
and the overall interests of the entire Syrian people in
mind, demonstrate political will, seize the opportunity,
come to the negotiating table and seek common ground
so as to find a solution that meets national needs and
takes into consideration the interests of all ofthe parties.

The international community should firmly
uphold the Charter of the United Nations and the basic
norms guiding international relations; commit itself
to maintaining the sovereignty, independence, unity
and territorial integrity of Syria; respect the will and
choice of the Syrian people; adopt a just, balanced
and impartial attitude; play a constructive role in
promoting peace talks; create favourable conditions
for the political transition; and support the efforts of
the Secretary-General and Mr. Brahimi, Joint Special
Representative of the United Nations and the League
of Arab States for Syria, so as to maintain and fully
leverage the United Nations leading role in good offices
and mediation.

