Mr. Kolby (Norway): Norway would like to
reiterate its support for the work done by the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK), led by Special Representative Haekkerup,
and the Kosovo Force (KFOR), led by General Skiaker,
to implement Security Council resolution 1244 (1999).
However, the international community, as well as local
leaders, must intensify their efforts to create conditions
for a multi-ethnic, peaceful and democratic Kosovo for
all. Serbs and other non-Albanians in the province have
seen few signs of improvement with regard to the
security situation, possibilities for return and the
resolution of missing persons cases.

Successful elections in November will depend on
an improvement of the security situation, especially for
non-Albanians. This is necessary in order to ensure the
widest possible participation in the elections. We trust
that UNMIK will do everything in its power to
facilitate meaningful minority participation.
Furthermore, we expect the leaders of the Kosovo
Albanians to cooperate fully in these undertakings.
Their readiness to assume responsibility in the period
prior to the elections will indicate their readiness to
assume responsibilities also following the elections.

At the same time, we count on Serb leaders in
Belgrade, as well as in Kosovo, to show support for
UNMIK's endeavours to implement Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999). In this respect, we welcome the
positive attitude of President Kostunica regarding
Kosovo Serb participation in civil registration. We
stress the importance of continued cooperation between
UNMIK and Belgrade in this process and we welcome
the appointment of Serb Deputy Prime Minister Covic
as state coordinator for Kosovo. The international
community expects the authorities in Belgrade to
encourage Kosovo Serb participation in the elections.

Creating security and conditions for the return of
all refugees and internally displaced persons to Kosovo
must also be given priority. The United Nations and
KFOR cannot do this alone. Kosovar leaders should
demonstrate increased political will to establish a
multi-ethnic society which is ready for meaningful
self-rule in accordance with Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999). There seems to be scope for
improvement in the efforts of the representatives of the
international community to determine the fate of the
many missing Serbs in Kosovo. However, Kosovo
Albanians and their leaders ought to be far more
cooperative in order to facilitate these efforts.

Norway welcomes the extradition of the former
President of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,
Slobodan Milosevic, to the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia in The Hague. This
is yet another sign that the democratic authorities in
Belgrade are working systematically and are
determined to settle the accounts of the country's
recent past and to bring Yugoslavia back to normal
international cooperation. This we welcome.

I wish to say a few words on the Macedonian
crisis. The Macedonian crisis cannot be resolved
militarily. Sustainable peace will require a political
solution. The political leadership needs to take great
responsibility for the peace process. This requires
increased willingness to compromise. Experience to
date shows a great need for continued international
engagement. The close cooperation between the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and the European
Union is very positive. It is of Vital importance that the
international community speak with one voice. NATO'S
decision to respond positively to President Trajkovski's
request for assistance in the monitoring and
disarmament process will, hopefully, facilitate the
political dialogue.

