Mr. Baja (Philippines): My delegation welcomes
this initiative to hold a joint open briefing by the
Chairpersons of the three Committees of the Security
Council dealing with the issue of counter-terrorism,
and we thank them for their informative briefings.

We share the view that global counter-terrorism
efforts will be more effective if the efforts of these
subsidiary bodies in pursuing their specific mandates
profit from the enhanced cooperation among them.

In recognition of such synergy, resolution 1566
(2004) specifically called on these bodies to enhance
cooperation with one another. I am particularly
gratified that this call is being seriously heeded, as the
work of the working group established pursuant to
resolution 1566 (2004) will benefit from the wealth of
experience of those three Committees.

As Chairman of that working group, I would like
to acknowledge with warm appreciation the offers of
cooperation by Ambassadors Mayoral, Loj and Motoc
to the working group.

Allow me also to take this opportunity to express
my delegation's appreciation for the exemplary work
of the previous Chairmen of the Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1373 (2001); to offer my delegation's full cooperation
to the new Chairpersons, Ambassadors Mayoral and
Loj, respectively; and to reiterate our support to
Ambassador Motoc, Chairman of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).

My delegation also pays tribute to the respective
groups of experts that assist the Committees in their
work. The expertise and objective perspective they
bring to the consideration of the national reports
submitted to the Committees are invaluable to the work
of the Committees in drawing conclusions on how to
make global counter-terrorism efforts more effective.

There is a lot to be learned from the sanctions
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and
associated individuals and entities, as it is the
Committee with the longest lifespan. Starting with
resolution 1267 (1999), the sanctions regime directed
at that time against the Taliban has undergone
subsequent fine-tuning in response to the evolution of
the modus operandi of Taliban and Al-Qaida terrorists.

Terrorist operations continue to evolve, and
terrorist groups continue to mutate. Now Al-Qaida
functions like a venture capital firm, providing
funding, contacts and advice to many groups or
individuals throughout the world. Such groups and
individuals act in the style of Al-Qaida and follow its
precepts and methods, but are only very loosely part of
Al-Qaida.

My delegation looks forward to the negotiations
on a new draft resolution to respond to this
phenomenon. However, in drawing up the new draft
resolution, it is also important to bear in mind not only
reactive responses for more effective measures against
those changes in modus operandi, but also the need to
be more proactive and to examine the root causes of
terrorism. Examining and addressing those root causes
could have longer-term effects.

We welcome the adoption of the fifteenth work
programme of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC), under the able chairmanship of Ambassador
Loj. In that regard, given that the effectiveness of the
Committee in performing its mandate of assessing the
compliance of Member States with the requirements of
resolution 1373 (2001) depends, to a great extent, upon
the full organization of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee's Executive Directorate (CTED), which we
hope can be completed as soon as possible.

The CTC also needs to explore other creative
means by which to monitor compliance with resolution
1373 (2001) as it contends with "report fatigue" and
the lack of expertise and capacity of some Member
States to respond to highly technical questions. With
respect to report fatigue, it is useful for the three
Committees to exchange and share information and
study the possibility of creating a common reports
database. Common information requested by different
resolutions can be identified and obtained from a report
already submitted by a Member State. That could limit
the repetition of questions to which States are required
to respond.

My delegation is pleased that the much-awaited
substantive consideration of national reports by the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) has commenced. We are all aware that
resolution 1540 (2004) has given the Committee a two-
year mandate within which to determine how Member
States comply with the requirements of the resolution.
Fulfilling the mandate of resolution 1540 (2004) to
monitor the global effort to prevent nuclear, biological
and chemical materials that can be used as weapons
from falling into the hands of non-State actors to be
used for the purposes of terrorism is important, but it
could be complicated. In that regard, we hope the vital
element of technical assistance provided for in
resolution 1540 (2004) will be facilitated by the
Committee, led by its dynamic Chairman, Ambassador
Motoc, as soon as possible, in order to maximize its
usefulness for Member States that need such
assistance. In that way, the global capacity to prevent
nuclear, biological and chemical weapons and their
means of delivery from falling into the hands of non-
State actors to be used for the purposes of terrorism
could be enhanced. That is true as well with regard to
the facilitation of technical assistance by the CTC in a
wider counter-terrorism perspective.

Various aspects of the war on terrorism have had
some significant success. Continued international
cooperation among intelligence organizations and
increased national security budgets have made it harder
for terrorists to successfully organize and execute
attacks or to move their funds across borders to finance
those attacks. However, if countries are to win the war
on terror, they must deny terrorists the support of local
populations. They must combine the component of
force with the component of cultural, social and even
emotional aspects. They must limit an all-out war
against the threat of terror in such a way that it does
not violate human rights or seriously impinge upon the
daily lives of citizens.

Finally, my delegation would like to see the
incorporation of the activities of these subsidiary
bodies within the comprehensive counter-terrorism
strategy proposed by the Secretary-General.
