Guatemala would like to express its appreciation to the German presidency of the Security Council for convening today's open high-level video-teleconference of the Security Council on conflict-related sexual violence, and to the Dominican Republic, which, with Germany, jointly chairs the Informal Experts Group on Women, Peace and Security. We also appreciate the briefers' briefings. We are confident that today's discussion is timely because of the added burden caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic. We trust that it will help to identify joint solutions that address effectively the challenges remaining in efforts to protect women and girls and achieve gender equality and peace. Guatemala attaches great importance to this topic. Sexual violence against women during armed conflict has historically been used as an atrocious tactic of war to establish terror. It is a flagrant violation of human rights. It is appalling and unjustifiable that sexual violence is still used to generate income through trafficking and sexual slavery, particularly as compensation for combatants in extremist groups. We strongly condemn all these acts and call for the redoubling of efforts to achieve the full eradication of conflict-related sexual violence. We must highlight the important role that women play in peacebuilding. There is a relevant link between the full and meaningful participation of women in conflict prevention and the efforts aimed at adequate reconciliation, reinsertion and reconstruction in ensuring effectiveness and long-term sustainability. Women must participate on an equal footing in all activities to maintain and promote human rights, development and peace and security. We must increase the representation of women in all local, national, regional and international decision-making processes for conflict prevention and resolution. Gender-related issues need to be considered in all deliberations of the Security Council to achieve sustainable peace. Cognizant of the provisions of resolution 1325 (2000) and mindful of the need to ensure a gender perspective in field missions, Guatemala proudly contributes through the deployment of female staff in areas of armed conflict. In this regard, we stress that the zero-tolerance policy is of high importance for the prevention of violations related to sexual abuse and exploitation. We join the international community in commemorating the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). Furthermore, Guatemala also commemorates the third anniversary of the adoption of its national action plan, which has helped to strengthen its framework on gender issues through a national mechanism whereby 14 Governmental institutions oversee the adequate protection of the rights of women and girls and discuss the challenges that the country continues to face for the protection and promotion of gender equality. We appreciate the assistance provided by UN-Women and the contributions of civil society to fulfil our national action plan. To date, the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court constitutes the most progressive international legal framework on gender crimes. As a State party to the Rome Statute, we highlight that the Statute's provisions should be incorporated into the national context through a comprehensive framework for the international investigation of crimes of sexual and gender-based violence, specific procedures to support victims and witnesses, programmes aimed at raising women's awareness of laws that concern them, allocation of adequate resources to monitor the application of laws that take into account the gender perspective and provisions to compensatevictims. Each of these components has great importance for women's access to justice, and it is the responsibility of each State to implement them. In closing, Guatemala firmly believes that women are agents of change and have an important role to play as facilitators of dialogue and reconciliation in their societies. Through the continued and holistic discussion of this agenda item in the Security Council, we can further contribute to the interdependence of the pillars of peace and security, development and human rights.
