Mr. De Rivero (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I wish to
thank the Assistant Secretary-General for his briefing
on developments in the Middle East last month.

Regarding the statement to be made in this
meeting by the Non-Aligned group, we wish to note
that that statement does not reflect Peru's position,
which is the position of the Quartet concerning the
attitude that should be taken by the new Palestinian
Government.

Peru has fought against terrorism successfully for
13 years. It has that terrible experience, and for that
reason it condemns terrorism energetically and
unequivocally in all its forms and manifestations,
wherever and by whomever committed.

Faithful to these principles, Peru supports the
conditions that were set by the Quartet on 30 January
for the new Palestinian Government formed by Hamas,
requiring it to renounce violence, to recognize Israel and
to undertake the commitments of the previous Palestinian
Authority, including the road map. To date, Hamas has
not responded concerning those crucial Quartet
requirements - which, moreover, have been reflected
in a presidential statement of the Security Council.

This uncertainty hampers the negotiations
between the parties, for one party does not recognize
the other. Thus there can be no direct negotiations, as
required by the Quartet and by the road map. This
blocks the possibility of a negotiated settlement to
bring about the coexistence of two States, Israel and
Palestine, living in peace side by side and within
secure and internationally recognized borders. As was
pointed out in the presidential statement that the
Council adopted on 3 February (S/PRST/2006/6), those
criteria will also be applied by the major donors when
they consider future assistance to be extended to the
new Palestinian Government.

Given those circumstances, we must consider
how best to channel and optimize assistance to the
Palestinian people, especially humanitarian assistance,
including that provided by the United Nations. We
must prevent the Palestinian people living in the
occupied territories from being left defenceless, while
not jeopardizing the principles and resolutions adopted
by the Council relating to counter-terrorism.

There can be no doubt that the current uncertainty
and the lack of negotiations are likely to aggravate the
situation and prompt unilateral acts and violence with
unforeseeable consequences. In order to prevent such a
scenario, a radical change must take place, involving
recognition, negotiations and an end to the occupation
of the territories. The effecting of such a change -
which is an historic responsibility - is now in the
hands of the new administration of the Palestinian
Government and of the newly elected Government of
Israel.

Steadfast adherence on the part of the new
Palestinian Government to the principles set forth by
the Quartet - above all, recognition of Israel, the
renunciation of violence and the acceptance of the
agreements and obligations entered into by the
Palestinian Authority in the past - is essential in order
to begin to remedy the dangerous situation of
uncertainty and to return to the path of negotiations,
which will make it possible for the Palestinian people
to fulfil their aspirations to build their State and to live
in peace.

Peru has always supported, and will continue to
support, unswervingly, the Palestinian people, with a
view to the establishment of a viable and democratic
national State, in keeping with the road map - that is,
through negotiations.

Before concluding, I would like briefly to refer to
the situation in Lebanon and to the resolution that we
adopted yesterday requesting the Secretary-General to
negotiate with the Lebanese Government an agreement
for the creation of an international tribunal to try those
responsible for the terrorist assassination of former
Prime Minister Rafik Hariri and 22 others.

My delegation joined the consensus in supporting
the creation of the tribunal, as requested by the
Government of Lebanon. We also appreciate the
progress made by the International Independent
Investigation Commission in shedding light on that
crime. We trust that, given the cooperation that it has
been offered, the Commission will be able to identify
the perpetrators and conclude the investigation within a
reasonable time period, as set out by Commissioner
Brammertz, speaking in this Chamber.

The results of the investigation carried out by the
International Commission must serve as the basis for
the work of the international tribunal that is to be set
up. We would like to express our preference that, in its
composition and powers, the tribunal have the greatest
possible Lebanese component. We believe that necessity
is in keeping with the provisions of resolution 1559
(2004), which calls for the re-establishment of the
territorial integrity, full sovereignty and total political
independence of Lebanon. The restoration of the rule
of law and the strengthening of a Lebanese judicial
system capable of administrating justice represent,
without question, a pillar of resolution 1559 (2004).
We believe that the tribunal should also provide
encouragement to Lebanon to fully shoulder its
responsibilities.

