Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): By way of
thanking you, Mr. President, allow me point out Japan's
very welcome contribution to the methods of work of
the Security Council, which reflects, Sir, your rigour
and professionalism. As suggested in your thought-
provoking concept note (S/2016/585), I shall focus on
a few points.

My first point is to recognize above all the profound
evolution in the Council towards more transparency,
which France welcomes, for the major debates of
general interest are the business of all. However, that
evolution has taken place at a time of unprecedented
growth in the Council's work. I dwell on that point
to emphasize the need to stabilize the procedures so
that they are appropriate and can be evaluated. France
does not deem it necessary to modify presidential note
S/2010/507 to a great degree - or to risk damaging the
quality and continuity of the work of the Council - at a
time replete with challenges and dangers, which should
serve to mobilize all our diplomatic energies. France
favours a constant legal codification of note 507 while
incorporating the 13 new notes adopted since 2010,
in addition to the one adopted last week, as well as
presidential statements including those of October 2015
and February 2016, adopted, respectively, under the
Spanish and Venezuelan presidencies.

My second point is to emphasize the need for the
Council to monitor and promote accountability for
its actions before all States Members of the United
Nations, in the spirit of Article 24 of the Charter of
the United Nations. To that end, France considers it
necessary to properly entrench the new pattern for
electing non-permanent members in June and draw all
of the consequences, namely, considering the Council's
report to the General Assembly and increasing the
time for newly elected members to become acquainted
with the work of the Council and its subsidiary bodies.
We welcome the recent adoption of the presidential
note on that matter, and we congratulate the Japanese
delegation for its efforts since January. In the same
spirit, we welcome the Council's monthly wrap-up
sessions in an open format in the Council Chamber, or
under an interactive Toledo format as established by
the Spanish presidency in October 2015. Finally, recent
developments with regard to the process for appointing
the Secretary-General and concerning the relationship
between the General Assembly and the Security
Council should be welcomed.

My third point will be dedicated to the issues of
the continuum of peace and conflict prevention. The
Council cannot but profit from the variety of partners
in the informal interactive dialogues and so-called
Arria Formula meetings. That allows it to expand its
sources, to better inform its deliberations and to better
anticipate through the use of informal formats and
early warning so as to act as early as possible. A very
important cultural change has taken place. To give a
recent example, before the adoption of resolution 2295
(2016), on the situation in Mali, in June under the French
presidency of the Council, an informal interactive
dialogue, including the Prime Minister of Mali, was
held instead of consultations, which allowed Council
members to clearly understand the stakes facing
Malians in that important negotiation. This format will
more generally inevitably have a knock-on effect on the
interaction within the Council by encouraging shorter
and more informative interventions, rather than just a
juxtaposition ofstatic statements. In that the Council will
find a considerable source for improving its efficiency.
Reviewing the reporting cycle and publication schedule
could also contribute to such efficiency, as the Council
still faces too many compulsory dates that clutter the
agenda to the detriment of an effective and creative
treatment hot crises. In other words, despite the urgent
situations that remain, the Council must not give in to
the routine of cycles and the illusion of productivism.
We must not fall into the habit of necessarily concluding
every meeting with a long-negotiated text, whose added
value is sometimes limited.

Favouring an innovative format, during our
presidency in March 2015 we organized an open debate
(see S/PV.7414) to more closely consider the issue of
children in armed conflict. Solely in our national
capacity, we limited ourselves to a statement ofthe ideas
exchanged. That statement usefully inspired Malaysia's
consideration as Chair of the Working Group, prior
to the adoption of resolution 2225 (2015) in June. The
same applies to this debate and the summary of the
open debate in October 2015 provided by the Spanish
delegation. Finally, last month, we organized under
our presidency an interactive and relevant ministerial
debate on the protection of civilians, for which there
was no need to adopt a text. Let us vary the formats of
our meetings with a view primarily towards collective
efficacy, not statistics.

Inconclusion-andthisismylastpoint-inclusiveness
is an empty promise if it is not accompanied by a
commitment to multilingualism, which is both an asset
to our thinking and the necessary condition for truly
participatory work. France also believes that e-working
methods and management must not result in, or serve as
a pretext for, diminishing the status accorded to each of
the official languages and working languages.

It was France that, in December 1994, organized
the first Council debate on its working methods (see S/PV.3483). We have come long way since then, but
we still have a long way to go. We are confident that,
under the leadership of Japan, we will continue to move
forward together to make the Council a body that is
both more efficient and more transparent and in the
service of all.

