Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Assistant Secretaries-General
Khaled Khiari and Ursula Mueller for their briefings.
We are also grateful to Ms. Agnes Marcaillou, Director
of the United Nations Mine Action Service, for her
report on the work that is under way in Syria in that area.

On 22 October, the Russian Federation and
the Republic of Turkey signed a memorandum of
understanding on the situation in north-eastern
Syria. We and our Turkish colleagues have already
circulated it, so its content is well known, but we would
nevertheless like to highlight some key provisions in it
that are designed to stabilize the situation. In drafting
it, we assumed that in the interests of maintaining calm,
Syrians and Turks, as neighbours, must work together
and take each other's interests into account. We should
point out that like the Syrians, our Iranian partners
welcomed this agreement.

As we have said repeatedly, we understand Turkey's
desire to take steps to ensure its national security.
However, it is important to realize that the problems
in north-eastern Syria did not emerge yesterday. The
reason for the destabilization of the region east of the
Euphrates is its illegal occupation and the dangerous
experiment in demographic engineering that has been
conducted there in an attempt to pit the Kurdish and
Arab populations against each other.

The Russian-Turkish memorandum, which is of key
significance for the stabilization of Syria - including
on the humanitarian front, which is what we are
discussing today - very clearly affirms respect for
Syria's sovereignty and territorial integrity and rejects
all separatist tendencies on its territory. Arrangements
have been made to end the active military phase of the
Turkish operation and to deploy Syrian border guards
to the border with Turkey. We have long stressed
that it is impossible to address the aspirations of the
Kurds, who are an integral part of Syria's multi-ethnic
society, without restoring Syrian Government control
throughout its national territory and borders. We are
ready to continue to assist the Syrian authorities and
the Kurds in establishing a broad dialogue on the most
pressing issues. At the same time, pursuant to the
memorandum and with the consent of Damascus, we
will help to implement the Adana accord in the current
circumstances and in the interests of resolving both
Turkey and Syria's border security concerns. Russia's
military police are already on the Syrian side of the
border with Turkey. After the withdrawal of the Kurdish
self-defence groups from the area in accordance with
the established timetable, we and the Turkish units will
begin patrolling the 10-kilometre zone together.

We assume that Syria will eventually be free
from the illegal foreign military presence. I reiterate
that robust and long-term stabilization and the overall
resolution of the humanitarian problems in Syria can be
achieved only in conditions that respect its sovereignty
and territorial integrity.

We share the concerns that have been expressed
about the growing threats of terrorism. Another
important element in the memorandum is ensuring that
the fight against counter-terrorism continues and that
the terrorists are prevented from taking advantage of
the current situation to intensify their criminal attacks
and facilitate the escape of those who are being held in
prisons in north-eastern Syria. We urge those who have
maintained and created those prisons not to shift onto
others others the responsibility of preventingjihadists
of all stripes end from scattering throughout the region.

We also caution against dividing them into good
and bad terrorists. Whatever these groups' names 4 the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, Jabhat Al-Nusra,
Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham, and so forth - they all preach
the same ideology of terror, murder and violence. We
once again warn against flirting with any jihadists for
narrow individual ends, providing them with political
cover, financial and material support or, worse, by
portraying them as so-called moderate radicals. We are
seeing such attempts in Idlib, for example, and we will
stamp them out. Speaking of the Idlib de-escalation
zone, we note that the situation there remains uneasy.
The ceasefire instituted on 31 August is holding, but
militants are still violating it regularly and firing on
Syrian Government forces' positions. Civilians and
civilian infrastructure are suffering and Syrian soldiers
are dying, while civilians' grievances are mounting.
They are protesting against the fighters' proliferating
presence, forced recruitment, the deteriorating
humanitarian situation and being threatened with
being shot if they try to leave the de-escalation zone.
The extremists are using violence to disperse peaceful
demonstrations and opening fire on protesters. The
situation inside Idlib will clearly only get worse
and more intense as long as terrorists control the
de-escalation zone.

As guarantor countries of the Astana process,
Russia and Turkey reaffirmed their willingness to
continue working together with Iran in the quest for
a political settlement to the Syrian conflict. We will
support the work of the Constitutional Committee,
which the members of the Astana group have been
working diligently to set up in the past few weeks. Our
view is that the situation on the ground should not be an
obstacle to the long-awaited launch of the Committee,
with the assistance of the United Nations, which should
happen as soon as next week.

The Russian-Turkish memorandum also establishes
the importance of resolving the problem of refugees.
Together with the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic, Russia is taking measures to prepare for the
return of refugees and internally displaced persons
(IDPs). Hundreds of thousands of Syrians have already
returned home. We urge international organizations,
including the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and other humanitarian
bodies to step up their efforts to provide shelter for
returning refugees, activities that unfortunately have
often been artificially delayed.

With the assistance of the Russian Centre for the
Reconciliation of Opposing Sides in the Syrian Arab
Republic and the Syrian Government, together with
the United Nations and the International Committee of
the Red Cross, efforts are continuing to resettle people
from the Rukban camp. We hope that the problem of
refugees and internally displaced persons there will be
resolved as soon as possible. As for the Al-Hol camp, the
situation there continues to be disastrous, owing to the
limited access to it for humanitarian agencies and the
funding shortages, and it has all got even worse since a
significant number of refugees have been moved there
from other camps in the north-east. Half of the people
there are women and children, and we know that there
are jihadists there and they are disseminating jihadist
ideology. It is high time to consider handing over all the
illegally occupied territory to the Syrian authorities,
which would help to resolve the IDP problem.

As Ms. Marcaillou pointed out, mine clearance
continues to be a pressing issue. We welcome the
start of work on it by the United Nations Mine Action
Service in Syria. Russia is involved in the demining
efforts in Syria both in a national capacity and through
its contribution to the Service. In that connection, we
urge all countries that are genuinely concerned about
Syria's humanitarian welfare to join these and other
humanitarian efforts, and to deliver humanitarian
assistance to all Syrians without discrimination,
politicization or preconditions. That includes not only
post-conflict reconstruction projects in the country, but
also, importantly, the lifting of unilateral sanctions in
the interests of normalizing Syrians' lives.

