Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We deeply deplore the fact that a number
of delegations have nonetheless displayed double
standards with regard to our discussion of the issue
of Ukraine in the Security Council. It is obvious to us
that they find the subject unpleasant because it does
not allow them to excuse their proteges in Kyiv. The
gross violation of the rights and freedoms ofmillions of
Ukrainian citizens is already all too clear.

We cannot accept the arguments we have heard
that delegations need more time to study the law.
That is all just weaselling and excuses. The text of the
Ukrainian law exists and has been publicly available
since the autumn of last year. The fact that it threatens
Kyiv's ability to fulfil its obligations under the Minsk
agreements has long been well known, which is why a
number of politicians and international officials have
already spoken about it, including Mr. Zannier, who
was invited to participate here today, and who will
now obviously not be able to express his position on it,
although this issue falls directly under his purview. Not
to mention that the law has already been discussed by
the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe
on 2 May.

It is also extremely odd to hear it claimed that the
Ukrainian law has not been translated into English. I
do not recall similar comments when the Council was
preparing to discuss President Putin's decree granting
Donbas residents Russian passports the very day after
he had signed it. How did those members arrive at their
decision then? Were they criticizing a document that
they had not even read? The question seems to be what
the connection is between language and the Security
Council. It is a direct one. We believed it necessary
to propose the convening of this meeting considering
that the latest move by the Verkhovna Rada and the
outgoing President, Petr Poroshenko, exiting in shame,
directly undermines the spirit and letter of the Minsk
agreements, approved in resolution 2202 (2015). The
fact is that the issue of language rights was one of the
main reasons that led to Ukraine's loss of Crimea and
the conflict in Donbas.

On 15 May, Mr. Poroshenko played yet another
dirty trick on his successor by signing a decree on the
entry into force of the law establishing the status of the
Ukrainian language as the country's national language.
The Verkhovna Rada had enacted it not long before,

rejecting the majority of the amendments aimed at
somehow or other giving a nationalistic masterpiece
a civilized veneer. The law violates Ukraine's own
Constitution and many of the international obligations
whereby Kyiv has to guarantee respect for national
minority rights. This move is hugely worrying for
Ukraine's Russian-speaking citizens, who in the
recent presidential elections categorically rejected the
policies of the now former President of Ukraine, which
artificially incited and cultivated hostility towards
Russia. I would like to point out that practically every
Ukrainian citizen understands and speaks Russian.
According to the most conservative estimates, Russian
is the first and mother tongue for more than a third of
Ukrainians, and the real number is higher than that.
Incidentally, that includes the former and the newly
elected President.

In spite of all the Maidan authorities' efforts
for the past five years to eliminate Russian from the
public and indeed the personal arena, they have not
succeeded. This event was a particularly sensitive one
for the residents of the southern and eastern parts of
the country, who have not given up hope that in living
in a so-called renewed Ukraine they can preserve their
identity, continuing to educate their children in Russian
and communicate in Russian in their daily lives and in
State and municipal bodies. The Ukrainians living in
those regions clearly expressed those hopes through
their votes for Mr. Zelensky, who, unlike the outgoing
Head of State, is not afraid to speak Russian, as he
demonstrated during today's inauguration ceremony.

