Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French): I
would like to begin by thanking you, Mr. President,
and the Guatemalan delegation for organizing today's
debate on Haiti. I also congratulate you for presiding
over the Council for the first time in your country's
history.

(spoke in Spanish)
We congratulate all Guatemalans.
(spoke in French)

We also thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Mariano Fernanez Amunategui and
our colleague, the Permanent Representative of Haiti,
Ambassador Cazeau, for their statements.

This debate comes at the end of a period marked by
a number of developments in Haiti that we see as clearly
positive beginnings. The adoption of constitutional
amendments, the creation of the Superior Council of
the Judiciary and the adoption of a new development
plan for the Haitian National Police are just a few
examples. Those are steps in the right direction by the
Government of Haiti. We hope that they will support
Haiti's fledgling institutions while promoting their
strengthening and independence, two factors essential
to their effectiveness.
However, Canada remains concerned about the
uncertainty surrounding the holding of senatorial
and local elections. By encouraging a legitimate and
credible Permanent Electoral Council to organize the
elections, the Haitian Government has the opportunity
to reaffirm its commitment to and demonstrate its
respect for democratic principles.

(spoke in English)

Canada's partnership with Haiti has lasted
decades. Today, that partnership is at the heart of our
engagement in the Americas, the purpose of which is to
increase economic opportunities, strengthen security
and institutions and establish long-term relationships.
One of the specific objectives of our engagement
is to effectively promote the rule of law, economic
opportunity and sustainable development initiatives in
Haiti, while at the same time tackling the underlying
causes of the country's continuing insecurity.

Since 2006, Canada has provided Haiti with more
than $1 billion in support. We have contributed to
Haitian development priorities in a variety of areas,
such as economic growth, food security and maternal
and child health, as a result of Canada's Muskoka
Initiative on Maternal, Newborn and Child Health.
Canada has also provided substantial humanitarian
assistance after natural disasters, to alleviate suffering
and meet the immediate needs of all Haitians. In fact,
individual Canadians generously donated $220 million
to relief efforts after the devastating 2010 earthquake
and our Government matched those donations.

In September, a Canadian trade mission to Haiti
generated a lot of interest and enthusiasm among the
investors who took part in it. We see that as a positive
development, because we firmly believe that the private
sector has an essential role to play in helping Haiti to
continue its reconstruction efforts. Good governance
being very important to investors, it is now up to the
Haitian Government to continue its efforts to strengthen
the rule of law and eliminate corruption, thereby
creating the conditions that will enable Haiti's private
sector and international investors to play their key role
in Haiti's economic recovery.

(spoke in French)

Canada supports the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and looks forward
to the upcoming adoption of the draft resolution to
renew its mandate. We are pleased with the Secretary-
General's recommendations, presented in his recent
report (S/2012/678), to renew the Mission's mandate and
to focus on adapting it so that it reflects the changing
security environment in Haiti. The security situation
has improved in the past few years, despite a recent
increase in criminal activity and the occupation of
former army bases by paramilitary groups last spring.
We commend the successful intervention of the Haitian
National Police, which was able to dislodge those
groups with MINUSTAH's support.

I would like to commend MINUSTAH on its
efforts to improve the security situation in Haiti, but
it is even more vital that Haiti's security institutions
become equipped themselves to play a greater role
in defending the freedom and security of Haitians.
Canada believes that the Haitian National Police must
be the primary security force in Haiti. Along with
other international partners, we continue to provide
massive investments to strengthen the police against
countervailing forces. However, Haitian authorities are
the key actors in that effort. We are therefore pleased
that the current Government has adopted the new
police development plan for the 2012-2016 period. We
hope that the Haitian authorities will make all efforts
necessary for its implementation, and we will continue
to monitor their performance as Canada considers its
future investments.

In conclusion, steadfast political will is still needed
to establish genuine rule of law in Haiti. Beyond some
recent progress, Haiti's leaders must commit to actually
delivering reforms that have been promised. Haitian
men and women expect a Government in which the
public interest is respected, the rule of law prevails,
human rights are protected and the economy grows
stronger through job creation across the country, and
through the prosperity that trade and investment bring.
Haiti's partners in Canada expect no less.
