Mr. Ouane (Mali) (spoke in French): I wish first to
associate myself with the words of welcome addressed to
Ambassador Levitte; my delegation and I look forward to
cooperating with him in continuing the excellent
relationship between our two Missions, which mirrors that
between our two countries.

I thank you, Mr. President, for having convened this
briefing. My thanks go also to Mr. Annabi for the
information he has provided, enabling us to make an up-
to-date assessment of the situation in East Timor. I have
a few comments to make on key issues about which
Mr. Annabi spoke.

On the security situation, we are pleased at the
notable progress that Mr. Annabi described. Yet is there

 

not a problem with the staffing of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)?
Could Mr. Annabi address this question, and tell us whether
the personnel may be too numerous given the present
situation?

I believe that the return of refugees is the most
important of the political and practical issues on the ground.
In our View, the United Nations and the international
community should continue to make this a priority. We
reaffirm our support for the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and for other
organizations working in the field to help the refugees
return in safety and dignity. Mr. Annabi noted that some
100,000 people remain in West Timor. We would be glad
to hear some further information about the activities of the
joint border commission.

On the reconciliation process, let me recall that such
a process is fundamental to the creation of the stability
required for sustainable development. That is why we
welcomed the establishment of the National Consultative
Council, which we see as an essential instrument for true
participation by the people of East Timor in decision-
making and in strengthening the independence process. We
would be very interested to hear from Mr. Annabi an initial
assessment of the roundtables intended to promote national
reconciliation.

Turning to reconstruction, the Tokyo donors
conference was an important event in that sphere. We
welcome the substantial pledges that were announced,
and - along with Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, who
addressed the Council some weeks ago - we hope that
they will be fulfilled as soon as possible. I mention this
also to show that the example of East Timor has shown that
the search for solutions to issues of reconstruction can be
based on close coordinated cooperation among financial
institutions, the United Nations and the people concerned,
in this instance the people of East Timor. This is something
we welcome.

Let me conclude by thanking the Secretary-General
and his Special Representative, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello,
as well as all the others who are participating in the
restoration of peace and in post-conflict reconstruction in
East Timor.
