Mr. Skoog (Sweden): Let me begin by thanking
the Ambassador of Kazakhstan, Mr. Umarov, for his
briefing and the excellent work he is doing in his capacity
as Chair of the Committee pursuant to resolutions
751 (1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and
Eritrea. We highly value the work done by the Chair,
the Committee and the Somalia-Eritrea Monitoring
Group. This is part of our wider effort to bring peace,
stability and prosperity to the Horn of Africa.

As the Chair has pointed out, global peace and
security cannot be achieved without resolving the
disputes and conflicts in the Horn of Africa. In this
regard, we would like to draw attention to the statement
issued today by the European Union on the 15-year
anniversary of the decision by the Eritrea-Ethiopia
Boundary Commission on the delineation of the border
between the two countries.

We had the opportunity last month to welcome
the successful conclusion of the electoral process in
Somalia and to hear directly from President Farmajo (see S/PV.7905). We acknowledged then that strengthening
the national security sector must now be a top priority
for the new President and Government. Sweden
shares the assessment of the Monitoring Group that
Al-Shabaab remains the most significant threat to
security in Somalia. If we are to build on recent
progress, sustained engagement by the Council will be
vital. As the Government of Somalia turns its attention
to building a credible and effective national security
sector, the Monitoring Group will be an essential tool
for our support to these efforts, and to the Government,
in particular with regard to the partial lifting of the
arms embargo.

We remain deeply concerned about the severe
humanitarian situation caused by the drought in
Somalia and the region. In addition to the direct
human impact, the effects of the drought have potential
negative implications for peace and security. In order to
respond to the needs of the five million people already
suffering from acute food shortages, immediate safe
and unhindered humanitarian access to effectively
support the relief effort is essential. The reports of the
Monitoring Group on humanitarian access contribute
to keeping the Council informed of the situation on
the ground, as does its accounts of violations and
abuses of international humanitarian law and human
rights law. We particularly welcome the Monitoring
Group's reporting on sexual and gender-based violence,
including on steps taken to end impunity.
We note the report of a possible breach of the arms
embargo. It is important that this incident be thoroughly
investigated. We would also note the need for continued
vigilance regarding any possible exploitation of natural
resources by Al-Shabaab.

Turning to Eritrea, we are encouraged by the fact
that the Monitoring Group, in consecutive reports, has
found no evidence of Eritrean support for Al-Shabaab.
It is essential that Eritrea cooperate in a constructive
manner with the Monitoring Group in order to allow
them to verify this finding conclusively. Sweden
supports the efforts of the Chair to facilitate a way
forward regarding access for the members of the
Monitoring Group to Asmara, and believe a visit by the
Chair could be a helpful step. We hope that 2017 can be
a positive year for engagement between the Monitoring
Group and Eritrea. Constructive engagement with
the Monitoring Group is in everyone's interest. We
encourage the Somali and Eritrean authorities to
strengthen relations with the Group, which can help
reinforce a positive trajectory for the Horn of Africa.
Sweden will continue to give its full support to the
group's work in the year ahead.

