Mr. Baublys (Lithuania): I wish to congratulate
you, Madam President, and the entire Argentine
delegation, in particular Mario, for the brilliant
stewardship of the Council, and your leadership and
successful presidency during the month of October. We
appreciate in particular your dedication to conducting
interactive consultations, to reading out the Council's
press statements at stakeouts and to blitzing tweets
before and after Council meetings.

We thank Argentina for holding two important
open debates, on the Council's working methods (see S/PV.7285) and women and peace and security (see
S/PV.7289), and the briefing by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations Force Commanders (see S/PV.7275). The Council will need to follow up on
many ideas that were raised at those meetings.

This month the Council dealt on an emergency
basis with the evolving grave crisis in Yemen, the Ebola
pandemic in West Africa, persistent ceasefire violations
by illegal armed groups in the east of Ukraine and the
situation in the Middle East, including settlements in
East Jerusalem. In fact, much of the work of the Council
on crisis situations has been a matter of public record.
This is fifteenth public meeting this month.

I will therefore focus my remarks on a few working
methods and important issues that the Council will
have to address in the month of November.

The Security Council of 2014 has been setting
records for meetings in public. The past few wrap-up
sessions, mainstays of privacy not long ago, have been
held in the format of a briefing. That is welcome. We
note the welcome practice of more and more chairs of
Sanctions Cbriefing in public. It has not yet become a
gold standard, but is surely not an exception either. We
look forward to your public briefing, Madam, in your
capacity as Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005)
concerning the Sudan. As the Chair of the Security
Council Committees established pursuant to resolution
2140 (2014) and established pursuant to resolution
2127 (2013) concerning the Central African Republic,
Lithuania stands ready to brief the Council and the
United Nations membership following any significant
developments in the Committees' work, hopefully in
November.

The Council needs to improve the quality of
exchanges between the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO) and the troop-contributing
countries (TCCs), especially as the United Nations
increasingly gears up for capacity-based peacekeeping
planning. There must be a meaningful follow-up to
discussions. In October, the Security Council held a
frank and timely discussion with DPKO on the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force and the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan, and we look forward
to brainstorming with that Department on the United
Nations peacekeeping operation in Mali, as United
Nations peacekeepers have sustained many casualties
since September in the north of the country.

Similarly, we believe we need to pay close attention
to the capacity of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic to meet the challenges in the precarious
situation in that country. We need a more systematic
implementation of presidential note S/2013/630, on
consultations with TCCs and police-contributing
countries, and we must continue to build on that.
We need to encourage more interaction when the
Council has an opportunity to hear the views of the
Force Commanders. We look forward to a discussion,
suggested by the representative of Australia, with
United Nations Police Commissioners in November.

We congratulate the five new incoming Council
members elected two weeks ago. As the heat and euphoria
of the elections subsides, important preparations
start immediately, in particular the preparation for
chairmanships of subsidiary bodies on the Council.
Lithuania had the task of kick-starting two Sanctions
Committees, on Yemen and the Central African
Republic, during the first four months of its Council
membership. We are ready to share our experience with
incoming chairs. Beyond that, we look forward to an
early appointment of Chairpersons of subsidiary bodies,
in line with presidential note S/2014/393, agreed by the
Council four months ago.

In November, the Council will again hear a briefing
by Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, on the relationship between Libya
and the ICC. That should not be a routine exercise.

We counted at least 37 Member States that took the
floor, some ofthem on behalf ofa larger group of States,
at the open debate on the Council's working methods
(see S/PV.7285) with regard to the need to effectively
address the relationship between the Council and the
Court. It is difficult to overlook the overwhelming
call for a follow-up mechanism. Nine years have
elapsed since the first Council referral. No warrant of
arrest has been executed. Do we aim to translate our
statements onjustice and accountability into a tangible
pursuit to end impunity? A follow-up mechanism
could include many elements, such as an obligation
for all States to cooperate with the ICC; designation
criteria for sanctions mechanisms; the streamlining
of decision-making by the Sanctions Committees
where Court processes intersect; incentives to prevent
failures of cooperation; a follow-up forum; a financial
provision; cooperation with regional organizations and
responses to requests and orders from the Court.
In the public meeting (see S/PV.7287) on Ukraine,
on 24 October, many Council members called on
all parties to the Minsk agreements to immediately
implement them in full and to work towards a peaceful
resolution of the conflict. The Secretary-General
deplored the planned holding by armed rebel groups
in eastern Ukraine of elections on 2 November, in
breach of the Constitution and national laws. We call
on Council members to condemn the holding of the so-
called elections on 2 November in areas held by illegal
armed groups of Ukraine and to call on parties to the
Minsk protocol and the implementation memorandum
to unequivocally distance themselves from such
provocative actions, just as the Russian delegation
reiterated moments ago. Those elections will seriously
undermine the Minsk agreements.

In conclusion, once again we thank the presidency
of Argentina and congratulate the incoming Australian
presidency and assure it of our full support.

