Ms. Keita: Mr. President, I thank you for the
opportunity to brief the Security Council. SpecialEnvoys
Wais and Haysom as well as Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Shearer will brief on the peace
process and the situation on the ground, respectively.
I will thus focus my remarks on the special report of
the Secretary-General on the review and renewal of
the mandate of United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) (S/2018/143).

In line with the Secretary-General's agenda for
reforming the peace and security pillar, the Secretary-
General directed the Under-Secretaries-General for the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and
the Department of Field Support (DFS) to undertake
independent reviews of eight major peacekeeping
operations. The independent review of UNMISS was
conducted from November 2017 to January 2018 by an
integrated team that included representatives of DPKO
and DFS, as well as agencies, funds and programmes,
and was led by an independent expert, Mr. Kevin
Kennedy, former Under-Secretary-General for the
United Nations Department of Safety and Security.
The team initially undertook a conflict analysis
and consultations at United Nations Headquarters
before proceeding to South Sudan, where it received
detailed briefings and held extensive consultations
with UNMISS and the United Nations country team,
the Transitional Government of National Unity,
the diplomatic community and non-governmental
organizations. The team also visited Addis Ababa and
engaged with regional partners and opposition figures.
The special report therefore comprises the main
findings of the review team and the observations and
recommendations of the Secretary-General, to feed into
deliberations on the renewal of the UNMISS mandate.

UNMISS was established in 2011 as a capacity-
building tool to assist a Government that lacked
the capability to deliver services to its people.
However, following the December 2013 outbreak of
violence, UNMISS evolved into a Mission in which
the protection of civilians, including from national
security institutions, has become the main focus.
This requirement unfortunately remains valid. The
situation in South Sudan continues to remain a cause
for grave concern for everyone. Tens of thousands of
civilians are estimated to have been killed since the
conflict began in December 2013. More than 4 million
have been displaced, half of whom are now refugees in
neighbouring countries.

As documented once again by the Human Rights
Council Commission of Inquiry, which published
its report last Friday, human rights violations and
abuses, including horrific incidents of sexual violence,
have reached alarming levels, and impunity for these
crimes remains the norm. Moreover, more than
200,000 internally displaced persons continue to be
protected on UNMISS bases, with the assistance of
humanitarian partners.

Since May 2017, the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD), supported by the African
Union and the United Nations, has been working to
revive the political process. A high-level revitalization
forum on the peace agreement was convened on
18 December 2017 and delivered a new Cessation of
Hostilities Agreement on 21 December. Since the new
Agreement came into force on 24 December 2017, it
has been breached repeatedly by the parties in various
parts of the country. Special Envoys Wais and Haysom
will brief the Council on the progress made during
the second phase of the revitalization forum, but let
me just echo here the message of the African Union
Peace and Security Council, as expressed in its most
recent communique, dated 8 February. If violations
of the Cessation of Hostilities Agreement and attacks
against civilians are to end, we need to ensure that
the signatories are held accountable and also deprived
of the means to continue fighting. Without criminal
accountability for the crimes committed and an end to
the supply of weapons and ammunitions to the warring
parties, the suffering of the South Sudanese populations
is unlikely to end.

Meanwhile, we need to be aware that the economic
situation in South Sudan is also expected to continue
deteriorating. The army and security agencies have
not received salaries for several months. Criminality
is increasing and adding to the prevailing insecurity.
Civil servant arrears are accumulating and many
public-sector employees are no longer reporting to
work. South Sudan is ranked 181 of 188 countries on
the Human Development Index. The survival of the
population will therefore require massive levels of
international assistance for the foreseeable future.

The review found that the protection of civilians
sites continue to dominate UNMISS protection
of civilians activities. Managing and providing

humanitarian assistance to those sites - a collective
effort between the Mission and the humanitarian
community - is a major and difficult undertaking.

Some sites have become highly politicized, witnessing
the activities of competing gangs and smuggling
of goods - a level of criminality that is extremely
difficult to manage with existing resources and
without the cooperation of the Government, despite
sustained efforts to improve security in its midst. The
protection of civilians sites remain a continuing point
of friction with the Government, which claims that it
provides refuge to elements of the armed opposition
and is refusing to investigate and prosecute crimes
perpetrated on its premises. Despite UNMISS efforts,
and in the absence of criminal prosecution, sexual and
gender-based violence has become a serious problem at
some of them, where approximately 80 per cent of the
population is comprised of women and children.

The review found that largely over 50 per cent of the
Mission's uniformed personnel are currently devoted to
protecting those sites. While the vast majority of the

people in the protection of civilians sites are there for
their physical protection, and the protection of civilians
sites will remain the responsibility of the Mission
until the hosted population feel safe enough to leave
them, those sites only represent a fraction of the South
Sudanese civilians in need of protection. There are
no easy answers to that dilemma. There will never be
enough troops both to protect the protection of civilians
sites and to extend the UNMISS protection footprint
to other areas of large displacements in a country as
large as South Sudan and with 2 million displaced.
Increasing the effectiveness of protection efforts beyond
the protection of civilians sites will need to continue
being a major priority of the Mission, notably through
the development of an integrated and people-focused,
system-wide protection approach, aimed at filling
existing gaps, generating synergies and removing
duplication, and thus possible wastage of resources.

With respect to the Regional Protection Force
(RPF), since resolution 2304 (2016) was adopted on
12 August 2016, the security conditions in the capital
have changed substantially. Today, while the risk of
instability and violence remains, the threat of military
conflict in Juba has considerably diminished. The
current environment in Juba therefore may call for some
adjustment of the RPF mandate as currently scripted.
Following the review, the Under-Secretary-General
for the Department of Peacekeeping Operations has
ordered the conduct of a military and police capability
study to explore how fewer troops can be dedicated
to the protection of civilians sites and more deployed
throughout the country to protect other civilians under
imminent threats of violence. The capability study will
also need to address the configuration of the RPF, as it
is likely to have to support revised transitional security
arrangements, to be agreed upon during the High-Level
Revitalization Forum.

South Sudan came into being with extremely
limited institutional capacity in all areas of governance
and Government services, with the exception of
military forces. That situation has not improved in
subsequent years. Poor governance and economic
collapse have compromised already weak rule-of-
law institutions. In the current political and security
environment, the review found that a full-scale return
to capacity-building for rule-of-law institutions is not
warranted. An increase in the training of national
security institutions in international human rights and
humanitarian law and support to the investigation and
prosecution of sexual and gender-based violence are,
however, necessary, consistent with the requirements
of the human rights due diligence policy. That should
be undertaken with existing resources and in close
collaboration with the United Nations country team to
avoid a duplication of effort.
It is our considered judgment that the most effective
way to protect civilians in a sustainable way is to reach a
political solution to the conflict. A sustainable political
resolution of the conflict is also the only avenue to
chalk out a viable exit strategy for UNMISS. The four-
pillared mandate of UNMISS remains valid, albeit with
some adjustments, but the focus of the Council and the
region should undoubtedly be on its fourth pillar, which
is to support to the political process. Without progress
in the political process, the Mission is likely to have
to be deployed for a considerable amount of time, at
a considerable cost to the international community.
Moreover, in order for UNMISS to deliver on its mandate
effectively, the Mission will need to gain unfettered
freedom of movement and the full cooperation of the
Government, both of which remain insufficient today.

I once again urge the Council to pronounce itself
against the repeated violations of the Status of Forces
Agreement, as well as the restrictions and impediments
imposed on humanitarian partners. In addition, while
the Mission has delivered satisfactorily on its task
of creating conditions conducive to the delivery of
humanitarian assistance, the safety and security of aid
workers remain a serious concern that the Government
must address urgently. Ninety-two aid workers have so
far been killed since the conflict began, and of those 25
were killed in 2017. The safety and security of people
whose sole purpose is to provide assistance to the most
vulnerable of South Sudanese should be a common cause
for all in general, but for the Government in particular.

As communicated by UNMISS on 24 February,
an allegation of sexual exploitation involving several
police personnel belonging to a Ghanaian formed police
unit in Wau was documented at the Wau protection
of civilians site. In that respect, let me reaffirm that
Headquarters and the UNMISS leadership are fully
committed to implementing the United Nations zero-
tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse. As
soon as the preliminary results of the investigation
came through, the Mission took immediate action and
removed the entire unit of 46 police officers from duty
within the protection of civilians site and transported
them to Juba. That was done to protect witnesses
and victims.

The Office of Internal Oversight Services has
already begun its investigation into the allegation and,
in cooperation with the police-contributing country
responsible, all efforts will be made to hold those
found to have engaged in sexual exploitation or abuse
accountable in line with the existing procedures. On
the whole, the Ghanaian peacekeepers and police
officers serving in UNMISS have made an excellent
contribution to the protection of civilians and to
the building of durable peace in South Sudan. It is
very disappointing that the behaviour of some police
officers risks staining that record of service as well as
the Mission's reputation.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that only
a political solution can bring an end to the conflict in
South Sudan. There is no military solution. I would
urge the Security Council, as well as the African Union
and members of IGAD, to use all possible leverage on
the parties to reach a viable political agreement so that
the people of South Sudan can finally see the peace
dividend that has eluded them since independence
in 2011.

