Mr. Ruzicka (Slovakia): At the outset, allow me to
join previous speakers in expressing our condolences
to the parents and families of those who lost their lives
during the horrific attack in Peshawar this morning, as
well as our strong condemnation of that brutal act.

I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, and
your country, Chad, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council. Allow me to wish you every success
in steering this important organ. I also would like to
express my gratitude to you for convening today's
important debate on such a critical and timely topic. It
provides a great opportunity for all of us to discuss and
share views concerning the modalities of cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
with an emphasis on the African Union (AU), in the
field of peace operations.

Slovakia fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
Nevertheless, I wish to make few additional remarks in
my national capacity.

The international community has recently faced a
growing number of increasingly complex multifaceted
challenges. The changing global context in the area of
peace and security confronts us with repeated cycles
of violence, collapsing governance and endemic
instability that adversely impact all aspects of civilian
socioeconomic life. The situation is further exacerbated
not only by the shifting character of conflicts, but
also by the diverse nature of conflict parties and their
motivations. Those challenges have become plainly
visible and commonly recognized in various parts of the
world, leading to augmented pressure and intensified
demand on peace operations to adequately adapt and
effectively react. To put it simply, the response must be
as complex as the challenges.

In such an environment, successful response
requires enhanced cooperation and strengthened
partnership between the United Nations and relevant
regional and subregional organizations, as well as
between and among those same regional and subregional
organizations. Slovakia supports the trend towards
building such partnerships, in particular with respect
to the African Union and its regional organizations.
Such an approach would allow us more efficiently and
effectively to steer a path through conflict prevention,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding all the way to
sustainable peace.

It is remarkable to note that almost half the
participants in current United Nations peacekeeping
missions come from Africa. Recent transitions from
the African-led International Support Mission in Mali
to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, and from the African-led
International Support Mission in the Central African
Republic to the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic have proved once again the significance of
effective United Nations-AU operational partnership
on the ground.
At the same time, we are fully aware that peace
operations represent a complex process, requiring
time and resources. Such a process consists of various
components and layers that are mutually interconnected
and interlocked. Seldom has one country or even a
single organization had the ability and capacity to
contribute to the support and development of all peace
instruments and security mechanisms. Therefore, the
specific expertise and thematic focus of Member States
and regional and subregional organizations add value
to the overall success of the entire project of peace
operations.

In that respect, the direct experience of many
United Nations and AU peace missions and operations
clearly shows that a nationally led and inclusive
security sector reform (SSR) process can progressively
deal with the root causes of insecurity and fragility and
create an enabling environment that allows sustainable
development and peace to take root. In addition, security
sector reform is directly linked to the protection of
civilians and the rule of law - two critical tasks that
have become an integral part of almost every peace
operation.

Resolution 2151 (2014) on security sector reform,
adopted in April under the Nigerian presidency, is a key
milestone in those ongoing efforts. It also underscores
the importance of partnerships and cooperation with and
among regional organizations in supporting security
sector reform. For us, building effective partnerships
is Vital to ensuring that the international community
remains the best actor to appropriately respond to
growing needs and multiple challenges, that there is a
coordinated approach, and that we are able to share our
experience and expertise when needed.

Slovakia has long sought to further strengthen
working partnerships among the United Nations, the
AfricanUnion,the EuropeanUnionandthe Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe in the area of
SSR. Such a dialogue can be critical in helping to build
synergy while also preventing the fragmentation of
efforts. We actively promote the creation of synergies
in order to avoid overlapping and duplication, as well as
to streamline available resources.

Our active engagement and commitments in that
area were personally reiterated by Mr. Miroslav Lajeak,
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign and
European Affairs of Slovakia, during his recent trip to
Ethiopia and Kenya at the end of November, when he
met and held fruitful discussions with high-ranking AU
and United Nations officials. During his visit, Slovakia,
together with the African Union, organized the Africa
Forum on Security Sector Reform in Addis Ababa
from 24 to 26 November; and on 26 November, in
partnership with the United Nations Office in Nairobi,
our country organized a panel discussion in Nairobi on
the challenges of and opportunities for security sector
reform in East Africa and the Horn of Africa. Along
with other issues, both events highlighted the important
role that regional and subregional organizations can
play in SSR processes in view of the cross-border
nature of the many challenges to peace and security. At
the same time, they noted the central role of the United
Nations in all global peace and security issues, and the
vital role of the partnership with the AU and its member
States in regional peace and security efforts in Africa,
including peace operations.

In conclusion, I wish to confirm Slovakia's
continuing support for building effective partnerships
between the United Nations and the AU and other
subregional organizations in Africa, and our readiness
to build close coordination and cooperation in that area
of common interest. We stand ready to share our own
experience in that regard.

