Mr. Castro Cordoba (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome the presence of Minister
Rodolfo Nin Novoa and we are very pleased to see him
preside over the Council, in particular as his country
is one of the representatives of our regional group. We
congratulate him and the Uruguayan Mission on their
work at the helm of the Security Council this month.

We also thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for
his briefing.

The issue before us today remains of particular
importance to Costa Rica, in particular on the
seventieth anniversary of the United Nations. We are
convinced that the situation in the Middle East should
remain among the priorities of the Organization.
For that reason, we will never tire of calling for the
peaceful resolution of conflicts between peoples and
States, characterized by respect for international law
and human rights. I shall focus my remarks on three
clashes in the area: the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, the
situation in Syria and the situation in Yemen.

The escalation of violence in the area remains a
concern. Civilians, including women and children,
continue to pay a high price, which we strongly
condemn. As Miroslav Jenca, Assistant Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, said when he addressed
the Security Council on 16 December:

"The current circumstances should not
be accepted as the new normal. Israelis and
Palestinians should not be resigned to living under
the threat of violence." (S/PV. 7584, p. 2)

My country reiterates that it is urgent to resume
negotiations on the pending core issues of the conflict,
based on the obligations already assumed and the
agreements previously agreed between the parties, and
supported by international law and the decisions of
both the Security Council and the General Assembly.
It is imperative that a political solution be found to
this conflict and that a new architecture of peace to
resolve differences be established. Furthermore, those
responsible should be prosecuted, and efforts must be
pooled in order to halt the spiral of violence and prevent
further civilian suffering. We call for efforts, such as
those made by the Secretary of State of the United
States, John Kerry, which will reach their two-year
mark this March, to be pursued, and we hope to obtain
results that are as good as those achieved during the
negotiating process with Iran.

Costa Rica regrets that the conflict in Syria is
entering its sixth year and that the situation continues
to deteriorate. It is important to bring an end to the
armed conflict and to seek a swift political solution,
above all to the humanitarian crisis. As was stated
before the Security Council on 15 January by the
Assistant Secretary-General and Deputy Emergency
Relief Coordinator, Ms. Kyung-wha Kang, the gravity
of the humanitarian situation in Syria is increasing and
all members of the Security Council are responsible for
meeting the basic needs of the victims of the Syrian
conflict. "The Council cannot let more people die on its
watch" (S/PV7605, p. 3).

The use of barrel bombs and of civilians as a
weapon of war in the conflict, as well as the continued
trafficking in arms, including in clandestine tunnels,
are unjustifiable. In fact, they are detrimental to the
situation. We must ensure the full implementation of
resolution 2235 (2015) of7 August 2015, through which,
for the first time, accountability will be established for
those who have used chemical weapons in Syria against
the civilian population.

We also welcome the emblematic adoption by
consensus of resolution 2254 (2015) of 18 December
2015 in support of the peace process in Syria. That
was the first time the Security Council has endorsed
the Vienna negotiations and Geneva communiques.
It is important that the Security Council pursue its
implementation of the resolution, in favour of the
ceasefire and the inclusion of the opposition, so that a
formal dialogue can be established with a view to the
transition process, as well as free and fair elections. We
hope that the peace negotiations to begin in Geneva on
29 January will achieve the best results possible and,
as Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura said, start on the
right foot. We hope that the negotiations will truly mark
the beginning ofa real peace process.

With regard to the current situation in Yemen,
my delegation is concerned about developments in
the conflict and in the situation in which even the
Al-Thawra hospital has been repeatedly attacked. Basic
services and items, such as water and medicine, are
scarce. In the light of this situation, we join the calls
of the United Nations to allow humanitarian access to
the area and for a permanent ceasefire. We welcome
the statements of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights announcing that the
Yemeni Government has revised its position and will
allow the Special Envoy to Yemen to continue his work
in the country.

Costa Rica reiterates its concern about rising
tensions among regional Powers that escalate the tone
of the fighting and therefore makes a strong call for
peace in the Middle East. We remain confident that
the Security Council can fully exercise its mandate
to maintain international peace and security and fully
uphold international justice and the rule of law.

