Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): I join other speakers in
congratulating you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of
the Council for this month. I also thank you for your
initiative, Mr. President, in organizing this important
debate on children and armed conflict, as well as
for the concept note (S/2012/685, annex) intended to
provide direction for our discussion today. As conflicts
and crises continue to break out around the world, with
an obvious negative impact on the most vulnerable
members of society, mainly children and women, the
time for such a debate could not be more appropriate.

Nigeria appreciates that the Security Council
continues to place a great priority on the plight of
children in armed conflict in its work. Indeed, Nigeria
had the opportunity to contribute to the process during
its stewardship of the Security Council through its
participation in the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict.

The various resolutions on the issue of children and
armed conflict are testimony to the commitment of the
Council to address the subject matter. Furthermore,
the various action plans adopted by countries is also
evidence of adherence to and support for the Security
Council's leadership in that domain. I congratulate
all Member States that have adopted action plans,
recognizing their determination to address the serious
predicament in which children in conflict zones often
find themselves.

At this point, let me commend the former Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, for
her invaluable role in placing the plight of children in
conflict high on the United Nations and international
agendas.

I would also like to welcome and congratulate the
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Leila Zerrougui, on her well-deserved appointment. She
assumes her responsibility at a time of great challenges
for children around the world. Children, women and
other vulnerable groups are exposed to hardship and
terrible danger in many conflicts around the world.
We share Ms. Zerrougui's conviction on the scope
of the work that needs to be done to protect children
in conflict areas. We assure her of our unflinching
support in the discharge of her responsibilities. We
also wish to acknowledge the input into this meeting
of Mr. Herve Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Anthony Lake,
Executive Director of UNICEF, and Mr. David Tolbert,
President of the International Center for Transitional
Justice. In recent times, the international community,
including the Security Council, has taken a determined
stance against perpetrators of grave violations against
children. The steady growth in the number of action
plans and the increasing adherence to international
human rights and humanitarian law are contributing
to mobilizing concerted international action aimed at
ensuring the safety and welfare of children, especially
in conflict zones. In that context, we are encouraged by
progress made with regard to increasing accountability
for perpetrators of the six types of grave violations
against children in armed conflict.

Nevertheless, more needs to be done, as we all
have a responsibility to protect those vulnerable
and defenseless members of society. National and
international efforts must therefore be intensified to
ensure accountability as a means of deterrence and
to bring the perpetrators of those acts to justice. The
Security Council in particular and the international
community in general have an important role to play
in those endeavours. We share the Secretary-General's
assessment on the need for concerned Member States
to allow independent access for the United Nations
for the purposes of monitoring and reporting on grave
violations against children.

Efforts should also be intensified, in accordance
with the suggestions made by the Secretary-General
and the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, to secure
adequate resources for the purpose of the rehabilitation
of children released from recruitment, as well as for
exploring the possibilities of establishing legal and
administrative mechanisms for paying reparations to
child Victims of grave violations. In addition, we should
ensure that specific provisions for the protection of
children continue to be included in all relevant mandates
of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as well as
political and peacebuilding missions and other United
Nations planning instruments and processes.

We believe that it is the responsibility ofthe Council
to provide leadership in the global effort to set aside the
necessary political, financial and legal resources for the
achievement of our objective of protecting children in
armed conflict.

Before coming here, I was at the African Union
secretariat, where we listened to the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict. We believe that those two evils
are two sides of the same coin - children and armed
conflict and sexual violence against women. Most
of those human rights violations happen in conflict
situations. We urge the Council to address those issues
concurrently and to keep them always on its agenda.

