Ms. Picco (Monaco): More than half of the world's
population is under the age of 30 and nearly 90 per
cent of those young people live in the very areas where
the United Nations deploys most of its peacekeeping
missions. Graeme Simpson's progress study on youth
and peace and security (see S/2018/86), mandated by
resolution 2250 (2015), strikingly illuminates the long
road that still has to be travelled to fully mobilize the
tremendous asset that is young people, who are too
often the victims of armed conflict and conspicuously
absent from peace processes and conflict resolution.

I will limit myself to the remarkably innovative
and ingenious action, highlighted in Graeme Simpson's
study, of young people who use sport to deal with their
suffering, foster their demobilization and facilitate
their reintegration.

As the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
recognizes, sport has made a growing contribution to
development and peace in its promotion of tolerance
and respect, the empowerment of women and youth,
individuals and communities, as well as health,
education and social inclusion objectives.

The Group of Friends of Sport for Development
and Peace, which Monaco has co-chaired since 2010
with Tunisia, promotes the unique tool that brings
together communities and individuals - a tool that
deserves further integration into strategies for both
conflict prevention and post-conflict rehabilitation and
peacebuilding. The testimonies that we receive from the
Group of Friends are unequivocal: sport is a simple and
effective vehicle for bridging social, religious and racial
gaps and even for combating gender discrimination.

Founded in 2007 in Monaco by Olympic champion
Joel Bouzou, the organization Peace and Sport enjoys the
patronage of Prince Albert II. It supports programmes
in five continents and benefits from a network of
champions for peace. Sporting activities are particularly
important on a day-to-day basis, because of crowding
in camps for refugee and internally displaced persons,
and for United Nations peacekeeping operations.
That was demonstrated in 2017 in South Sudan with a
volleyball competition, and more recently, in 2018, as
part of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, where the Civil Affairs
Division organized a football tournament to promote
education and social cohesion.

The universal language of sport perfectly
encapsulates the four "P's of resolution 2250 (2015):
participation, protection, prevention and partnerships.
We must not underestimate the capacity of sport
to contribute to curbing violence, restoring trust,
re-establishing social ties, ensuring the reintegration
of ex-combattants and supporting their physical and
emotional recovery.

The recommendations in paragraph 60 of the study
are particularly interesting. The investment of $1 per
young person between today and 2025 - which will
mark the tenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
2250 (2015) - would be a great symbolic success, all
the more resounding if it young people are involved. We
are fully confident that the Secretary-General's Envoy
on Youth will be able to assist us in achieving that.

