The President (spoke in French): I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the representative of Belgium. First of all, I too would like to offer my condolences to the families of the humanitarian workers killed in Syria and pay tribute to their work and their courage. The situation in Syria, particularly in Idlib, demands the full attention of this Council. It is deteriorating by the day and is becoming absolutely critical, as we heard from both Mr. Pedersen and Mr. Lowcock. Let us be clear. The humanitarian crisis that is unfolding before our eyes and of which Mr. Lowcock has warned us for months is above all the result of the political and military choices of the Syrian Government and its allies. I would reiterate once again: under no circumstances can counter-terrorism efforts exempt parties from their obligations under international humanitarian law. The protection of civilians is a fundamental obligation of all parties to the conflict. The international dimension of the conflict is of great concern. The risk of miscalculation resulting from clashes among the various parties to the conflict has increased in recent weeks. That poses a serious threat to international peace and security. We call on all parties to exercise maximum restraint and for an immediate de-escalation. As others before me have said, the current situation on the ground unfortunately demonstrates that the Astana format is not working. We therefore call on the United Nations, in particular the Special Envoy, to spare no effort to achieve an immediate and lasting ceasefire. Ensuring the protection of civilians in Idlib is a priority. Without a ceasefire, efforts to further involve the Constitutional Committee are unlikely to succeed. How can confidence be built when part of the population is being indiscriminately bombed? Without the political commitment of the Syrian authorities, the cycle of violence will continue and instability will continue to prevail in the region. The only path to stability is a credible and inclusive political solution, facilitated by the United Nations, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015). I now resume my functions as President of the Council. The representative of the United Kingdom has asked for the floor to make a further statement.
