Mr. Kostunica (Serbia and Montenegro): I
should like to begin by expressing great respect for this
body of the world Organization. I am addressing
members today in their capacity as representatives of
United Nations Security Council member States in the
firm belief that the Council constitutes the most
credible and reliable guarantor of the foundations not
only of the United Nations, but of the entire world
order. Members know better than anyone else that the
inviolability of the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of States is one of these fundamental principles.

My country, Serbia and Montenegro, is a loyal
and active Member of the United Nations. Both in
word and action, it has repeatedly proven its
commitment to the principles that govern world peace
and stability today. In the same spirit of trust, we
expect that the Security Council will exercise its
authority and, in the case of Serbia and Montenegro
and its province Kosovo and Metojiha, safeguard the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of my country.

I believe that we all share the conviction that to
dismember a democratic State and to change its
internationally recognized borders against its will are
options not to be contemplated. This would not only be
an unprecedented case in international law and in the
practice of the United Nations, but also a dangerous
precedent with grave long-term consequences for the
international order in general. I would like the Council
to consider that the responsibility facing it today is not
related solely to the fate of a single Balkan State. What
is at stake here is a set of core principles that the
United Nations accepts and has to accept in its mission
of safeguarding world peace.

It is very important for me to emphasize to the
Security Council that Serbia and Montenegro is fully
prepared to assume its share of responsibility in the
process of resolving the Kosovo and Metojiha issue in
accordance with the basic principles of international
law and the democratic values of the contemporary
world. Within this general framework, we are
committed to a compromise solution and willing to
ensure substantial autonomy for Kosovo and Metojiha
as a part of the State Union of Serbia and Montenegro.
The future of my country, of the region and, to a
certain extent, that of Europe itself will depend on a
just and viable solution to the Kosovo issue.

We thus come before this forum with respect and
trust, expecting it to make a vital contribution in the
spirit of its previous documents, in particular that of
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) of 10 June
1999. That resolution clearly reaffirms the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Serbia and Montenegro, and
we are confident that forthcoming decisions of the
Council will not depart from this fundamental principle
of the United Nations.

The Security Council today faces a daunting task.
It has to decide whether to move to the next stage in
resolving the Kosovo and Metojiha issue, even though
the precisely defined tasks of the previous stage remain
uncompleted. At earlier Council meetings on Kosovo
and Metojiha, we offered several fully documented
assessments of the difficult situation in the province,
with particular emphasis on the hopeless position of
Serbs and other non-Albanians. We have repeatedly
provided convincing information, not only on the
absence of multi-ethnicity in Kosovo and Metojiha, but
also on grave violations of fundamental rights and
freedoms, from the right to life itself to freedom from
fear.

Ambassador Kai Eide's report before the Security
Council today (S/2005/635) has two main aims: to
provide a comprehensive assessment of the situation in
Kosovo and, on the basis of that assessment, to
determine whether talks on the future status of the
province should be initiated. In particular, Ambassador
Eide's task was to evaluate progress in the
implementation of standards that constitute the
foundation of a democratic, multi-ethnic and
economically viable society.

In his comprehensive review, Ambassador Eide
presents many essential and important facts,
particularly with regard to the difficult position of the
Serbian and other non-Albanian communities in
Kosovo and Metohija. I shall just quote a few. "[L]ittle
has been achieved to create a foundation for a multi-
ethnic society", so that the situation in this respect is,
as Ambassador Eide rightly says, "grim". "[t]he
minority communities - and especially the Kosovo
Serbs - suffer from more than a perceived insecurity".
In any case, according to Ambassador Eide, "It is
difficult to expect that people from minority
communities should take risks in order to verify
whether freedom of movement and security are" or are
not realities.

"At present, property rights are neither respected
nor ensured", Mr. Eide says. Examples include many
cases of illegal seizures of Serbian State property
through the privatization process that are not
specifically mentioned in his report. "Illegal
construction and occupation of homes are
widespread phenomena". Where minority communities
are concerned, the Eide report states, "Harassment,
looting, stealing of cattle and other similar incidents
occur very frequently. This is in addition to widespread
illegal occupancy of property, especially agricultural
land, which makes it impossible to gain access such
property and to use it or cultivate it without a security
risk".

The following sentences in paragraph 50 of the
Eide report are particularly significant:

"Lack of security and respect for property
rights as well as uncertainty about the future
contribute heavily to the fact that the overall
return process has virtually come to a halt. There
is a strong feeling that those who commit crimes
enjoy impunity and that the possibility for
establishing viable livelihoods is very limited.
The great majority of the people who left Kosovo
after June 1999 have not come back."

These statements gain particular importance in
the light of precise data not offered in Mr. Eide's
report. Today, may I remind you that more than 60 per
cent of Kosovo Serbs are internally displaced persons
in central Serbia. Apart from Northern Mitrovica, there
are no more Serbs in Pristina, Prizren, Pec, anilane,
Urosevac, and other towns in the province. The Serbs
in Kosovo and Metohija are now reduced to a
dwindling rural population, living in fear and often
deprived of their most basic rights.

The best illustration of the precarious legal
position of the Serb community in Kosovo and
Metohija is the fact that 17,000 court cases involving
individual property claims by local Serbs have been
positively resolved, but none of these decisions have
been implemented.

Since June 1999, Orthodox Christianity has been
exposed to deliberate and brutal persecution. Some 150
Orthodox churches and monasteries have been
destroyed or irreparably damaged. Orthodox
cemeteries throughout the province have been
desecrated and in many cases destroyed. Orthodox
Christians have been denied the basic right to profess
and practice their faith.

The Eide report attributes those massive
violations of human and minority rights not only to
ethnically motivated violence against minorities, but
also to the fragility and malfunctioning of institutions,
particularly the police and the judiciary. That holds
true both for the Provisional Institutions at the central
level - where, as the report emphasizes, Kosovo Serbs
fear they will become a decoration, with little real
ability to yield tangible results - and for the
institutions of local self-government, which have yet to
properly define, let alone implement, plans for the
protection of the Serb and other non-Albanian
communities.

In spite of all those facts, Ambassador Eide
recommends that we should move on to the next stage
of the process, the future status talks. He also adds that
there will not be any good moment for addressing
Kosovo's future status, and insists that the
implementation of standards should continue
throughout the future status talks. Nevertheless, the
critical question for all of us remains: whether future
status talks can succeed if the crucial standards for
human rights and fundamental freedoms in Kosovo and
Metohija are neither fulfilled nor anywhere near
fulfilment in the foreseeable future. Today I believe we
have to answer that question as follows. It is only
through a serious, completely realistic assessment of
the situation in Kosovo and Metohija - to which
Ambassador Eide's report makes a significant
contribution - that we can attain what I want to see as
the common aim of all those involved in the Kosovo
issue: a democratic and multiethnic Kosovo and
Metohija, where respect for rights will replace fear and
violence.

I wish to underline here that in the forthcoming
talks Serbia and Montenegro will be fully guided by
the general principles and norms of international law
and universally accepted democratic values. Let me
also express, on behalf of my country, the firm belief
that the Security Council will act upon the principle of
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of democratic
States, and so define the framework and mandate of
future status talks as talks on the future status of
Kosovo and Metohija as a province within the
internationally recognized State of Serbia and
Montenegro. I want to point out that all the principles
for resolving the Kosovo and Metohija issue, which I
am relying on here, are precisely the principles of the
United Nations, which the Security Council is
responsible for implementing. Let me just mention
them.

Our first principle, I repeat, is that any solution
must respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Serbia and Montenegro as an internationally
recognized State, a member of the United Nations and
other international organizations. That principle is
supported by the basic sources of international law,
including, inter alia, the United Nations Charter and
the Helsinki Final Act, and - in the particular case at
hand - is confirmed by resolution 1244 (1999), where
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Serbia and
Montenegro are recognized expressis verbis. Apart
from the basic sources of international law, the borders
and territorial integrity of the States created after the
break-up of the former Yugoslavia are additionally
guaranteed by specific international documents and
agreements such as the opinions of the Arbitration
Commission of the Conference on Yugoslavia - in
particular, Opinion No. 3 of 11 January 1992 - and
the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina of 21 November 1995, also called the
Dayton-Paris Agreement.

In addition to being supported by the basic
sources and rules of international law, these principles
are confirmed by all Security Council resolutions
covering the Kosovo crisis prior to resolution 1244
(1999) - namely, resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199
(1998), 1203 (1998) and 1239 (1999). They all
recognize, expressis verbis, the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Serbia and Montenegro. Let me
also say that I View the Security Council, legally bound
by the United Nations Charter, as the right place to
state unambiguously that in this instance we are not
discussing the non-binding obligations of States, but,
rather, the most stringent norms of international law -
the jns cogens norms - respect for which is a sine qua
non for the international community as a whole to
function.

Secondly, the future status talks should take into
account the fact that Serbia and Montenegro is a
democratic State. We find it inconceivable, as I am
sure Council members do, that solutions should be
imposed on any democracy against its will, least of all,
solutions that threaten its internationally recognized
borders. Any attempt to impose such a solution through
the de facto legalization of a partition of Serbia - that
is, through the forcible secession of a part of its
territory - would be tantamount to legal violence not
only against a democratic State, but against
international law itself.

Thirdly, our political efforts will be directed to
defining a specific and viable form of substantial
autonomy for Kosovo and Metohija, whereby the
legitimate interests of Kosovo Albanians will be fully
acknowledged. Allow me to remind the Council that
substantial autonomy for the province was proposed as
a political solution for the Kosovo crisis by resolution
1160 (1998), reaffirmed by the Foreign Ministers of the
Group of Eight on 6 May 1999, and the June 1999
agreement that brought an end to the hostilities in
Kosovo.

Finally, I believe that Council members will
agree with me when I say that a peaceful, negotiated
solution on the future status of Kosovo and Metohija
within the State union of Serbia and Montenegro will
be a decisive step towards European integration not
only for my country, but for the region as a whole. A
negotiated solution implies a compromise that will
make it impossible for Serbs and Albanians alike to
attain all their goals and aspirations. On the other hand,
it is only compromise that can further our integration
into the European economic, social and cultural space
and, ultimately, the European Union itself.

Those truly fundamental commitments constitute
the framework within which our country, with good
intentions and faith in the future, is approaching the
process of defining the future status of Kosovo and
Metohija.

The future status process will have the best
likelihood of success if, in its crucial and most
sensitive part, it takes the form of direct talks between
representatives of the two sides. I am certain that we
can all agree that the future status talks should aim at a
negotiated solution to be reached by the parties in
conformity with the essential principles and norms of
international law. If that is genuinely our goal, our
talks must be direct. If that cannot be achieved
immediately, at the very beginning, it is clear that the
Secretary-General's Special Envoy will have to do his
best to make it possible. It is our firm belief that the
only way to attain a negotiated solution is through
direct talks mediated by the Special Envoy and his
associates.

I would like to say that the general situation in
Serbia and Montenegro, as well as in Kosovo and
Metohija, differs greatly from that of June 1999. A
democratic government has been established in Serbia,
and Serbia and Montenegro has resolved its status
within the United Nations and irrevocably joined the
European integration process. That has added a
democratic dimension to the internationally recognized
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Serbia and
Montenegro, which were already clearly reaffirmed in
June 1999. Genuine respect for human and minority
rights, good-neighbourly relations and peace in the
region and in the world have become the principal
guidelines of my country's domestic and foreign
policy. Serbia and Montenegro is increasingly
affirming itself as a bulwark of basic democratic values
both within its territory and in the region.

I should like to conclude by stating that my
country is committed to making every effort to reach a
negotiated solution on the basis of compromise,
together with the Security Council and in a manner
compatible with the norms of international law. I hope
that the other party to the dispute will be ready to
assume its share of responsibility. I am convinced that
the international community, embodied in the United
Nations, will not succumb to threats of violence and
permit the dismemberment of a democratic State and
the undermining of the most basic principles of the
international order. I am convinced - and no one can
understand this better than the members of the
Council- that no democratic and free State could
accept that under any circumstances. For that is exactly
what we are discussing today.

Knowing that we share the common principles
underlying both the international legal order and the
United Nations itself, I express full confidence in the
Security Council and in its just treatment of the
Kosovo and Metohija issue. Today, I expect from the
Council nothing less than elementary justice and
nothing more than agreement that my country is
entitled to the protection of the same universal
principles that apply to each one of the countries
members of the Council, as well as to all other States
that belong to the world family of democratic nations.

Finally, in the belief that the Security Council
will consider in full earnest the arguments I have
presented, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
the opportunity to address this very important meeting.

