Mr. Qin Huasun (China)(spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, on behalf of the Chinese delegation, please allow
me to welcome President Chiluba of Zambia, the Foreign
Minister of Namibia and President of the General
Assembly, Mr. Gurirab, Foreign Minister Dlamini-Zuma
of South Africa, the representative of the Secretary-
General of the Organization of African Unity and other
distinguished guests at today's meeting.

I also wish to express my appreciation to you, Mr.
President, and the Permanent Mission of the United States
for your outstanding performance, and to thank you for
your kind words and best wishes just expressed on my
departure. My many years at the United Nations, and
especially in the Security Council, are no doubt going to
be the most memorable part of my diplomatic career. I
wish to take this opportunity to thank all my colleagues
present, all Permanent Representatives and the Secretariat
officers and staff for the support and cooperation they
have accorded to me and to the Permanent Mission of
China in the last few years.

The timely and effective resolution of conflicts in
Africa has always been a major task for the Security
Council. In the past few years I have sat through many
meetings on African issues in the Council Chamber.
There have been successes as well as failures,
encouraging progress as well as setbacks. We are
heartened to see that the situations in the Central African
Republic, Guinea-Bissau, Sierra Leone and many other
places are moving towards stability. At the same time, we
note with concern that the proposed referendum in
Western Sahara is still elusive. Chaos reigns and fighting
rages on in Somalia, and the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo drags on.
It is fair to say that in recent years the Council has
made some efforts towards resolving African issues. After
the Secretary-General submitted a comprehensive report
on Africa in 1998, the Council held open debates on the
report and adopted a series of follow-up actions. Meetings

 

were convened at the level of Foreign Minister twice in the
Council, in 1997 and 1998, to discuss African issues. We
also met last year many times in this Chamber to review
these issues.

We should also note, however, that the Council's
action so far is far from adequate. There is still more
rhetoric than real action. In the aftermath of the crises in
Kosovo and East Timor, the Council has been under
increasing criticism from African countries and the
international community for applying double standards.
Bridging this gap expeditiously is a great challenge for the
Council.

It is gratifying to note that the Council has realized
this and is in the process of redressing the problem. In the
first month of the new millennium, we have discussed a
number of African issues, such as the situations in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Angola and Burundi, as
well as refugees and HIV/AIDS in Africa. I understand that
we are preparing a draft resolution on dispatching military
observers and troops to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We sincerely hope that this momentum will be
maintained and that concrete results will be achieved at an
early date.

This is the last Security Council meeting at which I
shall be present. I remember that on 29 September last
year, I made a five-point observation on how the
international community should deal with African issues. I
do not wish to repeat those points today. I wish, however,
to emphasize that the Council, as a matter of principle,
should give priority to African issues, heed the views of
African countries and peoples, demonstrate the necessary
political will, commit adequate material and financial
resources and work closely with regional organizations in
Africa. By doing so it will surely contribute even more to
the prevention and resolution of conflicts on the African
continent and will play an even more active role in carrying
out its responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, as entrusted to it by the Charter of the
United Nations.

China has always attached great importance to African
issues, supported the legitimate demands and reasonable
positions of African countries and participated actively in
Council deliberations on Africa. That is why my
Government instructed me to postpone my departure so that
I could be present at last week's open debate on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and at today's wrap-up.
I wish to emphasize that the Chinese Government is ready
to join the rest of the world in rededicating ourselves to
resolving African issues and to helping bring peace and
stability to the African people as soon as possible.

