Mr. Keita (Mali) (spoke in French): I would first
like to say how greatly I appreciate the holding of this
briefing on East Timor. Like other delegations, I would
like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for his very exhaustive briefing and
to assure him of my delegation's support for his efforts
on behalf of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET).

The progress achieved in East Timor is a source
of satisfaction and motivation for the entire
international community. This was far from certain a
few months ago because of the daily changes in the
situation, and in large part it has been due to the great
skill and positive action of the Special Representative.
Life is re-emerging from the ruins. Public services are
increasingly opening their doors to Timorese. The
reopening of schools and health centres, reconstruction,
the collection of taxes, economic recovery and the
return of refugees are also positive developments under
way.

In spite of this generally positive overview, some
issues remain sources of concern. Economically
speaking, the establishment of microcredit systems, the
increase in the number of businesses and the collection
of taxes and customs duties are encouraging
developments. The contributions announced at the end
of the Lisbon donors' conference and the commitment
of international financial institutions will undoubtedly
make it possible to begin projects and to integrate the
economy of East Timor into the international economic
network. That economic recovery will make it possible
to increase stability and security in the country.

With regard to refugee returns, my delegation
would like to see further developments in the gradual
neutralization of militia activities on the borders and in
the camps. We also encourage Indonesia to strengthen
its presence on the border as part of the implementation
of the agreement of 11 April and to become involved
with humanitarian organizations and UNTAET to
enable the definitive return of all those who wish to
return to East Timor.

Attacks on the camps of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in
West Timor are a source of concern for us. We
condemn those attacks and believe that UNHCR should
have all the necessary support to achieve its objectives.

My delegation also welcomes the gradual
establishment of a climate of security in East Timor
and firmly condemns attacks against various posts. We
also ask that UNTAET continue its training of local
police so as to deal with persistent criminality and to
maintain public order so that the Timorese are better
prepared for independence. Attacks against these posts
in many ways illustrate the challenges that must still be
overcome.

On the political front, my delegation welcomes
the intensification of political activity in East Timor.
UNTAET has achieved notable progress in the
establishment of a United Nations civil administration.
It should now see to it that the participation of the East
Timorese people in the elections scheduled for next
year takes place actively, calmly, transparently and
democratically.

The briefing given to us by the Special
Representative enables us to observe that the remaining
challenges are still enormous, despite the considerable
progress we have achieved. It is therefore up to us to
provide the necessary support so that the people of East
Timor can gradually come to terms with one another in
the near future.

