Mr. Koenders (spoke in French): It is an honour and
a pleasure for me to address the Security Council from
Bamako in my new capacity as Special Representative
of the Secretary General for Mali. The report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Mali, which is
before the Council in document S/2013/338, follows
up on resolution 2100 (2013) of 25 April, establishing
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).

I wish to offer an overview of the situation on
the ground in my briefing, focusing on four main
themes: the security situation; the mediation process
and national reconciliation, including the recently
concluded preliminary agreement; preparations for
the elections; and the humanitarian and human rights
situations. Mr. Ladsous will focus more specifically on
strategic and operational issues related to the transition,
and Ms. Haq on the complex issue of support to the
Mission.

The security situation has gradually improved as
a result of the military operations launched in January
by the Malian army and France against extremist
groups in northern Mali. Most large cities in the north
have been taken. Since these large-scale operations,
the forces of Operation Serval and the African-led
International Support Mission in Mali (AFISMA) have
undertaken tactical operations. There have been no
major clashes. Since these operations, some extremist
elements have joined the population and others have
left the country. The major fighting has stopped and
the security situation in Timbuktu and Gao is gradually
returning to normal, thanks to the presence of AFISMA
and Operation Serval alongside the Malian forces. The
incidents recorded in these areas recently should be seen
as isolated acts of banditry. Furthermore, the extremist
groups seem to be avoiding direct confrontation with
the Malian army and its allies. However, scattered
operations continue, leading to the discovery of several
weapons caches.

Despite this improvement in the security situation,
the situation remains complex and fragile. We have
reported clashes between the Mouvement national pour
la liberation de l'Azawad (MNLA) and various armed
groups in the north - essentially the Mouvement arabe
de l'Azawad, the Mouvement pour l'unicite et le jihad
en Afrique de l'Ouest and other armed Tuareg and
Arab elements. Several reasons have been behind the
clashes, including fighting for control of some routes
used for drug trafficking and other goods, as well as
acts of revenge for the atrocities committed against
civilians during the occupation. In addition, another
armed Tuareg movement - the Haut Conseil de
l'Azawad - has been established as a coalition of the
Mouvement islamique de l'Azawad and elements of the
MNLA.

As for the region ofKidal, the MNLA has maintained
control of the city of Kidal and its surroundings and
strengthened its presence in some localities. Meanwhile,
the Malian army has reinforced its presence in Gao.
On 4 June, the Malian army launched an attack on the
MNLA, taking the town of Anefis, which it holds to
this day.

As the threat of asymmetric actions and violent
clashes remains signficant, the protection of civilians
and the security of United Nations personnel are
among my main concerns as we lay the groundwork for
MINUSMA in Bamako and the regions of the north. In
this fragile security situation, regional and international
partners, including the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the
European Union and the United Nations have stepped
up their efforts to convince the Government of Mali and
the MNLA to resume dialogue under the auspices of
the ECOWAS mediator and his team in Ouagadougou,
Burkina Faso.

(spoke in English)

In that context, I am happy to report that on 18 June
the transitional Government of Mali and armed groups
in the northern regions, particularly the MNLA and
the Haut Conseil de l'Azawad signed a preliminary
agreement on the presidential elections and inclusive
negotiations. The Mouvement arabe de 1'Azawad and
the popular front officially adhered to the preliminary
agreement on the same day. I signed as a witness on
behalf of the United Nations.

The preliminary agreement is, in my view, an
important first step towards the full restoration of
constitutional order and territorial integrity. It paves
the way for the holding of elections nationwide,
including in Kidal, and subsequent dialogue with
elected officials on governance, justice, security sector
reform and reconciliation issues. From 1 July onwards,
if the Council so agrees, the MINUSMA Force
Commander will chair the established Joint Technical
Security Commission, which has started overseeing the
implementation of the ceasefire in Kidal. This includes
the process of cantonment as a first step in the process
of disarmament and demobilization, the return to Kidal
of the Malian armed forces with Serval and AFISMA,
and the return of the administration.

For my part, I will chair on behalf of the United
Nations the international commission that will monitor
and oversee the implementation of the agreement. An
international commission of inquiry will also have
to be established to investigate war crimes, crimes
against humanity, crimes of genocide, crimes of sexual
violence, drug trafficking and other serious violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law
throughout the territory of Mali.

Although a first and preliminary step, the agreement
is critical, not only because ofthe forthcoming elections,
but also because it commits the parties to a post-
electoral dialogue. If it is to be successful, the dialogue
will need to be comprehensive and inclusive, and tackle
the root causes of the recurrent crises in Mali.

Some limited progress was also registered on the
broader political front. The long-awaited National
Commission for Dialogue and Reconciliation was
established on 25 April and its 33 members, including
its President and two Vice -Presidents, were appointed.
The Commission came under some criticism for the
perceived lack of transparency and inclusiveness in
the selection of its members. Its mandate and scope
were also deemed by many as too broad. However,
people generally welcomed its establishment
and look forward to the start of its activities if it
addresses long-standing issues of truth and impunity.
The Commission nonetheless faces technical and
logistical challenges. The international community
on the ground is determined to provide the necessary
support and resources, and has established for this
purpose a coordination mechanism at the request of the
Commission and led by MINUSMA.

Meanwhile, importantly for the Council,
preparations are under way for the elections, starting
with the presidential polls on 28 July. At the request
of the Government, MINUSMA is supporting the
deployment of sensitive and non-sensitive electoral
materials to the northern regions as we speak. These
include the national identification card - known
as NINA cards - which will be the sole cards
allowing individuals to vote. Meanwhile, coordination
mechanisms have been established to enhance joint
United Nations support to the elections as the Mission
continues to deploy.

Major challenges remain, including the need to
maintain the broad political consensus on technical
aspects of the elections, the timely delivery of electoral
materials, and issues of internally displaced persons
(IDPs) and refugees. One of the challenges is to ensure
that IDPs can retrieve their NINA cards so they can
vote in their current places of residence. Concerning
the participation of refugees, on 14 June a Government
delegation visited Burkina Faso, Mauritania and Niger to
conduct a census of refugees with a view to identifying
potential voters and discuss modalities for setting up
polling stations in the respective countries. The Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
and the International Organization for Migration are
working closely with the Government in this regard.
Concerning the provision of security throughout the
electoral period, the Government has requested the
support of MINUSMA, particularly for the northern
regions. We are currently assessing the needs in the
context of our capabilities.

Humanitarian needs in Mali remain of concern
to me. About 3.5 million people are considered food
insecure, with 1.4 million of them in need of immediate
food assistance and at least one in five households
in the three northern regions facing a severe food
shortage. Some 660,000 children under the age of five
remain at risk of acute malnutrition. Mali, north and
south combined, has the third highest child mortality
rate worldwide, with 176 deaths per 1,000 live births.

Humanitarian activities in the northern regions are
being carried out where possible in spite of the security
challenges and the coming rainy season, which will to a
certain extent limit the delivery of assistance. Although
most of the administration has returned to the Gao and
Timbuktu regions, the delivery of services remains a
very serious challenge. Some schools have reopened in
those regions, but in Kidal the administration has yet to
deploy and no schools are functioning. It is estimated
that more than 100,000 children still have no access
to education in the north. Access to health care also
remains limited. As of 18 June, the consolidated appeal
process for Mali for 2013 was 32-per cent funded,
having raised $133 million. In my view, additional
resources are urgently needed to address the basic
needs of millions of Malians and pave the way for early
recovery, which will be critical to gaining and retaining
the trust and support of the people.

The human rights situation remains precarious. I
have sent human rights teams to Gao, Gossi, Timbuktu
and Kidal. They have registered violations committed
by all parties. These include disappearances,
extrajudicial executions, ill-treatment, looting of
private property, illegal arrests and arbitrary detention,
as well as impunity, which is exacerbated by ethnic
tensions between different communities. In addition,
there is a severe shortage in the delivery of basic
services such as clean water, health care and education,
which are our top priorities. Following the organization
of the national colloquium on transitional justice,
discussions are taking place as we speak in Bamako on
transitional justice processes, entailing truth-seeking,
investigations, the prosecution of perpetrators and
reparations, with the support of UNDP and MINUSMA.
Meanwhile, the Mission continues to mainstream
gender issues throughout its activities. In cooperation
with UN-Women and the Ministry of Women's Affairs,
it is supporting the national strategy for women's
participation in the elections, as well as advocacy
towards the allocation of a women's quota in the electoral
process. Also, the Mission is setting up mechanisms to
address and prevent conflict-related sexual violence. In
turn, these mechanisms will pave the way to support
for the Government in the establishment of institutional
structures to address sexual and gender-based violence
in the framework of security sector reform.

With regard to support for cultural preservation,
UNESCO and the Government of Mali have recently
jointly assessed the damage to Timbuktu's cultural
heritage, including the situation of ancient manuscripts.
A total of 14 of Timbuktu's mausoleums, including
those that are part of the UNESCO World Heritage
sites, have been totally destroyed, along with two others
at the Djingareyber Mosque. The emblematic E1 Farouk
monument at the entrance to the city was also razed.
An estimated 4,203 manuscripts from the Ahmed
Baba research centre were lost, while another 300,000
that had been pre-emptively removed i mainly to
Bamako - and are in urgent need of conservation.
On the basis of this early assessment, MINUSMA and
UNESCO will join hands, as requested by the Security
Council, in efforts to support the safeguarding of
Malian cultural and historical heritage, which has been
seriously affected by the armed conflict in northern
Mali.

The situation in Mali has, as Council members
know, broad regional and international repercussions.
The recent attacks in Niger are a stark reminder of the
magnitude of the problems facing the Sahel region.
As international attention is focused on Mali, terrorist
and other criminal groups will continue to shift their
operations to neighbouring countries as a result of
the porous and extremely weak border management
control systems in place. Effectively addressing the
challenges facing the Sahel region will require time
and very concerted efforts. The upcoming meeting
of the Support and Follow-up Group on Mali on
1 July in Bamako and the presentation of the United
Nations integrated strategy to the Council tomorrow
will provide good opportunities to further highlight
the transnational nature of threats and the need for a
coherent and coordinated approach in tackling them.

As we focus on the wider region, we also need to
acknowledge that long-term support will be required.
In Mali, the root causes of the crises will need to be
addressed, as noted above, including bad governance,
corruption, cleavages within and between regions and
groups, a sense of political exclusion on the part of a
new generation, poverty and the lack of security sector
reform. Any solution can only be Malian in nature, and
accompanied by the international community. For that
to happen, broad based dialogue is needed, thoroughly
analysing the complex causes of the crisis that has
shocked so many Malians, in order to prevent it from
happening again.

The international community is showing
great solidarity, and I urge all Malians to seize
this opportunity to steer their country in the right
direction. In this regard, I welcome the preliminary
agreement and call on the parties to support its full
implementation in the spirit of national cohesion and
long-lasting peace. Further, I invite the political class
to reach a firm consensus on the electoral process, in
spite of anticipated risks, and encourage all Malians
to ensure an inclusive non-violent electoral and post-
electoral period. Supporting the transitional authorities
in providing an environment conducive to the
holding of peaceful and transparent elections and the
implementation of the preliminary agreement will be a
key focus of my efforts in the weeks to come.

The robust mandate the Council has given us
includes the stabilization of key population centres
and the protection of civilians. It underlines the need
to emphasize a political solution to the fundamental
problems of the country, including human rights,
the restoration of State authority and the rule of law
sectors. It underlines, if agreed, the need to deploy a
peacekeeping operation in a context of asymmetric
threats that will be taken very seriously.

At present, naturally, our resources are still limited.
We are immediately called to assist in two key areas -
the implementation of the preliminary accord and the
upcoming elections - that constitute preliminary steps
towards the next important phase. The success of these
activities will depend on key confidence-building and
assistance to put Mali on the path of stability. I take this
opportunity to call on Member States to fully support
us and contribute critical and immediate resources,
military and police personnel, and key enablers.

In closing, allow me to thank the African Union,
the Economic Community of West African States and
other international partners for their commitment to
addressing the Malian crisis. I particularly would like
to extend my gratitude to the African Union Special
Representative for Mali and Head of AFISMA, former
President Pierre Buyoya, for his personal role and
involvement in ongoing stabilization efforts. Also,
I would like to commend AFISMA troops for their
courage and dedication to the cause of peace and
stability in Mali and reiterate my condolences to the
bereaved families of their fallen brothers in arms.

