Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank Mr. Jean Arnault, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Mission in Colombia, for bringing us up to
date. Ukraine welcomes the Secretary-General's first
report (S/20l6/1095) on the implementation of the
Mission's mandate.

We welcome the new Final Peace Agreement
between the Government of Colombia and the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC), which
has ended more than 50 years of armed conflict in their
country. The ability of the parties to move forward and
work together during the period between the plebiscite
and the approval of the new peace agreement has
affirmed their determination to ensure a transition to
peace that benefits all Colombians.

There was an extensive debate, which led to the
revision of the agreement; as such, the main concerns
of various sectors of Colombian society were addressed
and the necessary commitment was achieved. It is
now essential that the open dialogue that led to the
agreement continue. The swift implementation of this
historic agreement must remain the main task for all
the parties involved. All political forces and all sectors
of Colombian society must actively participate in this
crucial task. Greater unity around the Peace Agreement
is essential to achieve its objectives, in particular with
respect to the ceasefire and the surrender of weapons,
as well as rural reform, combating illicit drugs and
expanding political participation. The issue of training
and the functioning of the FARC camps, as well as the
implementation of the Monitoring and Verification
Mechanism are fundamental at this stage. In that
regard, we commend the Government's commitment to
redouble its efforts to address those unique challenges.

We realize that the transition from conflict to peace
will be complicated by social, economic, political
and security difficulties. Given the complexity of the
process, we believe that it is important to maintain
focus on the needs and interests of the children affected
by the conflict, as well as a gender perspective.

Ukraine reiterates its determination to support
the implementation of the Final Peace Agreement,
in accordance with resolutions 2261 (2016) and 2307
(2016). We commend the efforts of the international
actors supporting the implementation of the Peace
Agreement, in particular those Member States that
have provided observers to the United Nations Mission
in Colombia, as well as the role played by the guarantor
and supporting countries during the peace process.

The Security Council should continue to play a
proactive role in supporting the parties as they move
forward with the implementation of the provisions
of the Final Peace Agreement, and in ensuring the
effective functioning of the Monitoring and Verification
Mechanism. We hope that the Colombian experience
of involving the United Nations as the international
component of the tripartite mechanism will become
an instructive success story for the region and for
the Organization.

