Mr. Allagany (Saudi Arabia) (interpretation from Arabic): We meet once again today to discuss the new
and painful developments in the Middle East. The
Security Council is the highest international political body
entrusted with the task of protecting countries from brute
aggression. It is supposed to follow up its resolutions, and
we believe that meetings of the Council, held as the
situation warrants, to look into the Israeli aggression can
only promote the peace process in the Middle East.

For the fifth day in a row Israel continues by sea, air
and land to wage its military campaign, known as "the
grapes of wrath", against the civilians in Lebanon. The
military campaign in Lebanon started in the south but
moved to all the regions of the country. The wounded and
the dead number in the hundreds, and more than 600,000
Lebanese have been displaced.

This blatant aggression against Lebanon - this
violation of its national sovereignty - is unjustified and
is in contravention of international laws and norms on the
sovereignty of States. It runs counter to the letter and the
spirit of resolution 425 (1978), which calls upon Israel to
withdraw from the occupied Lebanese territories.

Israel today warned the inhabitants of 40 Lebanese
villages to leave their homes lest they see them destroyed.
Homes were destroyed in the region of Beit Sahmar in
the western Bekaa, where whole families were buried
under rubble.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia believes that it is
unreasonable and unacceptable to continue to pressure
Lebanon using aerial and sea bombardment, thus claiming
the lives of many innocent civilians, destroying their
property and leading to their displacement. This comes in
addition to the sea blockade imposed by Israel upon
northern and southern Lebanon. It is unreasonable and
unacceptable that the women and children of Lebanon
should be the first victims of this blatant aggression.

 

We all saw on television the ambulance which was the
target of an aerial bombardment that claimed the lives of
the infant named Muna, three-year-old Zena, four-year-old
Leila, five-year-old Hassan, as well as their mother and
father. And then the official spokesman of the occupation
authorities would say only that the ambulance was targeted
for aerial bombardment because a Lebanese resistance
element was in it. It was an ambulance - it was saving the
wounded.

But the Israeli authorities only keep claiming that this
is an operation to pursue Lebanese resistance elements. Are
the Israeli authorities saying that Lebanese civilians -
specifically the children - bear full responsibility for the
resistance and that they will make no effort to implement
resolution 425 (1978), which calls upon them to withdraw
immediately and unconditionally from Lebanese territories?

Lebanon cannot be responsible for what happens in the
south. It cannot be responsible for all these operations of
resistance to Israeli occupation in that part of Lebanon
unless the Lebanese army is allowed to enter the south to
impose order and to complete Lebanon's sovereignty over
all its territories. Failing that, the Lebanese Government
cannot be held responsible for what happens in the south.

The principle of land for peace is still awaiting the
concept of land. The principle of withdrawal is still
obscured by the expression "re-deployment". Israel is
calling for the elimination of resistance without
withdrawing from the south - without any guarantee that
it will implement resolution 425 (1978) and other
resolutions of international legality on the Arab-Israeli
conflict.

Lebanon has entered its post-civil-war recovery period,
and the Government has been rebuilding its infrastructure.
It has borne the effects of the crisis in the Middle East, and
continues to be the victim of continued aggression. The
peace process that began in Madrid four years ago was
based on a comprehensive, just and lasting solution -
meaning land for peace - and the implementation of
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 425 (1978). As long
as more than one eighth of Lebanon is occupied and Israeli
raids continue to blow up power stations, to interrupt daily
life, to stifle the population with their aerial bombardment,
killing women, children and the elderly before the eyes of
the entire international community, the Security Council's
equating of aggressor and victim in its approach to
Lebanon's complaints will remain devoid of justice.

We are looking for real, permanent peace in the
Middle East, and a permanent settlement of the Arab-
Israeli conflict. We appeal to the international community
to adopt a unified stand against this senseless Israeli
aggression against Lebanon and immediately to provide
assistance to the Lebanese. We appeal to the co-sponsors
of the Middle East peace process to pressure Israel to
implement the agreements into which it has entered and
to achieve progress on the Lebanese and Syrian tracks by
implementing resolutions of international legality, so that
the rights can revert to those who possess them and the
land to those who own it. Then we can call it a just and
lasting settlement.

