Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
organized this debate on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, which is a subject of great importance
and whose consideration by the Council is all the more
important in light of the tragedy currently unfolding in
Gaza, unfortunately demonstrating once again that
civilians are always the first victims of armed
confrontation. I should also like to thank Mr. John
Holmes for his briefing.

The protection of civilians has several times been
the subject of appeals and recommendations by the
Security Council. Unfortunately, we must note that
they have remained a dead letter. We still have
occasion to regret the many violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law in conflict zones,
notwithstanding all of the legal instruments in force, in
particular the Fourth Geneva Convention and the 1977
Additional Protocols.

We are particularly alarmed that civilians are
often deliberately targeted by combatants, who often
subject them to the worst abuse, including intentional
massacres, cruel and degrading treatment, rape, the
blocking of humanitarian access and, not least, the
enlistment of children in armed forces. These acts are
intolerable and deeply reprehensible, since they imperil
the most precious human asset - human dignity, the
fact of being human.

In this regard, the situation of refugees and
displaced persons deserves the ongoing attention of the
international community. As the briefing of 8 January
gave us occasion to recall, these groups are easy
combat targets, in particular those who are most
vulnerable, living in camps and in very precarious
conditions.

Ensuring the protection of civilian populations is
primarily the responsibility of States and of parties to
conflicts. They must fully shoulder their obligations
under relevant national and international legal
instruments. They must not only cease their
reprehensible actions but also enable unconditional
access to victims by humanitarian personnel.

The international community must also shoulder
its responsibilities by providing resources to assist
civilian populations. That is why thinking about the
responsibility to protect should become more profound
in order to avoid repetition of tragedies that we have
witnessed in the recent past. We must reconcile the
rights conferred on States by their sovereignty with the
duty of the international community to react in an
urgent and appropriate manner in cases of humanitarian
disaster due to the inability of or refusal by a State to
end that disaster.

For its part, and because it is the primary
guarantor of international peace and security, the
Security Council must be at the core of this common
action. With regard to peacekeeping operations, the
Council must provide adequately defined mandates.
Furthermore, in cooperation with the Secretariat, it
must provide for appropriate training for the personnel
of peacekeeping operations in the areas of human
rights, humanitarian law and the rights of refugees,
with the aim of zero tolerance for any kind of abuse of
which they may be guilty.

The best guarantees that we can offer to civilians
for their protection are peace, stability and security. In
other words, we must work to prevent conflicts, in
particular by eliminating their underlying causes and
settling conflicts swiftly when they break out.

Accordingly, we need to direct our efforts to the
establishment of the rule of law, to strengthening
democracy, good governance and respect for human
rights and to safeguarding the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States. States must deal squarely
with combating impunity by ensuring, in particular, the
independence and effectiveness of their legal systems.

Furthermore, and in keeping with resolution 1325
(2000), there is an urgent and crucial need to
strengthen the role of women in the prevention and
peaceful settlement of conflicts as well as in post-
conflict reconstruction efforts. Accordingly, we fully
support the updating of the aide-memoire, which is a
practical analytical and diagnostic instrument for
addressing issues relating to the protection of civilians
in armed conflict.

The most fundamental right of every human
being is the right to live in dignity and security. No
situation, not even war, can be used as an extenuating
circumstance to call this right into question. States,
parties to conflicts, the Security Council and the entire
international community have an obligation to make
the protection of civilians an absolute priority.

We therefore pay tribute to all those who, on all
of the various battlefields around the world, have made
this their vocation, sometimes at the cost of their lives.
Without humanitarian personnel, many of the chaotic
situations that we witness would be even more chaotic.
Humanitarian staff must therefore be urgently provided
with the most effective protection possible. This too is
our collective responsibility.

