We commend Germany and the Dominican Republic for convening this important debate and for their commitment in pursuing the important topic of sexual violence in conflict. We also thank the briefers for their remarks and would like to align ourselves with the statement by the European Union (see annex 25). We are outraged by the persistent and widespread sexual violence in armed conflict committed by State and non-State actors, as documented in the most recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/487). Sexual violence is increasingly used as a tactic of warfare and is a flagrant and unacceptable violation of international humanitarian and human rights law. One of the biggest challenges its victims are facing is the lack of accountability of the perpetrators for the crimes they have committed. To address that, Poland will continue to fight and counteract gender-based violence, including as a response to the coronavirus pandemic. We will also continue to support a survivor-centred, rights-based response aimed at creating a safe and participatory environment, including through various solutions that build resilience and address the diverse experiences of all survivors. This approach is critical to ensuring that no one is left behind or excluded from the dividends of peace and development. We recall that victims continue to be stigmatized and rejected by their families and communities too often. Wanting to escape stigma and discrimination, the majority of victims do not report rape and other forms of sexual violence. The great reluctance of many men and boys to report sexual violence makes it very difficult to accurately assess its scope, the limited statistics that exist almost certainly vastly underestimate the number of male victims. It not only contributes to the culture of impunity, but also prevents survivors of sexual violence from accessing medical care and legal support. Also, women with children born of sexual violence are the most marginalized and their lives are accompanied by stigma and isolation. Against this background, we commend the work done by civil society, human rights defenders and peacebuilders, who have been working to change this situation, notwithstanding the risks, and we promise to support them further. We would also like to recall that sexual and gender-based violence remains an important part of humanitarian appeals and requires a joint international response and solidarity. Poverty and social exclusion remain risk factors associated with gender-based violence. As we have stated before, we believe that there is a need for a broader discussion in the Security Council on the importance of women's economic empowerment in post-conflict settings in more general terms. We cannot spare any effort in combating sexual violence. Only by shedding light on the atrocities and by bringing perpetrators to justice can we lift the lasting shadow of sexual violence in conflict for all the survivors and prevent it from happening in the future.
