Mr. Chen Xu (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this meeting. Like other
delegations, we would like to thank Mr. Lubbers for his
detailed briefing, in particular his overview of the
situation in Sierra Leone, Afghanistan, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Balkans, which will be
very helpful for the Council in its discussions. His
comments on the relationship between the issue of
refugees and the fight against terrorism deserve our
attention.

The problem of refugees touches upon many
issues and must be resolved through an integrated
approach. The issues of which the Security Council is
currently seized demonstrate that conflict and war are
the major cause of refugees and internally displaced
persons. While providing humanitarian assistance to
refugees, therefore, the international community should
concentrate on the resolution of disputes and the
settlement of conflicts. The work that has been carried
out by the United Nations in Sierra Leone, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and East Timor has
produced results in this regard. We therefore believe
that the Security Council should make further efforts in
that direction.

The proper settlement of the question of refugees
will require joint efforts on the part of the United
Nations, relevant regional organizations and the parties
to the conflict. The various bodies within the United
Nations system should also be more efficient in their
division of labour and cooperate better so that relief
work for refugees can be carried out in a coordinated
and orderly manner.

The problems associated with refugees vary from
one part of the world to another. In resolving these
problems, therefore, we must take into account the
specific situations and needs of the countries and
regions concerned. For some developing countries,
poverty and economic underdevelopment are often
among the major sources of armed conflict, while the
lack of infrastructure, in turn, seriously hinders relief
work for refugees. That has been the case in
Afghanistan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Sierra Leone. We therefore support Mr. Lubbers'
comments to the effect that Africa should remain our
top priority. We should build upon the work that has
been done to date so as to truly help those countries to
overcome their economic difficulties and properly
address the return, resettlement and reintegration of
refugees. If our work in this regard can yield speedy
results, it will have an important impact on the peace
and security of the countries and regions concerned.

Previous speakers have asked many of the
questions that I was planning to ask, so I will not ask
any of my own. I simply wanted to make those brief
comments. Before concluding, however, I would like to
say how much we appreciate the important
contributions made by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) over the
years to the resolution of the problems of refugees
throughout the world. The Chinese delegation will
continue to support UNHCR in its work. We are
convinced that, under the leadership of Mr. Lubbers,
UNHCR will go on to even greater achievements.

