Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): I would like to start
by thanking the Secretary-General for his briefing and
the Chair ofthe Peacebuilding Commission, Mr. Skoog,
and Ms. Bouchamaoui, for their insightful remarks. We
welcome this timely debate organized by the Permanent
Mission of the United Kingdom. My delegation aligns
itselfwith the statement to be delivered on behalf of the
European Union later today.

Peaceful societies based on the rule of law,
respect for human rights and accountable and
inclusive institutions are both essential conditions for
development and the outcomes of development. The
Security Council has a clear role to play within its
Charter responsibilities in conflict prevention, leading
countries out of conflict, and supporting the creation of
peaceful societies. Better, more coherent cooperation
with the Peacebuilding Commission, as discussed by
the Council on other occasions, is highly conducive to
this end.

While today's subject is vast and the issues are
many, let me focus on rule-of-law and prevention issues.
All conflicts, whatever their nature, have a very clear
pattern - the breakdown of governance, impunity
and lawlessness, exclusion and marginalization,
abuse of power and corruption, and a total disregard
for human rights. The final report of the African
Union Commission of Inquiry on South Sudan points,
inter alia, to the limited attention paid to democracy
and structural transformation, the failure to address
issues of marginalization and exclusion, long-standing
intra-South grievances, and the the failure to address
accountability issues.

In the Central African Republic, the weakness of
State institutions has been a boon for armed groups,
which extort, racketeer, impose illegal taxes, keep
a tight hold on the exploitation of natural resources,
and siphon off millions of much-needed funds, while
the State struggles to provide even the most basic of
services. In conflict after conflict, the continued
failure to address lingering grievances and redress the
exclusion and marginalization of certain groups within
a society has led to explosive consequences.

These are all sobering examples, reminders that
building accountable governance and rule-of-law
institutions and extending governmental authority to
conflict-affected areas are critical, as are targeting and
combating terrorism, which is increasingly setting its
sights on each and every one of us. Targeted efforts to
address key rule-of-law gaps that underpin a conflict
must begin early. Ensuring national ownership of these
efforts increases the likelihood that the initiatives will
be sustained long after peacekeepers are gone.

For rule-of law-mandates to have an impact,
identifying and sequencing the most appropriate
activities is key. United Nations missions need to be
given adequate and predictable resources, in terms
of both expertise and programmatic support, to fulfil
their rule-of-law mandates. Effective coordination of
all actors on the ground - peacekeeping operations,
regional organizations, bilateral actors and United
Nations entities - is required. We regret to note that,
while the rule of law has increasingly become part and
parcel of peacekeeping mandates, the subject itself
as a cross-cutting issue only rarely finds its way into
the Security Council agenda. Given its importance in
State-building, post-conflict recovery and sustaining
peace, this is hardly the right approach, in our view.
We need to bring the rule oflaw back into the Council's
focus.

With respect to prevention, while affirmations of its
importance are many, more often than not, the Council
tends to do too little too late in terms of action. In a
world of ever-more complex and protracted conflicts
and the worst humanitarian crisis since the end of the
Second World War, we should do a lot more to prevent
the breakdown ofpeace, rather than trying to fix it when
it is broken. As the Secretary-General noted earlier
today, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(General Assembly resolution 70/ 1) should be part and
parcel of the preventive effort.

We have to be much better at reading the warning
signs. Among them, violations of human rights and
fundamental freedoms are often the first early-warning
signs of a conflict. Persistent, unaddressed human-
rights violations are also an obstacle to reconciliation
and peacebuilding processes and therefore to inclusive
development. Implementation of the Human Rights Up
Front initiative is of utmost importance in strengthening
preventive, peacebuilding and development efforts.

To strengthen its preventive capacity, the Council
needs to revisit the instruments it has for the purpose.
Horizon-scanning, informal Department of Political
Affairs briefings, better use of interactive dialogues
with regional partners, more coherent analytical
capacity within the Secretariat can all contribute to an
earlier recognition of the warning signs and prompter
acting upon them before they degrade into conflict.

A key element of prevention is inclusivity - on
which the briefers have already spoken earlier this
morning -, with particular reference to the minorities
and vulnerable groups of a society, including young
people, women and girls. Peace and development
will not hold without meaningful and active women's
participation. Since the adoption of landmark resolution
1325 (2000), considerable progress has been achieved,
but even today, this progress remains far too uneven
and not irreversible. We need but look at the lists of the
participants and mediators in peace talks, from which,
with a few positive exceptions, women are largely
missing. But without their voices and participation,
peace and development, be it in Syria, Yemen, South
Sudan or anywhere else, is much harder to achieve.
While not diminishing our focus on women as victims
of conflict, a lot more needs to be done to reinforce the
role of women as protagonists, leaders of peacemaking,
development and counter-terrorism efforts.

Finally, I would like to make reference to the
implementation of the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT),
which we see as an important preventive measure
and a facilitator of development efforts. The all-too-
easy access to weapons makes conflict situations even
more entrenched. In some cases, even a small number
of illicit weapons can have a disproportionate impact
on a country's development, as in the case of small
island developing States. Implementation of the ATT
facilitates sustainable development as it reduces the
risk of arms getting into the wrong hands and allowing
peace and development efforts to be undermined.

