Mr. Ettalhi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I wish to thank you, Sir, for
convening this meeting to discuss the situation in the
Middle East. We also express our appreciation for the
presence of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon among us
this morning and thank Mr. Pascoe for his valuable
briefing.
I wish to endorse the statement made by the
Permanent Observer of Palestine and that to be made
by the representative of the Sudan as the leader of the
Group of Arab States this month.

There is no doubt that the situation in the Middle
East in general and the Palestinian question in
particular has represented and continues to represent
one of the most serious threats to international peace
and security, if not the most serious ever. That threat
has been considered by the Security Council for more
than six decades now and has led to numerous wars
and continual aggressive assaults and attacks that have
caused the great suffering of which we are all aware.
The examples thereof cited by Mr. Pascoe this morning
are but a few among many.

Developments have led to us to pause and
consider how the threat has become increasingly
serious and expansive with passing time. And yet, the
Security Council, entrusted by the general membership
of the United Nations under Article 24 of the Charter
with the principal responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security, has failed to assume
the responsibility referred to in Article 1 of Chapter I
of the Charter. We must ask why the Council is
pussyfooting and unable to address the issue. All I can
hope is that the Victims and perpetrators of the
aggression are being kept in mind throughout such
vacillation.

Once again, if any situation calls for the Security
Council's attention, it is the question of Palestine.
Whatever standards the Council applies in determining
its priorities, that question should be foremost among
them. If there is a threat to peace, the issue should be
clear. Among issues with humanitarian and human
rights dimensions, is there any suffering in the world
worse than that of the Palestinians at the hands of the
Israeli occupiers? The evidence lies in the six million
refugees and displaced persons living on assistance in
refugee camps; the 1.5 million under siege in the Gaza
Strip with no way of earning a living, and we believe
that the right to life is among the most sacred of human
rights; and the more than 2 million people in the West
Bank who are humiliated daily. Pregnant women die at
Israeli checkpoints, of which there are more than 600;
children are terrorized every day on their way to
school; and workers are unable to get to their jobs.
They are all exposed to death, detention and arrest at
any time.
The Security Council surely knows that, even
according to Israeli sources, 40 per cent of Palestinian
young people in the occupied territories have been
detained or arrested at least once. The Council surely
knows that, since this issue was considered last month,
the Israel Defense Forces has killed more than 150
Palestinians, among whom, as Mr. Pascoe noted this
morning, were 36 children and a 60-year-old peasant
who was driven to his farm by hunger. As all have
heard, Israel has announced its resolve to launch a
holocaust of the Palestinians, as noted by the Israeli
Deputy Defence Minister, not to mention those who
have been arrested and detained in Israel, about whose
suffering we heard in this morning's briefing. Does the
Security Council not see that the war crimes of the
occupying Power and its determination to annihilate
the Palestinians collectively represent an attempt to
ethnically cleanse the population by making life
unbearable for them in the West Bank? I would remind
members of the Fourth Geneva Convention, which I
believe is very well known to them all.

Since the Council last met on this issue, the
Israelis have continued to expand their settlements and
their Prime Minister has emphasized the fact that they
will continue to settle. When reminded of the
commitments he undertook at the Annapolis conference
and in the road map, he said that the settlement activity
is taking place in land annexed by Israel to its own
territory and that there was no further need to negotiate
since there was nothing to negotiate about. Worse yet,
in recent days, the competent judiciary body authorized
the Israel Defense Forces to kill those who protest
against the separation wall and determined that even a
peaceful demonstration is an appropriate justification
for murder. At the same time, the Israeli courts decided
to prevent Palestinians from using public roads in the
occupied territories. What kind of racist discrimination
or injustice could be worse than that? Israel's actions
prove that it is not committed to peace and is striving
to ensure the failure of the current peace process. Israel
is an entity based on injustice, ethnic cleansing and
massacre and cannot act against its own nature.

Those who insist on bringing the peace process to
a successful conclusion have been the first to call on
the Security Council to condemn the settlements and
siege and on the Israelis at least to enunciate an
intention to cease such activities, if only by
pronouncement.

The situation in Lebanon is a source of concern to
my country. The intervention of foreign Powers in that
brotherly country has created a complex crisis in the
political situation, whereby the Lebanese parties have
been unable to elect a president of the Republic,
leading to a political vacuum. My country supports the
actions of the Arab League to help our Lebanese
brothers to find a solution compatible with the Taif
Agreement.

We are concerned about Israel's ongoing daily
violations against Lebanese air space, territorial waters
and territory, which were referred to in the latest report
of the Secretary-General; its continuing attacks and
acts of aggression, including abduction and killings,
against people in the border areas; as well as the
ongoing occupation of the Shaba'a farms and other
Lebanese territory. We are also concerned about the
deliberate obstruction of efforts to demarcate the Blue
and Green Lines, including Israel's confronting the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon as it tries to
demarcate those Lines.

That is further evidence of the fact that Israel
disregards and flouts - and I have chosen the words
very carefully - the resolutions of the Council,
especially resolution 1701 (2006). I should once again
like to draw the attention of the members of the
Council to the document circulated by the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon with regard to that matter. I
believe that the Council's ongoing disregard of Israeli
practices has the effect of undermining its credibility. It
also leads us to conclude that the Council has double
standards.

Finally, I should like to remind the Council of
resolution 497 (1981), adopted more than 25 years ago.
In that resolution, the Council underscored the fact that
Israel's decision to annex the occupied Syrian Golan
and impose its laws there was null and void and
without international legal effect. Israel has refused to
accept the resolution, has continued its policy of
judaization, making life difficult for the Syrian
population, and has attempted to attract immigrants
from all over the world to populate the region. Syria
has chosen a just peace as a strategic option in return
for its territories occupied prior to 1967. But Israel has
chosen to continue its occupation, to defy the
resolutions of the Council and to violate the Fourth
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War.

In conclusion, Libya is honoured to say that it

will always stand on the side of justice and condemn
injustice and immorality in international law.

