I wish to begin by joining Council members in thanking Under-Secretary- General Voronkov and Executive Director Coninsx for their valuable briefings on the threats that the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) poses to international peace and security. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines remains profoundly concerned about the acts of violence and the atrocious crimes committed by ISIL and its affiliates. Recent terrorist attacks across the globe demonstrate that, despite its territorial defeat in Iraq and Syria, ISIL is continuing to expand its network, threatening State authority and disrupting peaceful societies as it carries out attacks against innocent civilians. We also note with particular concern, the findings in the Secretary-General's report (S/2020/774) that the global threat from ISIL is likely to increase in the medium to long term if the international community fails to comprehensively address it. Also disturbing is the observation that the inequalities and social fractures, accelerated and magnified by the coronavirus disease pandemic, have the potential to feed into a vicious circle of destabilization and violence that ISIL is keen to exploit. In order to address the threats to international stability and security arising from ISIL's continued expansion, the international community should renew its commitment to strengthening cooperation, bolstering stability and enhancing institutional capacities across all regions. Comprehensive strategies that promote social inclusion and cohesion, including through sustainable social and economic development initiatives, should be advanced in order to build resilient societies and reduce radicalization. Moreover, all counter-terrorism actions must be conducted in accordance with international law and accompanied by the full implementation of the relevant Security Council resolutions and the United Nations Global Counter- Terrorism Strategy. We must also effectively and efficiently share information responsibly with our partners in law enforcement and the intelligence community. Countering the financing of terrorism is also an essential part of the global fight against terror. It is therefore of the utmost importance to monitor changes in the terror-financing techniques utilized by ISIL. Similarly, in order to combat emerging terrorist financing risks, we call on the international community to fully implement resolution 2462 (2019), which requires Member States to disrupt and criminalize the financing of terrorism for any purpose. In that regard, we commend the efforts made by the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism in the area of terrorist financing, and welcome the recent launch of a global capacity-building programme, pursuant to resolution 2462 (2019), on the prevention and suppression of the financing of terrorism. We underscore, however, that all initiatives to combat terrorist financing must be designed in such a way that they safeguard all legitimate and well-managed financial activities, including in offshore jurisdictions. In conclusion, we underscore the central role of the United Nations in preventing and countering terrorism. The threats posed by terrorism can only be defeated through increased regional and international cooperation and through a comprehensive approach, with the active contribution and participation of all Member States. Finally, we reaffirm our commitment to contributing to the global efforts of preventing and countering terrorism.
