We thank the Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), Ms. Deborah Lyons, for her briefing. We also thank the Permanent Representative of Indonesia and Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011) for his briefing on the work of that subsidiary body of the Council. We also listened carefully to the briefing by the representative of Afghan civil society. Russia has unswervingly supported UNAMA's activities. We believe the Mission plays an important role in coordinating international humanitarian assistance to the country, and we note the selfless work of United Nations personnel in Afghanistan, particularly against the backdrop of the coronavirus pandemic. We have closely studied the report of the Secretary-General on the situation in the country (S/2020/1182) and would like to share the following observations. The centre of attention is the peace process in Afghanistan. At the previous meeting of the Security Council on this matter in September (see S/PV.8759), we noted that there had been certain positive developments towards national reconciliation, among which was the intra-Afghan negotiations launched on 12 September in Doha, which received broad support from the international community, including Afghanistan's partners from across the region and the world. Russia welcomed that event after the long months of discussion that had happened since the signing of the agreement between the Americans and the Taliban on 29 February. Let us not forget what preceded this development, which was a crucial moment in the history of this country: both parties ultimately agreed to make concessions and free prisoners. Over the previous three months they reached agreements on the rules of procedure for the negotiation process. However, there is still a long way to go for there to be real progress. At this stage, we see that intra-Afghan dialogue has been delayed for three weeks - until 5 January 2021. We hope that the pause taken by the parties does not mean the process is going to grind to a halt. It is our firm conviction that all efforts now must be aimed at launching substantive negotiations, which the parties have not yet started. Against this backdrop, we remain concerned over the security situation in Afghanistan. We are struck by the unprecedented level of violence in the country. The report of the Secretary-General shares views on the increasing number of victims among the civilian population, in particular women and children, is increasing. These assessments are indeed horrifying. On a regular basis, the country is shaken by terrorist attacks that unfortunately have become an everyday occurrence for the Afghan people. This is evidence once again of the presence in the country of terrorist elements of various kinds. The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant stands behind many of the large-scale attacks. We see that its Afghan wing has not only not ceased to work but rather, on the contrary, it continues to maintain and even increase its potential to roll out terrorist activity across neighbouring Central Asia. This is not to mention that in the country, as previously, there are still cells of foreign terrorist fighters, many of whom have received military experience in Syria and Iraq. Among the most recent sad confirmations of that were the attack on Kabul University and missile strikes on the capital. We also cannot be optimistic about the situation with the drug threat. There have been certain measures taken by Kabul, but we have not seen any particular progress in the fight against drugs. For the second year in a row, we are dealing with a situation where the publication of the latest report by the United Nations Office on Drug and Crime (UNODC) has been delayed. We had hoped to hear objective assessments today of the problem from the representative of UNODC. However, as Council members know, his participation was blocked by a number of delegations. This gives rise to a question: is it possible that certain countries simply do not want to see the real and sad situation in relation to drugs in Afghanistan? We believe that attempts to silence or downplay the presence of drug and terrorist threats in Afghanistan are unacceptable. We are convinced that there is a need for collective efforts on the part of international and regional players to achieve peace and stability in Afghanistan and help facilitate the country's recovery as rapidly as possible. The Afghan people need our solidarity at this turning point. As a friend and neighbour of Afghanistan, Russia continues to work with all Afghan parties for an inclusive process of national reconciliation and to move successfully towards the signing of an intra-Afghan peace agreement. This will also be helped by our steps taken through the troika - Russia, China and the United States - plus Pakistan. Maintaining regional consensus on the peace settlement in Afghanistan remains a priority. It is of course not a secret for anybody that partners from the region are the ones best able to play a role in helping the Afghans achieve their primary goal of putting an end to the years-long conflict and opening a new peaceful chapter in the country's history. Our common steps should be directed towards bringing Afghanistan into a stable, flourishing period as a State free from terrorism and drugs. This is also the reason for the comprehensive efforts of partners from the region within the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and the Collective Security Treaty Organization, as well as the Moscow format for consultations. Further progress towards intra-Afghan dialogue is directly connected to the future of the sanctions regime established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011). Extending the mandate of the Monitoring Team on the sanctions on the Taliban would allow it to continue its work and provide the Sanctions Committee with the necessary assistance. We would like to take this opportunity to thank Ambassador Djani and the entire Indonesian team for the capable stewardship of the 1988 Committee and for creating a favourable working atmosphere in that subsidiary body over the past two years. Nevertheless, we believe that resolving the issue of the sanctions review is something that must be discussed separately. It is clear that it requires a step-by-step approach and an objective view of the current situation in strict and full compliance with resolution 2513 (2020). We should recall that the result of our efforts should be peace in Afghanistan.
