The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Somalia, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mohamed
(Somalia) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Chinese): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council condemns in the
strongest terms the terrorist suicide attacks that
occurred in the towns of Hargeysa and Bosasso in
Somalia on 29 October 2008. These heinous
attacks, which caused numerous deaths and
injuries and appear to have been coordinated,
targeted the compound of the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) and an
Ethiopian Government office, as well as local
government offices.

"The Security Council expresses its deepest
sympathy and condolences to the victims of these
attacks and to their families, and to the people and
authorities of Somalia and Ethiopia. It notes with
appreciation that some of the victims are being
treated at the French medical centre in Djibouti.

"The Security Council commends United
Nations personnel for their action on the ground
in Somalia, in support of the Somali population.

"The Security Council underlines the need
to bring the perpetrators, organizers, financiers
and sponsors of these reprehensible acts of
terrorism to justice and urges all States, in
accordance with their obligations under
international law and resolution 1373 (2001) and
consistent with resolution 1624 (2005), to
cooperate actively with the authorities of Somalia
in this regard.

"The Security Council reaffirms that
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations
constitutes one of the most serious threats to
international peace and security, and that any acts
of terrorism are criminal and unjustifiable,
regardless of their motivation, wherever,
whenever and by whomsoever committed.

"The Security Council further reaffirms the
need to combat by all means, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations, threats to
international peace and security caused by
terrorist acts. The Council reminds States that
they must ensure that any measures taken to
combat terrorism comply with all their
obligations under international law, in particular
international human rights, refugee and
humanitarian law.

"The Security Council reiterates its
determination to combat all forms of terrorism, in
accordance with its responsibilities under the
Charter of the United Nations."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2008/41.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m.
08-57808

