Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation expresses its gratitude to
Mr. De Miranda, Minister for External Relations of Angola,
for attending this public debate. We also thank Ambassador
Fowler for presenting to us, in his capacity of Chairman of
the sanctions Committee on Angola, the report by the Panel
of Experts.

We express our profound concern over the long-
standing lack of progress in the peace process in Angola.
UNITA and, in particular, Mr. Savimbi have refused to
implement the commitments they undertook in the Lusaka
Protocol, as well as the relevant resolutions adopted by the
Security Council, and therefore should be considered the
party that bears the main responsibility for the current
situation in Angola. UNITA has constantly made
provocations and attacked innocent civilians - even
attacking United Nations personnel and aircraft - and
therefore deserves the condemnation and the sanctions of
the international community.

The Chinese delegation appreciates the great efforts
made by Ambassador Fowler as Chairman of the
sanctions Committee and his colleagues in order to
improve and strengthen the United Nations sanctions
regime against UNITA. We have noted that recently the
international community has been achieving ever-greater
consensus on the sanctions against UNITA. Various
concerted actions are being taken.

However, the sanctions against UNITA are far from
being effective. Mr. Savimbi and UNITA are still using
all means and channels available to bust the sanctions
imposed by the Security Council. One specific example
is that of the diamonds produced in the areas under its
control, which are being used by UNITA in illicit arms
trading. It has to be pointed out that no country, company
or individual should be allowed to collude with
Mr. Savimbi or UNITA in an attempt to bust the
sanctions imposed by the Security Council.

As long as violations of the sanctions regime
continue, peace will not come to Angola and the
sufferings of the people of Angola will continue. We
strongly appeal to all countries to genuinely abide by the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council, in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations, by putting an end
to the supply of arms or any other forms of support to
UNITA and by taking other effective measures to prevent
violations by their own nationals. The Chinese delegation
supports the work carried out by the Panel of Experts as
mandated by the Security Council.

The report that has been presented to us today by the
Panel of Experts is informative. I would like to reiterate
that the signal sent to us by the report is very clear:
measures have to be taken to strengthen the sanctions
regime. The Security Council must provide positive
support in this regard. Because the report and the
recommendations contained therein cover many fields,
such as the political, economic, commercial and military
fields, they also involve many complex issues, and we
have to study the report very carefully. We support the
sanctions Committee's having an in-depth consideration
of the report and the recommendations contained therein
so as to help the Security Council take timely and
practical measures.

Like other countries, we believe that strengthening
the sanctions against UNITA is in itself not our purpose.
Rather, it is a tool to create the necessary conditions for
a final political solution to the question of Angola. It is
our hope that the international community will be able to

 

work together, coordinate various actions and strengthen its
sanctions against UNITA so as to force it to lay down its
arms soon, cease all hostilities and embark upon the path
towards national reconciliation at an early date.

