Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I would like to begin
by thanking Special Representative Hennis-Plasschaert
for her very thoughtful and comprehensive briefing. I
think today's unanimous adoption of resolution 2470
(2019), which renews the mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), shows the
strong support of the Security Council for her work and
that of her Mission.

I think it is significant that this is our first Security
Council meeting on Iraq since the liberation of the last
of the Da'esh-held territory in the region. While it is
only natural for us at the Security Council to tend at
times to focus on the risks and the threats, I think that it
is very important that we also reflect on the significant
progress that has been made in Iraq to date, and also
that we thank the Iraqi Government, the Iraqi security
forces and the Iraqi people for the immense sacrifices
that they have made in defeating Da'esh.

While a territorial defeat is a very important
milestone, the path to reconciliation and stabilization
will be long and complex. Erasing the ideology ofDa'esh
will take time and require our sustained and collective
efforts. In that regard, we recognize the important
role that UNAMI continues to play in supporting the
Government of Iraq and its post-conflict recovery and
stabilization efforts. Looking ahead, the immediate
focus must be on ensuring that the conditions that first
gave rise to Da'esh do not re-emerge. In the near term,
we believe that means focusing on three areas, namely,
reconstruction, reconciliation and representation.

First, reconstruction and the provision of basic
services are clearly essential for Iraq's long-term
stability. We all heard the staggering figures mentioned
today by the representative of Cote d'Ivoire, with over
1.75 million Iraqis remaining displaced, unable or
unwilling to return to their homes. The Government
of Iraq, the United Nations and the international
community should continue to work urgently to
address that situation, including by recognizing and
tackling underlying concerns and through the full
implementation of the pledges made at the Kuwait
International Conference for the Reconstruction of
Iraq, referred to earlier by the Russian Ambassador.

Ensuring that all Iraqi citizens are able to access
civil documentation must also be a priority, especially
for internally displaced children who face disruption to
their education. Underpinning all of this is the need for
strong State institutions and inclusive and representative
Government. In that regard, we support Prime Minister
Adil Abd Al-Mahdi's efforts to reach agreement in the
Council of Representatives to fill the remaining four
Cabinet positions and ensure the broadest possible
representation of women and minorities in all levels
of Government.

Secondly, as Iraq continues to rebuild following
years of conflict, reconciliation at all levels of society
must be front and centre - a point raised by the French
Ambassador. In that regard, we welcome UNAMI's
continued engagement with the Government of Iraq as
it advances an inclusive political dialogue. We further
welcome the important role that the United Nations
plays in supporting an effective and accountable Iraqi
security sector, one that is able to effectively counter
the ongoing threat from Da'esh and provide security for
all Iraqis.

Accountabilityis important too, as the representative
of Germany highlighted, and we thank the Government
of Iraq and the United Nations Assistance Mission for
their ongoing support to the United Nations Investigative
Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed
by Da'esh, as it continues to carry out its vital work to
ensure justice for survivors.

Thirdly, turning finally to representation, the
United Kingdom welcomes the United Nations
Assistance Mission's focus on gender across all of its
activities, including its work to promote the enactment
of the anti-domestic-violence law. We strongly agree
with Germany that women's protection and meaningful
participation will support reconciliation and long-
term stability. As we are approaching the twentieth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), next October,
we will continue to support Iraq to ensure that its next
national action plan on women and peace and security
is budgeted, implemented in collaboration with civil
society and coordinated at the local and national levels.
We would welcome the opportunity to hear from more
female civil society briefers in future Council meetings
to learn from their experiences and expertise.

The United Kingdom remains steadfast in its
commitment to, and its support for, the important work
of UNAMI and for the people of Iraq as they work to
build a more stable and prosperous future.

