I thank Under-Secretary-General Mr. Lacroix and Foreign Minister Mr. Cheikh Ahmed for their briefings. As a good friend of African countries, China has been actively supporting the efforts of the Sahel countries to maintain peace, security and stability and to promote development in the region. We are encouraged to see that the political situation in the Sahel remains generally stable, and we commend the efforts of countries of the region in that regard. Meanwhile, we also share the concerns of countries in the region over the serious security challenges posed by terrorism, transnational organized crime and intercommunal violence. Having carefully studied the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/373) and listened to the interventions of the briefers, I wish to share the following points. First, continued efforts should be made to support political solutions to regional issues. China maintains that African issues should be resolved in an African way and through an African-led and African-owned process. We hope that the international community will continue to respect the political will of the people and the sovereignty of the countries of the region and to support the important role of regional organizations, including the African Union. Secondly, continued efforts should be made to tackle the challenges arising from terrorism and transnational organized crime. We still remember that in March, the Security Council held an open debate (see S/PV.8743) and adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/2020/5) on countering terrorism in Africa. We hope that the international community can strengthen effective coordination and increase its support and investment in the fight against terrorism in Africa. The Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel has played an important role in maintaining regional peace and security. China supports the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) providing logistical support to the Joint Force within its mandate and the strengthening of its mandate with the necessary financial assistance. It is also our view that the United Nations agencies should provide more support to Sahel countries to strengthen capacity-building in countering terrorism. China has provided ¥300 million in aid to counter-terrorism operations in the Sahel and the Joint Force, and will continue to help. Thirdly, efforts should continue to eradicate the root causes of regional instability. Underdevelopment is one of the main causes of many issues in the Sahel. We hope that the international community will provide more support to countries in the region in eradicating poverty and improving health care, education and employment so that they can achieve the 2030 Sustainable Development Goals and Agenda 2063 of the African Union in a more timely and effective manner. China is actively assisting countries the region, especially on infrastructure and connectivity, and by offering scholarships for study in China, among other means. Fourthly, the pandemic is still severely affecting the Sahel region and the African continent. It is the strong hope of China that the international community will work closely with African countries in fighting the pandemic and addressing its negative social and economic impacts. In this regard, our support should go beyond mere political slogans, and be implemented through concrete actions. We need to support MINUSMA in strengthening its capacity to fight the pandemic. President Xi Jinping has promised that China will work together with African countries in fighting the pandemic. We have promised to establish a cooperation mechanism for our hospitals to pair up with 30 African hospitals, and to make any vaccine a global public good, while making sure African and developing countries are among the first to benefit. We hope that, through our joint efforts, we will be able to bring hope to the Sahel and Africa as a whole. China will always be a strong supporter of African countries.
