Mr. Hernandez-Milian (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): In its national capacity, Costa Rica aligns
itself with the statement made by the representative of
Canada on behalf of the Group of Friends of children
and armed conflict.

It is an honour for Costa Rica to speak today in
its capacity as Chair of the Human Security Network
(HSN) and on behalf of the following members of the
Network: Austria, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Greece,
Ireland, Jordan, Mali, Norway, Slovenia, Switzerland
and Thailand, and South Africa as an observer.

We would like to thank Mexico for convening
this important open debate on children and armed
conflict, which has been one of the priority issues for
the HSN since its inception. The presence this morning
of Ms. Patricia Espinosa Cantellano, Mexico's
Secretary of Foreign Affairs, was a particular reflection
of its importance. We also would like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict for her introduction of
the annual report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/181). Our thanks to also to the representatives
of UNICEF and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, as well as to the Council's special guest,
Ms. Manju Gurung, for their valuable contributions to
the debate.

We believe that the information provided on the
criteria and procedures used for listing and de-listing
parties to armed conflict in the annexes of the reports
is an important step for greater clarity, objectivity,
transparency and accountability in the Security
Council's work for the protection of children affected
by armed conflicts.

We welcome the efforts and the important
progress made in different parts of the world to address
the six grave violations committed against children in
armed conflicts. The Security Council's strengthening
of its protection framework in all its relevant
resolutions - in particular its most recent one on this
issue, resolution 1882 (2009) - as well as ongoing
efforts in the General Assembly and other bodies of the
United Nations system, are a clear sign of commitment.

We also acknowledge the positive trend towards
mainstreaming the protection, rights and well-being of
children affected by armed conflict within some United
Nations missions on the ground. We encourage the
relevant departments of the Secretariat responsible for
providing support to the field, in particular the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the
Department of Political Affairs and the Peacebuilding
Support Office, to work closely together to ensure a
more systematic and consistent approach in all field
missions. The appointment of more child protection
advisers could also contribute to this end.

We still face major challenges in responding to
the issues that affect children in armed conflicts. The
effectiveness of United Nations work on this issue has
been limited by the low number of situations where
action plans have been effectively implemented after
signature; the absence of systematic follow-up to the
recommendations of the Working Group; the lack of
decisive action against persistent violators, as well as
accountability measures to fight impunity; and
insufficient funding for sustainable disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes,
including for the social protection of children who
have been associated with armed forces and groups.

In order to address these challenges, the Human
Security Network believes that action plans are among
the most important mechanisms to achieve tangible
results and a fundamental tool in halting the
recruitment of children. As part of the de-listing
process, the main elements of these action plans should
be tailored to the new requirements set forth in
resolution 1882 (2009) in order to respond more
effectively to other violations against children, such as
killing, maiming and sexual violence.

It is important to complement these action plans
with a strong programmatic response to support
Governments in implementing national strategies that
include prevention within a multisectoral approach to
assist and protect children who have been associated
with armed forces and groups, and in particular to
ensure their access to medical care, psychological and
psychosocial support, legal assistance, education and
sustainable socio-economic reintegration. Assistance
measures must focus on preventing their
marginalization and stigmatization and on facilitating
their social reintegration. Furthermore, a more stable
and long-term funding structure to fulfil all elements of
the action plans and to implement sustained
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes is critical to preventing re-recruitment and
the reoccurrence of other violations.

All parties to conflicts must in all circumstances
refrain from committing and condoning grave
violations against children in armed conflict. The real
commitment of civilian and military leaders and the
principle of command responsibility are fundamental to
enforcing the accountability of all perpetrators of grave
violations under internationally agreed standards. The
complementary role of international justice
mechanisms, such as the International Criminal Court
and others, can also play a relevant role in supporting
national efforts to fight impunity, as appropriate.
Targeted and effective means to ensure compliance
should be considered, in particular against persistent
perpetrators of grave violations. In addition, the
Security Council should improve the communication
and exchange of information among its subsidiary
bodies in order to ensure a more coherent approach.

Lastly, the Human Security Network considers it
important to give systematic follow-up to the
recommendations of the Working Group, including in
the reports of the Special Representative. The agreed
conclusions should serve as indicators of progress in
successive evaluations of every situation involving
children affected by armed conflict. In this regard, we
also believe that administrative support for the
Working Group is necessary. This could help to
systematize information, strengthen historical memory,
facilitate assessment, and identify trends and patterns
to promote a more strategic vision and find remedies
for every situation involving children affected by
armed conflict. Last but not least, a more efficient use
of the toolkit, in particular the conduct of field visits,
would also enhance follow-up by the Working Group.

