Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): We congratulate the French delegation
on assuming the presidency of the Council for the
month of March. We thank the French delegation
for its kind words about my delegation and wish it a
productive presidency.

The delegation of Equatorial Guinea would also
like to welcome to the Security Council Mr. Miroslav
Lajcak, Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and
Minister for Foreign and European Affairs ofthe Slovak
Republic, and to thank him for his informative briefing
on the programme and activities planned under the
Slovak chairmanship ofthe OSCE. We also congratulate
Slovakia on its assumption of the OSCE chairmanship
and on its commitment to the maintenance of peace
in Europe.

I would like to take this opportunity to support
the priority issues on the agenda of the Slovak
chairmanship ofthe OSCE, which focus on three areas of
action -preventing, mediating and mitigating conflicts
by focusing on the people they affect, ensuring a more
secure future and promoting effective multilateralism.

Since the continuing crisis in Ukraine is a priority
for the OSCE and one of the most critical issues in the
region, it is important to remember that the only possible
solution to the situation in Ukraine is by peaceful

means, through direct, frank and inclusive negotiations
on the basis of the Minsk agreements. Bearing in mind
the priorities of Slovakia's chairmanship, we would
also like to support its new approach and determination
with regard to the so-called protracted conflicts
affecting Europe. We therefore welcome Mr. Lajcak's
official visit to Moldova in January as part of Slovakia's
approach to conflict prevention and mediation.

As one ofthe largest regional security organizations
in the world, the OSCE plays a very important role in
maintaining the stability and security of countries in
and around the region. As we said in last year's Council
meeting (see S/PV.8200), it is important to further
strengthen cooperation between the OSCE and the
United Nations in order to enhance the OSCE's role
in implementing United Nations decisions concerning
European conflicts for the benefit of international
peace and security.

On the eve of the commemoration of International
Women's Day, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
considers it right that the OSCE chairmanship is
incorporating a gender perspective as a strategy to
promote women's participation in conflict mediation
and resolution processes with a view to implementing
the United Nations System-wide Action Plan on Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women.

In conclusion, I would like to highlight the
OSCE's excellent work as a mediator to help resolve
conflicts peacefully while ensuring that agreements
are implemented and fully respected. As we have noted
previously, we consider it very important to strengthen
the cooperation between the United Nations and the
OSCE as the sole mechanism for achieving peace and
greater stability in the OSCE regions. I would like
to wish the Slovak chairmanship every success in
fulfilling its priorities.

