Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands) (spoke in French): At the outset, allow me to thank Under-
Secretary-General Lacroix for his very insightful
briefing. I also extend my thanks to the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Mali, Mr. Coulibaly, for joining us
here in the Security Council.

On the fifth anniversary of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA), it is time to take stock of the
Mission's achievements and the remaining challenges.
I will address three main elements: first, the political
situation; secondly, the mandate; and, thirdly, the
effectiveness of peacekeeping.

First, with regard to the political situation, progress
in the peace process has been hard fought. While we
welcome recent promising developments, we must
recognize that the record over the past five years
has been bleak. The Malian parties must together
ensure expedited progress in the implementation of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
including the full and effective participation of women.

We welcome the Secretary-General's suggestions to
give new impetus to the political process. That requires
the development of a pact for peace based on clear
criteria. Our patience is running out. The forthcoming
elections will be an important test for the Malian
parties, who will have to prove their commitment to the
country's stability. We call on the Malian authorities
to ensure an inclusive electoral process and political
dialogue, leaving space for debate and dissenting voices.
On that point, we recall the need for all actors, including
law enforcement agencies, to act with restraint.

Secondly, with respect MINUSMA's mandate,
the Mission's support to the political process and its
mediation have proved very valuable. We share the
Secretary-General's view that the key to the Mission's
success lies in setting clear priorities. First and
foremost, the MINUSMA must focus on supporting
the implementation of the main provisions of the
Agreement - the effective establishment of legitimate
State bodies and services, decentralization, security
sector reform and disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration processes and reconciliation.

Furthermore, allegations of violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights
laws are too often not prosecuted. The importance
of the Mission's accountability tasks, including in its
judicial and corrections work, cannot be minimized.
While, as mentioned by the Under-Secretary-General,
MINUSMA has a role to play in central Mali with
regard to reconciliation and conflict prevention at the
local level, that should not affect its primary mission
in the north.

The repercussions of Mali's instability are felt
beyond the country's borders, above all throughout
the Sahel and in Europe. The stability of Mali, and the
region as a whole, is crucial in combating threats such
as human trafficking and illegal migration, terrorism
and organized crime. Coordination and cooperation
between the various security actors are essential if we
are to respond effectively to those problems, including
the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel,
Operation Barkhane and the European Union Mission.

In order to define effective strategies to support
sustainable peace and stability, MINUSMA must also
improve its information on how the illegal economy
influences conflict dynamics in Mali and beyond. That
includes trafficking in drugs, weapons and human
beings. Cooperation with United Nations entities, such
as the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, is
crucial in that regard.

Thirdly, and finally, I will address the concerns
regarding the effectiveness of peacekeeping. After five
years in existence, we can consider that MINUSMA
has reached maturity. Critical reflection on the
Mission can improve the achievement of its mandate.
The comprehensive action plan drawn up in response
to the Santos Cruz report and the measures already
taken to implement it are to be welcomed. We urge the
United Nations to implement the recommendations as
soon as possible. Given the complex context in which
the Mission takes place, compartmentalization must
be avoided. As the Dutch Prime Minister Mark Rutte
stated at the launch of Action for Peacekeeping, during
our presidency of the Council in March, an integrated
approach must be firmly applied at both strategic and
operational levels, not only within the framework of
the Mission but also in strategic coordination with the
United Nations country team (see S/PV.8218). In that
context, we call upon the United Nations to develop a
mission-wide strategic plan as soon as possible.

In conclusion, I salute all the men and women who
have done their utmost to promote peace and stability in
Mali since the launch of MINUSMA. We pay particular
tribute to the 174 peacekeepers who paid the highest
price in defending and promoting lasting peace in Mali.

