Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I would like to
start by joining my colleagues who have already paid
tribute to Ambassador Jeremy Greenstock, who is,
unfortunately, with us for the last time as he is due to
leave. It is a symbolic coincidence that he should be
here for the last time today, as we are discussing the
Cote d'Ivoire mission, which he led. That was a very
successful mission, and made a very significant
contribution to our current discussions on that subject.
We are looking at Cote d'Ivoire from a different
perspective as a result of the success of the mission
that he led. I wish Ambassador Greenstock great
success in the new tasks that he will be tackling in a
very sensitive area. His very significant contribution to
the work of the Council when we discussed Iraq will
stand him in good stead in his new mission. I hope that
we will be seeing Ambassador Greenstock often, since
he will be coming back from time to time - wearing a
different hat, but still talking to the many friends that
he has made here in the Council and elsewhere in the
United Nations. I wish him good luck.

Turning to Cote d'Ivoire, I would like to
welcome, and say that I am very honoured to see,
Prime Minister Diarra, Foreign Minister Bamba
Mamadou and the entire Ivorian delegation with us this
morning. I would like to commend Prime Minister
Diarra for the reconciliatory and leadership role that he
has been playing in the process of national
reconstruction in his country. His presence is also
gratifying because it gives an opportunity for the
Security Council to address the issue of C6te d'Ivoire
once again, with him here to explain some of the points
that the Council still needs to be clarified in order to
advance and fully support the positive efforts that he
has been making.

I would like also to say that I am pleased to see
Special Representative Albert Tevoedjre. We were very
pleased about the teamwork that he established with
the Ivorian authorities. That teamwork is, I think, also
a factor in the success that we are now experiencing in
Cote d'Ivoire.

The great achievements made since the
inauguration of the Government of National
Reconciliation on 13 March 2003, thanks to the efforts
of President Laurent Gbagbo and Prime Minister
Diarra, are proof of the political will of the Ivorian
forces and the determination of the international
community to address this crisis. It is our conviction
that the same political will will prevail to address all
pending issues, namely, the appointment of effective
interior and defence ministers; the extension of
Government services and State authority throughout
the territory; the adoption of the amnesty law; and the
implementation of the disarmament and reintegration
programme.

We are pleased with the information and the
assurances that have been given to the Council this
morning by Prime Minister Diarra with regard to the
steps that have been effectively taken in that respect.
We will review this as we have reviewed the other
elements.

As my delegation stated during one of the
consultation meetings, the progress made in the field of
political dialogue will only be sustainable if military
aspects are properly addressed. In that connection, we
welcome the joint declaration by the defence and
security forces of Cote d'Ivoire and the Forces
nouvelles, which was made 48 hours after the Security
Council mission departed Cote d'Ivoire and following
the assurances we received from President Gbagbo and
Prime Minister Diarra when we were in the country.
That step is really a very positive development. The
parties should be encouraged to continue to work in the
same constructive manner they have already
demonstrated as they implement the declaration. Again,
that is one specific example of what has been achieved.

As stated in the report of the Security Council
mission to West Africa, "Although Cote d'Ivoire
remains an issue of serious concern for the subregion
and the international community, the precise modalities
of implementing the Agreement are largely a matter for
internal Ivorian discussion". (5/2003/688, para. 35)

It is clear from that conclusion that, in order to
reach all the goals related to the pending issues, the
Ivorians should continue to play a key role, as indeed
has been the case.

One very meaningful lesson can be drawn from
the crisis in Cote d'Ivoire regarding the response of the
international community, namely, that the continued
efforts of the Economic Community of West African
States, France, the African Union, the United Nations
and the international community as a whole is
producing the desired result due to the fact that the
political will of the parties is increasingly evident. The
harmonious, concerted and timely response of the
international community is a determining factor if we
are to succeed in tackling crises of the dimension of the
one in Cote d'Ivoire, as is the case in the entire
subregion of West Africa.

The efforts of the international community will be
incomplete unless they are followed by further action
to support the post-conflict period. There is therefore a
need for the international community to continue to
respond to the appeal made at the donors conference
held in Paris on 18 July, bearing in mind that a positive
impact on the West African region is directly
dependent on the recovery of cote d'Ivoire.

The disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme that has been presented to the
Security Council this morning by Prime Minister
Diarra will make a positive contribution to peace and
stability in Cote d'Ivoire. We therefore support it, and
urge the Council to give it very positive consideration.

The prevailing situation in Liberia is a matter of
concern, as it can have a negative effect on the
sustainable peace we are seeing emerging in Cote
d'Ivoire. I would therefore like to take this opportunity
to reiterate the urgent need for the Council to find a
solution to that burning crisis as well.

France has presented us with a draft presidential
statement that contains elements that I think will have
our support. We would be very pleased to approve it
later in the Council.

