The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Ms. Cousin
for her briefing.

After consultations among Council members, I
have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf.

"The Security Council recalls its resolutions
2042 (2012), 2043 (2012), 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014),
2175 (2014), 2191 (2014) and its presidential
statements of 3 August 2011 and 2 October 2013.

"The Security Council reaffirms its strong
commitment to the sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity of Syria and all
other States affected by the Syrian conflict, and to
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.

"The Security Council expresses grave alarm
at the significant and rapid deterioration of the
humanitarian situation in Syria, including at the fact
that over 220,000 people have been killed, including
well over 10,000 children, since the beginning of
the conflict; around half of the population has been
forced to flee their homes, including over 3.9 million
who have sought refuge in neighbouring countries,
among which are nearly 2.1 million children; and
that more than 12.2 million people in Syria require
urgent humanitarian assistance including 440,000
civilians in besieged areas.

"The Security Council demands that all parties
to the Syrian domestic conflict immediately put
an end to all forms of violence and reiterates that
all parties to the Syrian domestic conflict, in
particular the Syrian authorities, must comply with
their applicable obligations under international
humanitarian law and international human rights
law and respect human rights, and reiterates
its demand that they fully and immediately
implement the provisions of its resolutions 2139
(2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014), particularly
through facilitating the expansion of humanitarian
relief operations and the immediate delivery of
humanitarian assistance to hard-to-reach and
besieged areas across borders and conflict lines.

"The Security Council is alarmed that the
Syrian crisis has become the largest humanitarian
emergency crisis in the world today, threatening
peace and security in the region with diverse
implications on the neighbouring countries and
the displacement of millions of Syrians into those
countries, and calls for addressing further spill-
over of the conflict in Syria into the neighbouring
countries.

"The Security Council further calls for
coordinated international support to the
neighbouring countries hosting Syrian refugees,
at their request, in addressing legitimate security
concerns and ensuring the safety and security of
host communities and refugees, and countering
radicalization through, inter alia, the provision
of support for effective border management and
internal security measures.

"The Security Council reiterates its deep
appreciation for the significant and admirable
efforts that have been made by the countries of
the region, notably Lebanon, Jordan, Turkey, Iraq
and Egypt, to accommodate Syrian refugees and
is mindful of the immense costs and multifaceted
challenges incurred by these countries as a
consequence of the crisis.

"The Security Council notes with deep
concern that the crisis in Syria has had social,
demographic, environmental and economic
effects on neighbouring countries; which have
exacerbated vulnerabilities; overstretched limited
resources and basic social services such as health,
water, sanitation, housing capacities, energy and
education; aggravated unemployment; diminished
trade and investment; and affected regional
stability and security.

"The Security Council emphasizes the strain
placed on host country education systems by the
inflow of refugees and that additional resources
will be required to help the 600,000 children
outside the school system access quality education.

"The Security Council underlines the risk of
further regional destabilization if the conflict,
refugee crisis and the needs of the host countries

are not adequately addressed. The Security Council
stresses the importance of funding the humanitarian
and development responses to the refugee crisis,
providing support for national response plans,
addressing the humanitarian needs of refugees,
in particular women and children, both in camps
and urban areas and through capacity-building and
technical support, strengthening the resilience of
host countries and communities as components of
stabilizing the region, preventing radicalization
and countering the threat of terrorism and foreign
terrorist fighters.

"The Security Council notes with concern
that the international response to the Syrian and
regional crisis continues to fall short of meeting
the needs as assessed by host Governments and the
United Nations, and urges all Member States, based
on burden-sharing principles, to support the United
Nations and the countries of the region, including
by adopting medium- and long-term responses to
alleviate the impact on communities, providing
increased, flexible and multi-year predictable
funding as well as increasing resettlement efforts,
and taking note in this regard of the Berlin
Communique of 28 October 2014.

"The Security Council urges donors, international
financial institutions and United Nations agencies
to consider financing instruments that effectively
meet the unique needs of middle-income countries
impacted by the Syrian conflict and address its
massive structural impact on neighbouring countries.

"The Security Council emphasizes the importance
of complying with applicable international
humanitarian law and refugee law, promoting and
protecting the human rights of all people affected
by the crisis and respecting the United Nations
guiding principles of humanitarian emergency
assistance, welcomes efforts by host countries in
this regard and urges Member States to continue to
help them in this effort.

"The Security Council welcomes the convening
of the third International Humanitarian Pledging
Conference for Syria, generously hosted by Kuwait
on 31 March 2015, and the $3.6 billion pledges
made, and calls on all Member States to ensure the
timely disbursement of pledges.

"The Security Council emphasizes that the
humanitarian situation will continue to deteriorate

in the absence of a political solution, expresses its
full support for the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, and
reiterates that the only sustainable solution to
the current crisis in Syria is through an inclusive
and Syrian-led political process that meets the
legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people, with
a View to full implementation of the Geneva
communique of 30 June 2012 endorsed as annex II
of its resolution 2118 (2013)."

This statement will be issued as a document of the

Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2015/10.
I shall now make a statement in my national
capacity.

In the context of today's special meeting on the
tragedy in Syria, it is my duty to say that throughout
history - and still today - my country, the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan, has been a safe harbour for the
countries of our region, taking in displaced people from
their lands when war or calamity has struck.

Today's meeting coincides with the start of the
fifth year of the Syrian crisis. Over the past four years,
we have seen an escalation in killing, destruction,
terrorism and lawlessness, which has forced millions
of Syrians into exodus, both inside and outside their
country. We in Jordan are at the forefront of this crisis,
with the number of refugees in our country swelling to
1.5 million refugees to date, although before the crisis
there were already 750,000 Syrians living in Jordan.
This overall number represents 21 per cent of the total
population of Jordan.

Undoubtedly, the four-year duration of this crisis so
far and the absence of a political solution have forced
Jordan to turn away from dealing with the immediate
impact of the crisis and led it to attempt to manage
the flow of a large number of refugees who need to
be hosted on an extended basis. This situation has
had many repercussions on us, affecting, as it does,
Jordanian society and the Jordanian State in terms of
infrastructure, services, education, health, energy and
water, putting acute pressure on the country's already
limited resources.

In our view, finding a political solution has always
been the only way out of the crisis, particularly with
regard to humanitarian assistance and the problem
of refugees and displaced persons. Such a political
solution should meet the needs and aspirations of the
Syrian people and lead them to a new reality in which
all the diverse groups that form the Syrian people
play an active part in restoring the social fabric of the
country and in which the displaced feel safe enough to
return home.

The significant impact that hosting the refugees
has had on Jordan can be seen in the education sector,
where, in the 2014-2015 school year, we have hosted
140,000 Syrian students. This has been a major burden
on us and has led to a deterioration in our entire
education sector. We have had to establish two school
sessions per day in order to accommodate such a large
number of students and, even then, thousands of school
children from Syria could not be accommodated at all
owing to the lack of capacity to receive them.
Furthermore, since the start of the Syrian crisis,
Jordan has seen an increase of 22 per cent in water
consumption, and as the Council knows, we are a very
poor country in terms of water.

With regard to health care, our hospitals and public
medical centres treated 700,000 Syrians in 2014,
which represents an increase of 219,000 cases from the
previous year.

Those examples from the three sectors are
replicated in other sectors in Jordan, especially in the
labour market. This is a crisis that touches the Jordanian
people and the countries that host refugees very closely.
These situations lead to tensions and friction between
the refugees and the host societies. They lead to an
imbalance, which threatens the peace and security of
the host communities and could result in the situation
spilling across borders, which could, in turn, threaten
international peace and security. The severity of these
potential outcomes compels the Council to seriously
consider these challenges and the potential development
of these situations. International agencies and donors
should respond more effectively to the needs of the
refugees, but also to the needs of the host countries as
they seek to alleviate the burden created by the inflow
of refugees.

As we enter the fifth year ofthis crisis in Jordan, we
continue to provide services to our brothers and sisters
from Syria who have come to our country seeking
refuge. We provide them with everything possible, and
we fulfil that role on behalf of all humankind.

Humankind as a whole is also responsible for
meeting the needs of the refugees. The Jordanian
Government has put in place an emergency plan for
2015 and has adopted best practices in assessing the
needs of the refugees and the host communities. Their
needs have all been integrated into a single plan that
includes all the ministries, United Nations agencies,
donors and local and international non-governmental
organizations. The plan projects the cost of our relief
efforts for this year to be $3 billion. The plan includes
options for financing, such as direct support, trust
funds and other options that are appropriate for the
specific requirements of this crisis. We have signed
an agreement establishing the trust fund to respond to
the crisis in Syria and reduce the burden created by the
increased needs.

Dealing with the refugees outside Syria is
intrinsically connected to the situation in Syria.
Since the beginning of the crisis, therefore, Jordan
adopted an approach aimed at balancing the needs
of the refugees in Jordan and the needs of the Syrian
population in Syria. We have gone to great lengths in
that regard. Through our membership in the Security
Council we have effectively taken part in the adoption
of resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014),
concerning humanitarian assistance to Syrians in
Syria. Myriad humanitarian convoys have been sent
to Syria, but these measures are partial and temporary
and will never provide a comprehensive solution to the
crisis in Syria or to the problem of refugees. A lasting
solution that addresses the roots of the problems can be
achieved only through a political solution, as I said at
the beginning of my statement, based on the provisions
of the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex). The
absence of a political solution after four years of crisis
compels the international community to address the
refugee problem by taking a long-term perspective
and considering the development needs of the host
countries, as their development is vital in terms of their
capacities to host refugees. That is the case in Jordan.

In conclusion, allow me to express J ordan's gratitude
and appreciation to all the countries and international
organizations, people and bodies that have provided us
with assistance in assuming the burden of hosting the
refugees. In particular, we are grateful to Kuwait for
hosting the three conferences aimed at appealing to the
international community to assume its responsibility
and at expanding donors' opportunities to effectively
contribute to finding a solution to the problem, until the
refugees voluntarily choose to return to their homes,
which will happen only ifa political solution is reached.
I urge all representatives to make every possible effort
to achieve that goal.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.

