Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me,
at the outset, to welcome His Excellency Mr. Abdoulaye
Diop, Minister for Foreign Affairs, International
Cooperation and African Integration of the Republic
of Mali. I would also like to thank Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix for his briefing and congratulate him on taking
over the leadership of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations. I assure him that Egypt will support him
and his Department out of our belief that peacekeepers
are very important for the maintenance of international
peace and security.

As one of the major troop-contribution countries in
the Organization, I would like to extend my condolences
to the Government of France for the recent loss of the
French soldier in Mali.

The situation in Mali has direct repercussions
on regional stability in the Sahel region. These
repercussions spill over into North Africa and
South Europe. Restoring stability and security in
Mali is therefore a local priority with regional and
international dimensions.

Mali has had to face difficulties and challenges
since the beginning of the crisis, despite earnest and
sincere efforts by the Malian parties and the widespread
international and regional support for those efforts.
However, the achievements on the ground today fall
short of fulfilling the aspirations of the Malian people
to achieve peace, security and sustainable development
and end human suffering.

It is very important to push for the implementation
of the provisions of the Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali as a comprehensive framework
for parties that really yearn for peace. The accelerated
implementation of the Agreement will unite all
these parties against their common enemy, namely,
terrorist groups.

We cannot underestimate the role of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) in providing assistance
to Mali and protecting civilians. I would like now to pay
tribute to the personnel of the Mission for the courage
they have shown and the sacrifices they have made.

The Malian defence and security forces is the entity
that bears the primary responsibility for maintaining
peace, security and stability in Mali. It is vital that
the Malian forces be restructured and their capacity
built up.

The points I havejust made are self-evident, and all
delegations and stakeholders should agree with them.
There is consensus on what the difficulties, challenges
and even the solutions are. However, what remains
pending is the implementation mechanism.

As the interim period draws to an end for the
implementation of the provisions of the Peace and
Reconciliation Agreement next June, the Security
Council shoulders the responsibility under the
Charter of the United Nations to realistically deal
with the situation in Mali based on learning from the
shortcomings and building on the points of strength in
the Council's previous resolutions and policies on Mali
and taking practical steps in that regard. It is important
to understand the available tools and optimize their use
in striving to fulfil MINUSMA's mandate.

MINUSMA is a crucial, indispensable element
in the achievement of stability, which is a goal that is
clearly within the mandate stipulated in the relevant
Security Council resolutions and within the parameters
of peacekeeping mandates in general. Any attempt
to go beyond this mandate would involve conceptual
and operational complexities that would not be in the
interest of MlNUSMA's forces, nor would it serve the
purpose of their deployment.

The States of the Group of Five for the Sahel have
taken steps to deploy regional forces to tackle the
situation in the Sahel. Those steps must enjoy clear and
direct support from the Council and the international
community. Regional forces, if they have the necessary
technical training capacity, would be in the best position
to deal with the challenges in the region. Building the
capacity of regional forces would be the best guarantee
of sustainable peace and security in the region.
With respect to the political track, an objective and
impartial assessment of the achievements made thus
far is needed in order to chart a path for future work
that would deal with the shortcomings and maximize
the progress achieved. We can look into adopting an
assessment tool that would not interfere with existing
mechanisms that are successfully working. We
appreciate the work of these mechanisms; they should
not be undermined.

In conclusion, Egypt reaffirms that it will cooperate
with Council members and at the bilateral level with
Mr. Diop to provide him with all the support to that his
country and fraternal people need so that we can bring
stability and security to the entire territory of Mali.

