Mr. Craxi (Italy) (spoke in French): Allow me to
begin by thanking the United Kingdom, in its capacity
as President of the Security Council, for having
organized today's debate, and to thank its Foreign
Secretary, whose presence here attests to the
importance of the issue under discussion.

Italy associates itself with the statement to be
made by the representative of Germany on behalf of
the European Union.
Climate change is an unequivocal global threat.
Today's debate helps to raise awareness of the dangers
associated with environmental problems and to provide
food for thought on the actions to take in the competent
forums, in the specialized agencies, and among the
United Nations membership.

A few weeks ago, the latest report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change reiterated
the extreme seriousness of global warming and its
connection to human activities. Various studies,
including the Stern Review and the report promoted by
the United Nations Foundation, highlight the serious
threat that climate change poses to peace and security,
such as fomenting or aggravating conflicts. Climate
change has an impact not only on the environment, the
economy and human health, but also on stability and
security, especially when they intersect with realities
already characterized by problems of an ethnic,
cultural, political or economic character.

In the long term, disputes over borders or over
the division of maritime zones might be a consequence
of territorial changes caused by a rise in sea levels.
There is a further great risk of an exodus of entire
populations, unleashing serious socio-economic
instability and potential humanitarian crises. It is
estimated that, by 2010, environmental degradation
linked to climate change may drive population shifts
involving upwards of 50 million people in developing
countries - bona fide climate refugees. Particularly
vulnerable to climate change are areas such as sub-
Saharan Africa, the Middle East, South-East Asia and,
in particular, the small islands, which, for that matter,
generate fewer greenhouse gases than other States.

We must recognize that there is no trade-off
between the fight against poverty and safeguarding the
environment. Climate change and the risks associated
with spiralling conflicts and mass exoduses contribute
to an increase in both poverty and instability. The
increase in climate-change-related poverty increases, in
turn, pockets of discontent and ultimately - as the
Stern Review underlines - recruitment by rebel or
terrorist groups.

We should not neglect the relationship between
climate change and energy consumption, which can
also be reflected in crisis situations between States.
Our development model and our very lifestyle require
huge amounts of energy. That translates into an
increasingly fraught search for large quantities of fossil
fuels, with consequences in terms of geopolitical
tensions and environmental unsustainability.

To achieve a governance of the environment and
energy dynamic that will provide access to potable
water and electricity to all citizens of the world, the
international community needs to endorse the concept
that energy security and environmental sustainability
are indivisible. We need to enact common strategies to
address the risks related to climate change and our
current model of economic growth.

In the context of United Nations reform, we
should strive to strengthen multilateral governance that
helps to counter and manage such phenomena. In that
regard, we welcome the reference to that issue in the
Secretary-General's recent report on the
recommendations of the Panel on system-wide
coherence. In that context, the Italian Government
believes firmly in the importance of creating a United
Nations environmental organization.

The European Union recently made a
commitment to unilaterally reducing greenhouse
emissions by 20 per cent by the year 2020 and by
30 per cent in the event that a post-Kyoto international
agreement is reached.

In the framework of the Group of Eight (G-8),
Italy plays a proactive role on environmental questions
and has launched a partnership to promote the
development of bioenergy. We look forward to the
outcome of the G-8 Summit.

In the near future, the Italian Government will
organize a national conference on climate in order to
raise public awareness and to foster the adoption of a
long-term strategy to combat global warming. The
debate will also deal with relationship between security
and climate change.

In conclusion, we need to act with determination
and act quickly with regard both to forms of adaptation
and to mitigation. Delayed action could increase costs
and could even make global warming irreversible, with
all the related disastrous effects that would derive
therefrom in terms of failure to prevent conflicts. The
Italian Government would like to renew here in the
Security Council its support for all initiatives that seek
a consensus to draft a new, universally endorsed
international agreement to fight climate change. In this
spirit, we are prepared to work with our European
partners to achieve this goal.

