Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
at the outset to congratulate China on having assumed
the presidency of the Council this month, and to wish
China every success in leading the work of the Council
towards better results. I also thank you for organizing
this timely debate on this very important issue.

In his report (S/2012/376), the Secretary-General
identifies five core challenges faced by the international
community with respect to the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. However, the onset of the Arab
Spring and the outbreak of armed conflict in some
Arab countries have generated new challenges. How
will totalitarian Governments respond to their peoples'
demands and not attack them? Will it be possible to
prevent those aspirations to freedom and democracy
from being transformed into an armed conflict?

The most important question now is how to
prevent tyrants from using heavy weapons to destroy
densely populated areas and kill civilians. How can we
convince United Nations Member States to refrain from
providing political and military support to dictatorships
that are killing and maiming their own civilians? Those
are the new challenges that we should all address.

Libya has had its own dire experience. We have
seen all kinds of crimes committed by supporters of the
former Al-Qadhafi regime. We have seen demonstrators
shot and killed in the streets. We have seen missiles,
tanks, artillery and helicopters used to bomb densely
populated areas and kill children, women and elderly
persons mercilessly. We have seen people collectively
suffocated and killed in shipment containers. We have
seen the wounded being evacuated from hospitals,
killed and thrown into mass graves. We have seen
people being raped; we have seen men being mutilated.

We have seen many atrocities in Libya committed
in a systematic and premeditated manner. The same
thing is taking place today in Syria in even worse
conditions. I think the situation will become clearer
with the deployment of reporters and humanitarian
workers in areas that had been blockaded by the regime
and where access was denied. Is it possible in the
current circumstances to refrain from taking action to
protect civilians and to halt crimes against humanity
under the pretext of sovereignty? Are we discussing the
sovereignty of the people, or of the regime that has lost
its legitimacy and is killing its people?

Is it morally acceptable, in the current situation,
to continue to offer weapons and political support
to the regime in Syria? Is it acceptable that the
representatives of the Syrian regime continue to be
present in international organizations in various States
and to spread lies and disinformation? Will the Libyan
and Syrian people forget that some countries, having
extended arms and political support, are complicit in
the crimes committed by Al-Assad? There are so many
questions being asked today that require immediate
answers from the Council.

However, it is certain that the people will eventually
triumph, justice served and the criminals brought to
justice. It is the right ofthe victims ofthe tyrant regimes
to demand that all those who have committed crimes be
brought to justice. It is also the right of those people
to hold accountable the foreign Governments that have
in any way abetted the perpetration of those crimes. It
is only natural that, when they are finally brought to
justice, the people defending the tyrant regimes will be
seen trying to conceal their own crimes.

The Security Council took action at the right time
in the crisis against civilians in Libya by adopting
resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011). That set the
stage for the international community to implement the
right to protect civilians. It also saved the lives of tens
of thousands of Libyan civilians and helped the Libyans
to achieve their aspirations and to rid themselves of a
regime that exposed its people to the worst forms of
torture, quashed their aspirations, restricted their
freedom and squandered their wealth. Will the Security
Council stop at that? Will it keep its hands tied and limit
its actions to counting the growing number of civilian
victims in Syria?

Our conscience should remain alert. We should
not be insensitive to the dozens of people being killed
in the streets of Syrian cities. We should not remain
insensitive to the destruction of homes. We should
not remain insensitive to the images of children being
killed. We should not remain insensitive to the images
of thousands of displaced persons and refugees or of
those who have been wounded and or lost limbs. We
should not continue to be insensitive to the physical
and psychological suffering of women who have been
raped, of those who have been under blockade in the
Syrian cities, or of those who lack access to food and
medicine.

The Security Council should guarantee free
humanitarian access to those who require it. We should
continue to protect humanitarian workers throughout
Syria through United Nations and Arab League efforts
to strengthen monitoring and control. I believe it is time
for the major Powers to stop their political bickering
in order to allow the efforts of the Security Council to
protect civilians to go forward. It is time for the Security
Council to work as one and to express in one voice that
the atrocities carried out in Syria must end. It must
enable the Syrian people to achieve their aspirations to
freedom, democracy and justice.
They cannot do so without effective measures being
taken against the regime of Al-Assad. Those efforts
could start by denying the regime the opportunity to
spread disinformation and lies; suspending Syria's
membership in international organizations; expelling its
ambassadors and consuls around the world; deploying a
commensurate number of international observers in all
Syrian cities; and referring appropriate crimes to the
International Criminal Court.

It is obvious, however, that the regime in Syria is
opposed to any peaceful settlement, as it has undermined
Kofi Annan's plan and continues to believe that it is
capable of suppressing the Syrian people's uprising.
As the regime continues to use heavy weapons against
civilians, it is time to provide the Syrian people with
such weapons so that they can defend themselves and
fulfil their aspirations.

