Mr. Timerman (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): The
horrific spectacle that moved the world on 21 August
was neither an isolated nor an unpredictable event.
Week after week for more than two years, and especially
after we joined the Security Council in January, we
heard nothing but reports detailing more deaths, more
refugees, more displaced persons, more violence, more
arms supplied to all parties, more scepticism about the
appropriateness or the need for a political solution, and
a growing and dangerous inclination to military action
as the most effective strategy.

That is why we in particular cannot suggest that the
tragedy in Syria exists because the attack on 21 August
took place. But we can affirm that the horror has opened
the doors to a peaceful resolution of the conflict. Much
depends on the Syrians themselves, as well as those
seated here under the mandate of the United Nations.
Perhaps what happened on 21 August is that, along
with the more than 1,000 victims of that day, the whole
world heard the voices of all those victims and saw with
perfect clarity how petty geopolitical interests were at
play in Syria and the region, and how they were more
interested in aggravating the conflict than in resolving
it. It witnessed the profound impotence of the Security

Council to put an end to the daily massacres that were
accumulating in an ethical outrage and a clear threat to
international peace and security.

As a country firmly committed to non-proliferation
and the elimination ofweapons ofmass destruction, and
as a State party to the Convention on the Prohibition of
the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of
Chemical Weapons, Argentina was a resolute supporter
of resolution 2118 (2013) and the detailed and specific
programme of supervision and destruction of Syria's
chemical weapons approved by the Executive Council
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons. There is no room for double standards or
euphemisms. The use of chemical weapons is a war
crime and a crime against humanity, and those who
perpetrate such crimes cannot go unpunished. With
today's resolution, the Council is finally assuming its
responsibility for stabilizing the situation in Syria and
contributing to achieving a lasting peace, reaffirming
the strength of multilateralism as a cornerstone of the
collective security system established by the Charter
of the United Nations as the world's only guarantee
against the hegemony of might-is-right.

We also agree with those who believe that the
resolution can lay the foundations for progress towards
a negotiated political solution to the Syrian crisis that
reflects the legitimate aspirations and demands of its
people and establishes the basis for a lasting peace,
while respecting Syria's territorial integrity and
sovereignty. That is why we applaud the fact that the
Security Council has taken ownership of the Geneva
Communique of June 2012 (S/2012/523, annex), calling
for the speedy holding of "Geneva II" so that it can be
implemented.

The resolution establishes a specific mechanism
for the elimination of Syria's chemical weapons,
based on the framework agreement reached in Geneva
on 14 September between the United States and the
Russian Federation (S/2013/565, annex). Yet it is fair
to point out that it also reflects concerns and proposals
put forward by various members of the Council over
the past few months of consultations. That aspect was
a decisive factor in my country's sponsorship of the
resolution.

In keeping with Article 25 of the Charter of the
United Nations, the Security Council's decisions are
binding on all members. While we trust that the various
actors involved in the Syrian conflict will act in good
faith and cooperate for the effective implementation
of the resolution, it is also clear that should there be
non-compliance, it is within the exclusive power of
the Council to convene in order to assess and take
measures that it deems appropriate under Chapter VII
of the Charter.

To conclude, my country wishes to reiterate that the
horror of chemical weapons, whose use is a war crime
and a crime against humanity, should not overshadow
the fact that 99 per cent of the casualties in the conflict
have been from conventional weapons. It is absolutely
necessary for the Security Council to prohibit the supply
of conventional weapons to the parties to the conflict.
That suggestion, put forward by Argentina, accords
with the views expressed by the Secretary-General and
Special Envoy Brahimi and with the desire of millions
of men and women who want and work for peace. Nor
can we ignore the serious violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law throughout Syria.
The humanitarian disaster affecting millions of Syrians
has had a deep impact on institutional stability and the
living conditions of people in neighbouring countries
and exacerbates sectarian tensions across the region.

The step that was taken today was necessary and
essential, but there are other steps that must be taken
by the Council. In that regard, Argentina will continue
to advocate for effective accountability, referral of the
situation in Syria to the International Criminal Court,
unrestricted access for humanitarian aid, measures to
stem the transfer of weapons to all parties the conflict,
the rejection of the use of force, the option for dialogue
and a peaceful political solution as a legitimate and
realistic path to peace, and the prevention of further
violence.
