Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): We are very grateful
to you, Mr. President, for convening this important
meeting of the Security Council on a question to which
we attach the utmost importance. We would like also to
thank Assistant Secretary-General Ibrahima Fall for his
very informative briefing.

We are glad that the topic of general issues of
sanctions is now being considered in an open format
and is no longer relegated to the place it had occupied
in the last several months - as a footnote to the
Council's monthly schedule of work. We hope that
from now on the Council will be resuming its
involvement in this important issue.

I should like to thank the representatives of
Germany, Sweden and Switzerland for their initiative
in calling for this discussion and for the introduction of
the "end results" booklets of the Bonn-Berlin and
Interlaken processes in such a lucid and user-friendly
form. I hope that the reports of the Security Council
will one day become as analytical and useful as the
booklets that were circulated today. These very
important initiatives have become a significant part of
a general process that has brought about visible
improvements in Security Council policy in the area of
sanctions in recent years.

I hope that the Council will carefully consider the
results of the Interlaken and Bonn-Berlin processes and
apply them in its work. I said, "I hope", Mr. President,
because the Council's record in this area is less than
perfect. I cannot but express my deep regret at the
prolonged foot-dragging in the consideration of the
draft outcome of the Working Group on sanctions,
which, among other things, contains specific references
to the Interlaken and Bonn-Berlin processes.

Whatever our individual and national attitudes
towards the results achieved by the Group, we cannot
simply disregard its work and the draft outcome
presented by the Chairman. We realize that it is
practically impossible to achieve full consensus on all
issues related to the question of sanctions, and
compromises had to be worked out among delegations.
I believe that the results we have achieved thus far are
the best we can do under the circumstances. Sooner or
later, we should make our final decision on the report,
and I think that it is high time for the Council to do so.

I cannot say that my delegation is entirely happy
with the provisions of the draft recommendations.
Many of our proposals, unfortunately, were not
reflected in the paper. The same can be said about
many other delegations.

While we realize that we cannot get everything
we want, at the same time, we consider that it would be
inappropriate and counterproductive to throw away
what has been achieved during all these months of
negotiations.

Finally, I think that we cannot seriously consider
sanctions-related issues without reviewing ways to
strengthen the capacity of the United Nations in this
area. The establishment within the United Nations of
an office or unit to monitor targeted sanctions as well
as the illicit exploitation and trafficking of high-value
commodities in armed conflict should be considered an
important part not only of the sanctions policy as such,
but also of the Council's conflict-prevention strategy in
general.

