Ms. Sison (United States ofAmerica): With today's
adoption of resolution 2368 (2017), the Security Council
is taking another important step towards helping to
defeat the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) and
Al-Qaida. We thank the other sponsors ofthe resolution
for their support.

There is no higher priority for the United States,
which is why we are leading a 72-member coalition that
is making great strides in liberating territory from the
grip ofISIS. The United States has been supporting the
Iraqi Government in its effort to push ISIS out of Mosul,
and ISIS's last strongholds in Syria are coming under
intense pressure. But even as it is losing ground in Syria
and Iraq, the threat that it represents is far from over.
ISIS will continue looking to spread its ideology and
radicalize new groups around the world. It will create
new offshoots in new places; fighters who trained with
ISIS in Syria are now starting to return home.

The Security Council has to show that it can
adapt to such changing threats, and that is the goal of
the resolution we have adopted today. Its provisions
recognize the importance of focusing not just on ISIS
but also on its affiliates, wherever they may emerge. We
have also redoubled our commitment to enforcing these
measures. The resolution urges for more international
cooperation in cutting off terrorist funding, preventing
terrorists from travelling and stopping such groups
from acquiring arms. In order to help ensure that those
sanctions are being fully and fairly implemented, we
have reaffirmed our support to the Analytical Support
and Sanctions Monitoring Team of the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning ISIL (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and
associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities and to its Ombudsperson. In another important
step, in today's resolution the Security Council
added eight new individuals and entities to the 1267
Committee's sanctions list. They include ISIS leaders
in South-East Asia, foreign fighters from the Caucasus,
illicit money exchange businesses and ISIS-affiliated
terrorist groups in Syria, and there will be more
designations to come.

In order to make the best use of this tool, the
Security Council should regularly add to the sanctions
list the names of any new ISIS- or Al-Qaida-affiliated
individuals or groups, wherever they may be in
the world. But while implementing the sanctions is
essential, it is only one part of a broader strategy for
defeating ISIS and the violent, extremist ideology that
feeds it. All States Members of the United Nations
should work together to prevent groups from declaring
allegiance to ISIS and becoming one ofits affiliates. We
must mobilize action to address the issue of former ISIS
fighters who return or relocate to other countries. We
cannot allow them to become a new threat elsewhere.

And we must do more, especially here at the United
Nations, to help countries prevent and counter violent
extremism before it takes root. In order to do so, it is
essential that we build strong partnerships with civil
society, faith leaders, youth and local communities.
ISIS, along with similar groups, threaten not just our

security, but also our values, such as tolerance, human
dignity and freedom. For that reason, in every region
of the world, people of all faiths have come together to
condemn terrorism. The United States will continue to
lead that effort. Today's unanimous vote reinforces the
global resolve to defeat terrorism wherever it is found.

