Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): C6te
d'Ivoire thanks the presidency of the Dominican
Republic for organizing this public debate on the
impact of climate disasters on international peace and
security, which is critical. My delegation commends
Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo and the
other briefers for their excellent presentations.

My country aligns itself with the statement to be
made by Ms. Fatima Mohammed, Permanent Observer
of the African Union to the United Nations.

The issue of the impact of climate disasters on
international peace and security has a prominent place
in the world's current security concerns. My country
notes that the frequency and growing intensity of
natural disasters and their direct or indirect impact on
peace and security in the affected regions are without
precedent in modern history. That development is
linked, among other things, to the combination of
world population growth and climate change. While
in the early 1990s there were fewer than 300 disasters
per year worldwide, experts have registered more
than 500 annually since the early 2000s. In addition,
they estimate that more than half of the population
in developing countries is expected to be at risk from
floods and/or storms by 2025.

Just as the increase in natural disasters is partly due
to the worsening of climatic phenomena, the material
and human damage they cause is linked to urban growth
and the concentration of populations in at-risk areas,
particularly in coastal regions. In sub-Saharan Africa,
for example, 700,000 people lived in flood-prone
coastal areas in 2000; that figure will reach 5 million
in 2030 and up to 25 million in 2060, according to the
most pessimistic forecasts.

In an environment of soaring population growth,
coupled with the scarcity of arable land and water
resources, natural disasters could trigger or aggravate
social tensions that could degenerate into open
conflicts. Similarly, in a context where early-warning
and health-response mechanisms cannot contain the
scope of disasters, these can spread water-borne or
vector-borne diseases.

Africa is now one of the regions most exposed to
the effects of climate change on peace and security. The
case of Cote d'lvoire is a perfect illustration. Ranked
147 out of the 178 countries most vulnerable to climate
change, my country, like many others, is experiencing
the negative impact of such disasters, with adverse
effects for forests, agriculture and food security, in
addition to sparking community conflicts, particularly
between farmers and nomadic herders.

In response, my country has adopted a national
climate change programme that aims, among other
things, to reduce its greenhouse gas emissions by
28 per cent and increase the share of renewable energies
in its energy mix by 16 per cent by 2030. In response
to natural disasters, my country established the
National Civil Protection Office to facilitate the rapid
provision of assistance to affected populations. My
delegation stresses the need for the United Nations and
international partners to work to strengthen national
capacities in the fight against climate change and the
management of natural disasters.

Cote d'Ivoire believes that addressing the impact
on peace and security of natural disasters related to
climate change cannot take place exclusively within
the framework of national strategies. To be effective,
they must be consistent with existing continent-wide
and international frameworks. My country therefore
endorses the relevant recommendations of the
174th meeting of the African Union Peace and Security
Council, held on 21 May in Addis Ababa, on the link
between climate change and conflict in Africa and
the security implications. They include developing a
continental framework to proactively respond to real
and potential security threats posed by climate change;
actively seeking comprehensive approaches to enhance
resilience to climate change; improving communication
on climate change in order to effectively ensure
disaster preparedness and risk reduction from the
local to the continental level; and finally, accelerating
the implementation of all existing international and
regional commitments on mitigating the adverse effects
of climate change, including the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change, the Montreal Protocol on Substances
that Deplete the Ozone Layer and the Sendai Framework
for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030.

For Cote d'lvoire, the fight against climate
change must remain an essential component of our
shared commitment to promoting international peace
and security. It therefore urges the United Nations,
including the Security Council, to play its part in this
shared endeavour.

