The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of the United States.

First, I would like to thank the United Nations for
hosting and organizing this historic meeting of the
Security Council. I thank President Kibaki and the
Government of Kenya for their support and hospitality,
not just over the past two days but throughout the
peace process. I want to acknowledge the important
contributions of President Museveni, as Chairman of
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, and
the continuing heroic efforts of General Sumbeiywo. I
thank all speakers that have contributed to this event.

I have stated that this is an historic meeting.
Because it is only the fourth Council meeting outside
New York since 1952, it is in some sense historic
almost by definition. But the only real measure of the
success of this occasion, the only measure of whether it
proves to be a truly significant event, rests with the
parties to the conflict in the Sudan.

Yes, we passed a resolution - the fourth one on
the Sudan this year. And yes, the parties signed a
memorandum of understanding. But some will say -
some are already saying - "Oh, just another
resolution", and "Oh, the memorandum of
understanding is just an agreement to agree to peace
sometime down the road". Some will say that this
whole event is just a photo opportunity. Some will say
that we have had two beautiful days in Nairobi, filled
with grand words, but that the event was an illusion. In
the meantime, people are dying in the Sudan, women
and children are suffering, and the atrocities in Darfur
continue.

We came here not for a ceremony, not for a photo
opportunity but for results. The Secretary-General and
his staff came here to emphasize the critical juncture
that the parties have reached in the peace process.
Ambassador De La Sabliere accommodated this trip
around his own very important African mission. From
a personal perspective, this is my eighth trip to Africa
since 2001 on issues related to the Sudan. The entire
Security Council flew here together, unified in its
desire to see peace in all of the Sudan, now.

Vice-President Taha, Mr. Garang, I listened to
your words to the Council, and I believe that you are in
fact determined to conclude a comprehensive peace by
31 December, as you have promised the world you will
do. It is up to you to prove the naysayers and the
sceptics wrong and to move your country forward
towards joining the family of nations. As this meeting
attests, the attention of the world is upon you. The
United Nations and all the nations of the world expect,
and demand, that you deliver on your word. That
means that there must be a peace agreement in place by
31 December. Implementation must begin on
1 January. General Sumbeiywo has agreed to come to
New York early next year to brief the Council on the
early stages of implementation.

The process of turning the Sudan into a
prosperous nation at peace with itself and its
neighbours must move forward immediately. The
Sudan must become a nation that respects human rights
and that replaces violence with political dialogue. That
process must proceed with dispatch, without posturing,
grandstanding or empty words.

I ask everyone present today to think what could
be. Imagine the Sudan starting the first day of 2005 and
evolving through the six-year interim period covered
by the agreement. Picture a Government of national
unity and reconciliation, with renewed political and
economic ties to other nations and a stable Darfur. At
that point, donor nations would provide the economic
horsepower to drive development, and there would be a
nationwide infrastructure of security, stability and
justice.

That brings me to Darfur, where chaos and
cruelty remain the order of the day. As political
institutions are established nationwide and as security
is established across the country, the process of
bringing justice to the oppressed people of Darfur must
continue. I want to be very clear: the violence and the
atrocities being perpetrated in Darfur must end now.
You have heard this message clearly from the Security
Council; heed it. I cannot emphasize this point more
strongly.

When the north-south agreement is in place, the
flow of support for all of the Sudan will increase on the
understanding that the parties are fulfilling their
commitments, including those agreed in Abuja and
N'Djamena. Peace support operations will also be
carried out across the country, including in the west.
Working alongside the parties, and with the continuing
and vital leadership of the African Union and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, we can
use the conclusion of the north-south peace process as
a springboard to end the suffering in Darfur.

But this picture, this vision, this dream of peace
hinges on the parties meeting their commitment to sign
a peace agreement by 31 December 2004. We are very,
very close to peace, but we have been close before.
Vice-President Taha, Mr. Garang, do not let this
opportunity slip away. Follow through with your
promises. Prove that you are men of your word. And
allow yourselves the tremendous satisfaction of
knowing that you have taken the first steps to reversing
the abuses and ending the suffering that have plagued
your country for so long. Then, and only then, will the
parties be able to look back on their commitments
made here today in Nairobi as the turning of a new and
great page in the once-troubled history of the Sudan.

I now resume my function as President of the
Council.

I invite the First Vice-President of the Sudan,
Mr. Ali Osman Taha, to take the floor.

