Mr. Bessedik (Algeria): Let me begin by
expressing my appreciation to the Peruvian presidency
of the Security Council for organizing this timely
and extremely important open debate on linkages
between international terrorism and organized
crime. I also thank each of the three briefers for their
comprehensive briefings.

The growing threat to peace and security posed
by organized transnational crime and its nexus with
terrorism and violent extremism certainly require further
attention and action by the international community.
It must step up its efforts to sever the links between
both scourges and address them in a holistic manner.
Despite territorial setbacks and the limiting of the funds
available to such terrorist groups as the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant and Al-Qaida, these entities are
showing a great capacity for mobility, adaptation and
innovation and often resort to new methods of financing
to diversify their revenue streams. It is therefore
expected that terrorist groups across Africa and other
parts of the world will support themselves through a
variety of criminal activities, including trafficking in
persons, illicit drug trafficking, cybercrime, illegal
exploitation of natural resources, extortion, kidnapping
for ransom, trafficking in firearms, money-laundering
and smuggling of migrants, as well as radicalizing
criminals in the prison system.

As underscored in the concept note (S/20l9/537, annex), there is an urgent need to better understand and
address the evolving linkages between terrorism and
organized crime, as well as the manner and extent to
which they vary in different regions and contexts. We
must mobilize our joint efforts to develop and deploy
a set of tools to disrupt those expanding networks and
cut off the funds that they are generating. Exchanging
information among intelligence, military and police
officials, enhancing the capacity of national police and
financial intelligence units, providing the necessary
technical assistance as requested and further sharing
of resources and technology among States must be
key priorities.

It is also important to highlight the importance for
Member States to invest more in promoting effective
border control and surveillance technologies, including
introducing biometric identity documents. In that
connection, we reaffirm that States have the sovereign
right, in accordance with international law, to secure
their borders. Cooperation between States in that
regard can be achieved only through a coherent and
coordinated approach that respects the basic principles
of sovereign equality, political independence, territorial
integrity and non-intervention in matters that are
essentially within a State's domestic jurisdiction. The
United Nations counter-terrorism entities, particularly
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
have an important role to play in identifying threats
and capacity-building needs at the request of States,
while bearing in mind that each region has its
own specificities.

We also need to address the structural conditions
that are conducive to criminal activity and terrorism.
The fight against both scourges can succeed only
through a comprehensive approach to economic and
social development and by promoting transparency
and good governance and addressing the root
causes, including poverty, inequality, exclusion and
radicalization. Ensuring the effective implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
the involvement of civil society and local communities
are also essential in that regard.

Addressing the nexus between terrorism and
organized crime remains a central component of
Algeria's comprehensive national strategy in the
fight against terrorism. Accordingly, my country has
adapted its legal framework related to anti-money-
laundering and the criminalization of the financing of
terrorism, assets-freeze measures and control of the
non-profit sector, in conformity with relevant Security
Council resolutions and the Financial Action Task
Force standards.

At the regional level, Algeria is fully committed
to regional cooperation in fighting the destabilization
caused by terrorist and organized crime groups in the
Sahel region. Like all Sahel countries, Algeria has
consistently advocated an approach geared towards
targeted and efficient action based on national
ownership and aimed at combating terrorism and cross-
border criminality, while assuming responsibility for
security and stability within our territory, in keeping
with our international obligations. Algeria's extensive
military deployment on its borders is part of its efforts
aimed at ensuring its national security and that of all
its neighbours.

Algeria has engaged in a concerted approach among
the countries of the Sahel through various cooperation
mechanisms, such as the Joint Operational General
Staff Committee, the Sahel Fusion and Liaison Unit
and many other forums. Such mechanisms contribute
to enhancing security cooperation among the Sahel
countries, through the coordination and strengthening
of border control measures, as well as through training
and the sharing ofintelligence and equipment.
It is worth mentioning that, at the thirtieth African
Union (AU) Heads of State and Government Summit in
February, in its capacity as an African Union Champion
in combating terrorism and violent extremism, Algeria
presented a report that outlines terrorist threats and
trends on the African continent in 2018. The report
notes that the connection between terrorism and
transnational organized crime in Africa has grown
at an alarming pace. Although driven by different
motives, the two scourges have a common purpose
that serves their respective interests, that is, to weaken
State institutions and reduce their capacity to assume
their responsibilities.

Terrorist groups in Africa are increasingly
involved in criminal activities related to drugs and
psychotropic substances, trafficking in firearms and
humans, counterfeiting, the smuggling of cultural
goods, the exploitation of natural resources and
minerals, cattle rustling and piracy. The transboundary
nature of terrorism and organized crime, as well as the
existence of porous borders and ungoverned spaces in
some AU member States, coupled with weak national
institutional capacities of other member States, are
often exploited by terrorist and criminal groups as they
expand their activities.

The African continent, through the African Union
and its various institutions, and the countries directly
affected have shown resilience and determination
in combating terrorism and addressing trafficking-
related terrorist financing. Various continental
collective security initiatives and arrangements have
been established, such as the Nouakchott and Djibouti
Processes, the Committee of Intelligence and Security
Services of Africa, the African Police Cooperation
Organization (AFRIPOL) and the African Centre for
the Study and Research on Terrorism (ACSRT).

AFRIPOL and ACSRT, both based in Algiers,
continue to play an important role in strengthening
Africa's capacities to combat terrorism and organized
transnational crime. The signing, in January, of an
information-sharing agreement between INTERPOL
and AFRIPOL provides an important joint platform
for cooperation in a bid to reinforce their partnership
and coordination in terms of combating both scourges.
Further steps were also taken in supporting AU
member States to further enhance the capacity of their
national law enforcement agencies, including through
the establishment of AFRIPOL national liaison offices
and the African Police Communication System.

As part of its global efforts to counter terrorism
and violent extremism, Algeria also works closely
with other actors, particularly the Global Counter-
Terrorism Forum (GCTF), which complements United
Nations counter-terrorism efforts. In that framework,
Algeria and Canada are chairing the GCTF Capacity-
building in the West Africa Region Working Group.
In that connection, a meeting on the nexus between
terrorism and transnational organized crime in West
Africa was jointly organized in Algiers by Algeria and
Canada in October 2017. The GCTF has also produced
useful framework documents addressing the linkages
between terrorism and organized crime, as well as the
Algiers Memorandum on Good Practices on Preventing
and Denying the Benefits of Kidnapping for Ransom
by Terrorists.

Finally, Algeria remains firmly engaged in global
efforts to counter terrorism and violent extremism at
all levels, and is ready to contribute to the collective
endeavour to curb the threat posed by transnational
organized crime and its nexus and collusion
with terrorism.
