Mr. Goddard (Barbados): At the outset, let me
join those who spoke before me in thanking you,
Mr. President, and Germany for having convened this
very important meeting.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
14 member States of the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM). CARICOM. wishes to associate itself
with the statements made on behalf of the Group of 77
and China and the Non-Aligned Movement.
CARICOM. welcomes the presence of His Excellency
Mr. Marcus Stephen, President of the Republic of
Nauru, at today's debate.

Climate change represents the most serious global
environmental and development challenge facing
humanity. Dangerous climate change is already
occurring, and therefore an urgent and comprehensive
response by all countries must be of the highest
priority. Climate change will intensify already existing
global challenges, exacerbate water and food scarcity,
and cause a range of other shocks and stresses, some of
which will be highly unpredictable and abrupt.

CARICOM. believes that the environmental,
social and economic aspects of climate change cannot
be easily separated from its possible security
dimensions. We therefore believe that the possible
security implications of climate change must be
addressed at the multilateral level by bodies which are
inclusive, representative and transparent and that allow
for the full and effective participation of all Member
States.

Let me reiterate CARICOM's view that the
Security Council should refrain from encroaching on
the functions and powers that the Charter and tradition
have placed within the purview of the General
Assembly. CARICOM. maintains that it is far better for
the Council to construe its mandate strictly and do a
small number of things well rather than be more
expansive and do a host of tasks poorly.

As a group of countries particularly vulnerable to
the adverse impacts of climate change, CARICOM
believes that if urgent and ambitious actions are taken
to comprehensively address climate change, this will
reduce the security implications associated with

 

climate change, including the existential threat faced
by some small island developing States (SIDS),
including some in the Caribbean and Pacific. When the
Council last addressed this issue in 2007, it was in the
context of the alarming findings of the Fourth
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change, which warned that we were on the
cusp of a global climate disaster without an urgent and
ambitious collective response.

Over the past four years, science and actual
climatic events have not only confirmed these
assessments, but have pointed to an even narrower
window of opportunity for action than originally
envisaged in 2007. The increased intensity and
frequency of extreme weather events around the world,
including in the Caribbean, accelerating ice melting in
polar regions and glacier retreats, and a faster-than-
projected sea-level rise, all point to the seriousness of
the climate challenge.

Unfortunately, the response by the international
community has not been commensurate with the scale
and complexity of this challenge. Despite the sobering
realities confronting us, there is an absence of political
will on the part of those most responsible for this
problem to conclude a comprehensive and legally
binding agreement in the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and
provide vulnerable developing countries with the
means to address current and future adaptation needs.
Furthermore, global emissions are at their highest level
in history, and as the International Energy Agency
confirmed a few weeks ago, the world is about to cross
the dangerous threshold that would make it impossible
to limit the increase in global mean temperatures to the
below 2° C goal agreed to in Cancun in the UNFCCC a
mere six months ago, or achieve the even more
ambitious below 1.5" goal supported by over
100 developing countries, including the Alliance of
Small Island States and the least developed countries.

CARICOM. continues to believe that with strong
leadership, a bold and ambitious response is possible,
and we are therefore not prepared to wave the white
flag of surrender and abandon hope that this problem
will be solved. We consider it morally and ethically
unacceptable for the international community to fail to
respond to the needs of peoples facing the prospect of
hunger, drought, more frequent and intense extreme
weather events or the real prospect of losing their
lands, livelihoods and even lives on account of sea-

 

level rise, when we have the means and tools at our
disposal to address these problems.

It is still scientifically possible and economically
feasible to undertake the actions required to avert this
looming climate catastrophe. Even now, no effort,
financial or otherwise, is being spared to avert a global
financial meltdown. A similar effort is required to avert
a climate catastrophe.

In this regard, those who have historically
contributed most to this problem have a moral and
legal obligation to assume primary responsibility.
Developed countries must take the lead in significantly
reducing their harmful greenhouse gas emissions and
substantially increasing financial and technological
assistance to support the adaptation efforts of
developing countries, especially the SIDS.

CARICOM. remains convinced that the
international community must attach the highest
priority to completing ongoing climate change
negotiations within the UNFCCC and its Kyoto
Protocol on strengthening the existing legally binding
climate regime.

CARICOM. wishes to further emphasize the need
for our development partners to join with us and other
SIDS to ensure the full and rapid implementation of the
Barbados Programme of Action and the Mauritius
Strategy, of which the issues of climate change and
sea-level rise are important components. The effective
implementation of these two international agreements,
support for national and regional initiatives such as the
Caribbean Community Climate Change Centre, along
with the action taken within the UNFCCC, will
significantly assist the SIDS in coping with the adverse
effects of climate change and help to minimize the
security implications associated with climate change.

In closing, let me say that it is these real and
tangible actions that will reduce the risks of climate
change. Given the many expressions of solidarity
today, CARICOM. is hopeful that this debate will result
in a renewed sense of urgency and ambition within the
ongoing climate change negotiations. For the
Caribbean Community and other island States, the
failure of the international community to respond to
climate change and thereby ensure our survival and
viability is not an option we would wish to
contemplate.

 

