At the outset, I wish to thank Mark Lowcock for his briefing. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines once again reiterates the Special Envoy's call for a complete and immediate nationwide ceasefire throughout Syria. As the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) rages across the world, it is imperative that all parties pull back from hostilities and focus on combating the pandemic. In that context, we are pleased that the ceasefire in north-west Syria, although fragile, continues to hold. Even before the emergence of the pandemic, Syria's health system was in a precarious position, having been crippled by a decade of war. Continued hostilities will only disrupt efforts to fight the virus and cause further deterioration of an already dire humanitarian situation. We recognize that the pandemic has necessitated the implementation of restrictions on movement. However, we reiterate the need to strike a balance between these measures, aimed at containment and suppression, and the urgent need to preserve, scale up and coordinate the critical humanitarian response through all modalities. We take note of the Secretary-General's timely review of humanitarian cross- line and cross-border operations (S/2020/401). The humanitarian situation is indeed a complex one, and there is no perfect solution. Humanitarian needs across Syria are great. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines therefore remains in support of the most favourable access arrangements, which will ensure the rapid, uninterrupted and direct provision of aid to all who need it. Despite the pandemic, the scourge of terrorism remains and continues to threaten Syria's sovereignty, the safety of its people and vital humanitarian action. We recognize the need for counter-terrorism measures in this regard. However, we yet again reiterate that such measures must respect international law. Civilians and civilian infrastructure must be protected, and their targeting can never be justified. We echo the appeal for the lifting of unilateral sanctions to assist Syria in addressing its pressing humanitarian needs. We further encourage members of the international community to contribute to Syria's reconstruction; without it, millions will remain displaced and deprived of basic necessities. The dual threat of COVID-19 and conflict is leaving more people vulnerable than ever before. Humanitarian considerations must take precedence over political tensions, and we must prioritize cooperation.
