Mr. Svilanovic (Yugoslavia): In addressing the
Security Council for the first time, I would like to take
this opportunity to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency and to express my
conviction that, under your able stewardship, it will
continue to conduct its affairs fruitfully and
constructively. I would also like to thank Assistant
Secretary-General Hedi Annabi for his briefing.

In taking up the issues at hand, let me recall that,
in the past several weeks, the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia has addressed the Security Council on a
number of occasions, drawing its attention to the
serious situation in southern Serbia, specifically the
ground safety zone, which includes parts of the

territories of the Serbian municipalities of Bujanovac,
Medveda and Presevo. The highest representatives and
the Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
expect the international community to respond to the
serious events in the zone, in accordance with the
obligations to which it committed itself by Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999) and the Kumanovo
Military-Technical Agreement, in order to protect and
secure the administrative boundary of Kosovo and
Metohija and to prevent armed Albanian terrorists from
entering the zone, which is the main cause of the
present tensions.

Since 10 June 1999, Albanian terrorists have
committed more than 400 armed attacks on Yugoslav
police personnel and residents of the zone, killing 19
people, 11 of them police officers and 8 civilians, and
wounding 39 police officers and 3 civilians.

More than 1,000 terrorists from Kosovo and
Metohija, often equipped with heavy weapons, have
entered the zone and are still there. They present a
potent threat to the lightly armed Yugoslav policemen,
the only ones allowed by the military-technical
agreement to police the zone. The safety and security
of its population are under attack, and the major roads
in southern Serbia are constantly threatened, while tens
of thousands of Serbs living in Kosovo and Metohija
close to the zone are cut off from the rest of Serbia.

The actions of Albanian terrorists further instigate
the ethnic cleansing of the remaining Serbian and other
non-Albanian population and constitute an enormous
impediment to the return of internally displaced Serbs
from Kosovo and Metohija. They also impede the
efforts of the international community and the new
democratic Government of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia to normalize the situation in Kosovo and
Metohija.

The new Government of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia bases its policy on constructive cooperation
and dialogue with the international community.
Consequently, it addresses the question of Kosovo and
Metohija with immense responsibility and a firm
commitment to full respect for Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999) and the military-technical
agreement. Faced with the escalation of violence in the
zone and the fact that violence has become a daily
occurrence in Kosovo and Metohija, the Yugoslav
Government continues to be committed to dialogue and
a quest for a peaceful and diplomatic solution to the

S/PVAZA')

 

problem. Unfortunately, it is precisely this commitment
of ours to peace, dialogue and tolerance that has been a
cause of concern and anxiety to those who resort to
force and violence in order to further their extremist
goals. The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia therefore
expects the Security Council to take appropriate
measures this time around to address the situation in a
proper way.

The timing of these incidents is of particular
concern. On the one hand, the fundamental democratic
changes in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia have
created the conditions for dialogue with the Albanian
side and paved the way for all-round cooperation with
UNMIK and KFOR, which we hope will lead to a
generally acceptable political solution. On the other
hand, the recent local elections in Kosovo and
Metohija brought to the fore moderate forces among
the Albanians in Kosovo and Metohija. These
developments made it incumbent on all of us to make
sure that that positive momentum is not wasted. After
all, no solution can be achieved without dialogue and
negotiation, and the loss of the momentum may bring
about a deterioration of the situation and lead to
unforeseeable consequences. Such a course of events
may not only aggravate the situation in Kosovo and
Metohija; it may also jeopardize the democratic
processes in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and
affect the stability of the region as a whole. The latest
incidents in Leposavic are also a cause of added
concern, and we hope and believe that they will not be
repeated in the future.

It is of utmost importance now that Albanian
terrorists pull out immediately from the ground safety
zone and that the regime established by the military-
technical agreement be fully respected. On behalf of
my Government, I call on the Security Council to
pledge its authority to bring about that end. KFOR and
UNMIK should take effective measures to stop further
incursions by Albanian terrorists from Kosovo and
Metohija that could result in the spread of armed
incidents. In these efforts, UNMIK and KFOR will
enjoy full support and cooperation from the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia.

Let me point out that my Government stands
ready to take all necessary measures, under the
Constitution of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and
in accordance with the relevant international
documents, to protect its citizens and defend the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the country. This
is our duty, as well as our obligation.

Before I conclude, let me point out that the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia welcomes the
statements of the Secretary-General of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) to the effect that
KFOR and NATO will act vigorously to stop the
violence of armed Albanian terrorists and that they will
expand cooperation with the Yugoslav Army and police
within the framework of the joint commission
entrusted with the task of implementing the military-
technical agreement. In that context, the Government
of my country reiterates its readiness to sign at an early
date an agreement on the status of UNMIK and KFOR,
so that mutual cooperation can be enhanced.

The Government of my country is also ready to
consider, in cooperation with UNMIK and KFOR,
possible changes in the regime in the zone, as well as
its scope, convinced that it would facilitate the
normalization of the situation in the area. My
Government is prepared to take all necessary measures
to integrate the local Albanian population and help
them participate actively and be represented in local
and central authorities, as well as in other walks of life,
in particular police work, health care and education.

