Ms. Del Ponte: First of all, Sir, thank you very
much for your words of appreciation. I shall take them
with me with gratitude.

I would like to tell the Council that the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia was
established to put on trial those most responsible for
the crimes committed during the conflict in the former
Yugoslavia. Those most responsible are Karadzic and
Mladic. The Council will therefore have the choice and
the responsibility to decide whether or not the Tribunal
can fulfil the mandate the Council gave it. That will be
a decision that will confront the Council very, very
soon. It is impossible to envisage that Karadzic and
Mladic can go on trial in Belgrade. It is absolutely
unimaginable. They are considered to be heroes. The
Tribunal has a precise mandate. The Tribunal must be
able to fulfil that mandate, but it is the Council's
choice whether or not Karadzic and Mladic will be
confronted by international justice.

Regarding the question about the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo and its
relationship with our accused, Haradinaj, I must tell the
Council that we closed the prosecution's case without
being able to obtain the testimony in court of two or
three extremely important witnesses. Haradinaj
remains in detention, although he has asked for
provisional release during the Christmas holiday. We
have, unfortunately, some accused who have
provisional release for the Christmas holiday - that is
another particularity that we do not have in our
national system - but fortunately, Haradinaj could not
be provisionally released. The judges of the Trial
Chamber decided that it was really too dangerous,
because what is going on in this demonstration of his
friends' relationship with the accused has a chilling
effect on the witnesses.

I cannot give the Council details because an
investigation is ongoing. We informed the Legal
Officer of the Secretary-General in summary - very
brief summary, because the investigation is ongoing -
and it will be possible, when the investigation is
finished in due course, to inform the Security Council,
if needed.

