Brazil thanks the Indonesian presidency for convening this debate on linkages between terrorism and organized crime. Brazil remains committed to multidimensional responses to terrorism, in line with international law and, particularly, the Charter of the United Nations. The repudiation of terrorism is enshrined in the Brazilian Constitution as a guiding principle of our foreign policy. This repudiation goes beyond words and has been translated into action. Over recent years, our national legislation has been updated to match the challenges of preventing and countering terrorism and its financing, and our agencies are working tirelessly to fight this scourge. As the Council has already recognized, the nature and scope of possible linkages between terrorism and transnational organized crime vary considerably, depending on the geographic, social and political context. We will be able to tackle possible linkages only with conceptual clarity; the international community will hardly find a solution to a problem it does not understand. More research is needed to properly grasp the proclivities of potential connections between terrorism and organized crime so that we can jointly design adequate strategies to address them. Although terrorism and organized crime are regulated by different legal frameworks, there are some practices that may be beneficial to address both phenomena. First, it is imperative to investigate the financial and operational support networks that may equally benefit terrorist groups and transnational criminal organizations. In this regard, we should strengthen our efforts to combat money-laundering and facilitate the timely exchange of financial intelligence. In addition, the international community should invest more resources in technical assistance aimed at developing expertise in domestic agencies. Moreover, regional and international cooperation should be at the centre of both counterterrorism and organized crime-control strategies. The broad scope of measures described above demonstrates the comprehensive approach required to prevent and counter terrorism, including possible linkages with transnational organized crime. Hence, these potential linkages should be interpreted as an encouragement not to bring the issue of organized crime to the Security Council, but rather to once again place the General Assembly at the centre of the United Nations debate on counter-terrorism. All Member States have a legitimate interest in actively contributing to the fight against terrorism. Integrating counter-terrorism concerns with domestic law-enforcement challenges is a task for the General Assembly, which is the United Nations organ mandated to address multidimensional factors that a security-centred approach fails to capture. The seventh review of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy represents a unique opportunity to further debate potential interactions between both types of crime. It provides a deliberative space where all Member States may share successful practices that contributed to disrupting both terrorist groups and criminal organizations. It may also show that some approaches will work for neither category of crime, such as military responses detached from socioeconomic measures aimed at more structural changes. Finally, it might confirm that some challenges are exclusive to terrorism, as are the responses needed to overcome them. To give just one example, countering terrorist narratives is of crucial importance to preventing radicalization, but has hardly any impact on combating transnational organized crime. Terrorism defies our sense of humanity and attempts to create an environment of indifference and chaos. To counter this scourge, the international community must distinguish itself from it, acting with solidarity and order - solidarity to honour the victims of terrorism, to cooperate in forestalling future attacks and to avoid unintended negative consequences of counter-terrorism measures; and orderliness to act within the parameters of international law, to respect human rights, humanitarian law and refugee law, and to work in a manner consistent with the division of labour among United Nations organs as established in the Charter. Brazil remains committed to actively contributing to these efforts.
