Mr. Jinga (Romania) (spoke in French): I thank
the Uruguyan presidency of the Security Council for
the initiative of having convened this open debate one
year after the adoption of resolution 2286 (2017), which
focuses on the protection of civilians during armed
conflict and the protection of medical and humanitarian
staff in areas of conflict. 1 should like also to thank
the Secretary-General, Mr. Antonio Guterres, for his
detailed briefing on the current situation.

Romania fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union. I
would now add some remarks in our national capacity.

Improvement of the condition of wounded and
injured armed forces personnel was codified by the very
first Geneva Convention, in 1864. In the wake of the
Second World War, the Geneva Conventions and their
Additional Protocols provided the modern framework
for international humanitarian law and must remain at
the heart of our action in addressing all conflicts.

However, despite this commitment, the situation on
the ground reflects a cruel reality: there is a growing
lack of security for the injured and ill and for medical
and humanitarian staff, whose work is exclusively
medical in nature. No conflict more starkly reflects the
horrors of war and its impact on the lives of innocent
civilians than the protracted violence in Syria, where
more than 13 million people are in need of protection
or assistance.

Despite the protected status of medical
establishments under international law, such structures
continue to be destroyed or damaged in the wake of
conflict or combat, even following the 30 December
2016 ceasefire. According to the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), seven
attacks against medical facilities were reported in Syria
in February and 19 others in March. In addition, the
lack of specialized professional medical personnel
has a significant impact on the most common medical
services, such as vaccination. The repercussions of this
war on civilians will continue to reverberate for many
years after peace in Syria has been restored.

The conflict in Yemen is equally alarming.
Currently fewer than half of medical facilities are
functioning. There is a grave scarcity of staff, equipment
and medicine. Some 15 million people lack access to
basic medical services. Thirteen health-care providers
have been killed and 31 wounded since the outbreak of
hostilities, according to OCHA.

Reducing or cutting off people's access to basic
medical services is a grave violation of international
humanitarian law. All parties to conflict are bound by
a strict obligation to respect and protect medical staff,
facilities and vehicles, as well as the wounded and the
sick. Security Council resolution 2286 (2016), which
Romania co-sponsored, is an important benchmark
in the international community's efforts to draw
attention to the protection of medical and humanitarian
staff in areas of conflict. However, after outrage, it is
time to act. The resolution must mark not the end of
a political process but rather the commencement of a
practical effort.

Medical infrastructure is also referred to as critical
infrastructure. Security Council resolution 2341 (2017),
on the protection of critical infrastructure against
terrorist threats, buttresses this approach, especially in
the realm of civilian protection. Intentional and direct
attacks against hospitals are war crimes, hence the need
to ensure that perpetrators are held accountable and
brought to justice.

Protection of civilians during armed conflict,
including the need to protect health care, which is the

topic of today's debate, remains a key aim. Although
it is incumbent primarily upon States to protect their
people, the protection of civilians is an integral facet
of peacekeeping operations, with a significant impact
on both the reputation and the credibility of the United
Nations. In this regard, Romania aligned itself with
the Kigali Principles, which reflects my country's
commitment to global efforts to deliver peace and
security to conflict-affected countries. Respect for the
Kigali Principles is critical and must be reflected in all
peacekeeping operation mandates.

