The President (interpretation from Chinese): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the situation in Burundi,
document S/ 1996/335.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/l996/34l, which contains the
text of a letter dated 8 May 1996 from the Permanent
Representative of Burundi to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council.

Following consultations among the members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the report
of the Secretary-General on the situation in Burundi,
dated 3 May 1996 (S/ 1996/335) submitted pursuant to
resolution 1049 (1996).

"The Security Council is gravely concerned at
the continued deterioration of the security situation in
Burundi, in particular at reports of a downward spiral
of violence which has resulted in further large-scale
killings in Buhoro and Kivyuka, and at the increasing
flow of refugees from Burundi. The Council is deeply
concerned that relief organizations have been
prevented from delivering vital humanitarian and
development assistance in Burundi, and at the
suffering which this imposes on the people of
Burundi. It calls on the parties and all concerned to
refrain from any action that could aggravate the
problem of refugees.

"The Security Council strongly condemns any
use of violence and emphasizes its conviction that a
lasting settlement of the situation in Burundi can
only be found through peaceful means. The Council
calls on the parties to engage in a comprehensive
political dialogue aimed at achieving national
reconciliation in Burundi. The Council urges once
again the authorities and all parties concerned in
Burundi to set aside their differences, renounce the
use of force and demonstrate a firm political will for
a prompt settlement of the conflict.

"The Security Council stresses the importance
of the commencement of the National Debate
provided for in the Convention of Government, as
an appropriate mechanism for a wide ranging
political dialogue in which all parties to the conflict
should participate without any preconditions. The
Council reaffirms its support for the convening of
the Regional Conference on Peace, Security and
Development in the Great Lakes Region and calls
upon all the States concerned to render their
cooperation for the convening of the conference.

"The Security Council reiterates its full support
for the ongoing efforts of former President Nyerere
to facilitate negotiations and political dialogue to
resolve the crisis in Burundi and looks forward to a
successful outcome of the upcoming meeting in
Mwanza, Tanzania, on 22 May 1996. The Council
calls upon the parties to make full use of the
meeting to achieve progress towards national
reconciliation. It also supports the efforts of the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative to
that end.

"The Council emphasizes the importance of the
continued cooperation of the United Nations with the
Organization of African Unity, the European Union
and other interested countries and organizations in
coordination with former President Nyerere aimed at
achieving the objective of a comprehensive political
dialogue between the parties in Burundi. In this
regard, the Council expresses its support for the
efforts of the Organization of African Unity (OAU)
and its observer mission (MIOB) and calls upon all
States to contribute generously to the OAU Peace
Fund in order to enable the OAU to increase the size
of the mission and to extend its mandate beyond
July 1996.

"The Security Council welcomes the
endorsement by the Secretary-General of the
conclusions of the technical mission providing for

 

United Nations radio broadcasts in Burundi and looks
forward to being kept informed by him of progress
made in the implementation of their recommendations.

"The Security Council reiterates the importance
it attaches to the contingency planning called for in
paragraph 13 of resolution 1049 (1996), and notes the
consultations which have already taken place. In the
light of recent developments, it requests the Secretary-
General and Member States concerned to continue to
facilitate, as a matter of urgency, contingency planning
for a rapid humanitarian response in the event of
widespread violence or a serious deterioration in the
humanitarian situation in Burundi. It also encourages
the Secretary-General further to pursue planning for
steps that might be taken to support a possible
political agreement.

"The Security Council reminds all parties of
their responsibilities for restoring peace and stability
in Burundi, and recalls its readiness, as set out in
resolution 1040 (1996), to consider the adoption of
further measures should the parties fail to
demonstrate the necessary political will for a
peaceful solution to the crisis. The Council will
remain seized of the matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/l996/24.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.40 pm.
