Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The statement made by the representative
of Ukraine has shown once again that his delegation
is trying to exploit any opportunity it can to repeat
its baseless insinuations against Russia. His remarks
are particularly cynical when they are made in the
context of a debate on the situation of children and
the provision of assistance to them. According to the
Ukrainian delegation's immoral logic, assistance
for children - whose suffering is caused by the
Kyiv authorities' broad-based operations against
the population of the eastern regions - is totally
unacceptable.

I will not comment on all that was said by the
representative of Ukraine - let that lie with his
conscience - but our position has been made clear on
many occasions. Nevertheless, I would like to point out
the following. The adoption of a number of measures for
implementing the Minsk Agreements allowed for the
de-escalation of the armed conflict in eastern Ukraine.
We sincerely hope that there will no more child victims
or any others as a result ofthe conflict. For this to be the
case, it will be necessary for the February agreement to
be fully complied with.

It is clear, however, that, more than a month after
the Agreement was signed, the Kyiv authorities still
have not implemented any serious measures to stabilize
the situation ofpeople affected by the conflict in eastern
Ukraine, including children. The Donetsk and Luhansk
regions remain blockaded. How are we to interpret the
fact that pensions remain unpaid, no attempt to restart
the banking system or reopen socioeconomic and
social communications links has been made, and food,
medical and other supplies remain undelivered?

It has been noted that, after the start of military
action, children were no longer receiving vaccinations.
Worse, the restrictions that the Kyiv authorities have
imposed on the movement of people and goods in
regions that they do not control create obstacles to
the delivery of assistance to the population of these
regions, including children. According to the human
rights monitors and representatives of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
working in these areas, it is crucial that these and
other problems be addressed immediately. It is clear
that many children, including disabled children, need
immediate medical attention. I call on the Ukrainian
delegation to address these problems.

