Mr. Jovanovie: At the outset, I wish to express
satisfaction at the exemplary fashion in which you, Mr.
Ambassador, have discharged the functions of the President
of the Security Council during the month of January. I also
wish to commend your predecessor, Ambassador Lavrov,
for the outstanding manner in which he presided over the
Security Council in December.

The conclusion of the Basic Agreement on Eastern
Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium, together with the
Peace Agreement for Bosnia and Herzegovina, represents
a major step towards the establishment of a lasting and just
peace in the territories of the former Yugoslavia. The Basic
Agreement provides a solid foundation for full respect for
and protection of the Serb people in the region,
guaranteeing them peace, freedom and equality. After
Dayton, London, Paris, Bonn and Vienna, it is evident that
the outstanding questions can be resolved only by peaceful
and political means and only if all parties demonstrate
willingness to be flexible and readiness to compromise.

The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia particularly
wishes to emphasize that, under the Basic Agreement, the
Security Council has undertaken the responsibility to
guarantee peace and stability in Eastern Slavonia in the
transitional period, which means to ensure the equality of
all citizens and the protection of their human rights,
including those of the refugees and other persons who, in
accordance with the Basic Agreement, choose to return to
live in Eastern Slavonia.

The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia commends the
conclusions contained in the report of the Secretary-General
and rightfully expects the United Nations forces to
efficiently and impartially contribute to the full
implementation of the Agreement. We consider that a
sufficient number of soldiers should be dispatched to
Eastern Slavonia in order to enable the United Nations to
entirely fulfil all the tasks that lie ahead. Should that not be
the case, both United Nations credibility and the efficient
implementation of the Agreement would be at risk.

In addition to the military part of the operation, the
United Nations also has important duties in the field of
civilian administration, where the major tasks should be
the protection of the civilian population and their human
rights, as well as enabling an unimpeded return of the
refugees.

The successful implementation of the Agreement
should create the necessary conditions for the
development of the region and ensure stability, which
would eventually generate calm among the citizens.

The transitional authority, enjoying the trust of the
population, should take control of and enhance all existing
public services and administration. It is imperative that
the proportionality of the ethnic structure of the region be
maintained in the number of people employed, especially
in top management jobs. The principle of proportionality
must be respected especially in the police and the judicial
system.

It is obvious that the implementation of the Basic
Agreement cannot depend solely on the United Nations.
The primary responsibility for its full implementation lies
with the two sides, which, with the assistance of the Co-
Chairrnen of the Conference on the Former Yugoslavia
and United States representatives, signed this Agreement.
They are expected to translate the Agreement into action.
Should those two sides, in good faith and mutual
agreement, with the help of the international community,
fulfil their obligations, that would defuse the situation on
the ground and restore confidence and understanding
essential for the success of the operation.

In this framework, it is essential that confidence-
building measures should be urgently established and the
full security of the local population be ensured. Only in
this context can the peaceful demilitarization of the region
be carried out. The basic precondition for the successful
implementation of the Agreement is that the security of
the population be fully maintained.

Any departure from the signed Agreement will
generate additional tensions and problems, with
unforeseeable consequences. Therefore, it should be
pointed out that the implementation of this major and
politically significant Agreement, as well as mutual
confidence-building, cannot be ensured by non-
compliance and gross violations of human rights, sending

 

false signals, destruction of property belonging to the other
side, violation of the Security Council resolutions - in
short, by embracing behaviour that is unacceptable and
contrary to the new spirit of relations prevailing after
Dayton and Paris, to which one of the sides very often and
easily resorts, with the tacit approval of the major
international factors.

We expect that the United Nations peace operation to
be established today will be successful and that it will fulfil
the tasks set by the Security Council. That would best
exemplify the fact that even the greatest problems can be
solved peacefully.

Following the signing of the peace Agreement for
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the reaching of the Basic
Agreement for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western
Sirmium, we feel that conditions have been created for the
resolution of other outstanding questions in a new
atmosphere. One of those issues is certainly Prevlaka.

The dispute over the Prevlaka peninsula is one of the
most complex and significant issues in the search for a
solution to the crisis in the previous Yugoslavia. It is of
particular importance for the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, considering that access to the Montenegrin Bay
of Boka Kotorska is fully controlled from the Prevlaka
peninsula.

In essence, what is at stake is a classic territorial
dispute which has been noted as such since Croatia's
secession from the previous Yugoslavia, by both the
Croatian side and the international community. The
Croatian side, in negotiations that took place as early as
1991 with representatives of the Republic of Montenegro,
in principle accepted the possibility that the dispute could
be resolved through a tripartite exchange of territory
between the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, the Bosnian
Serbs and Croatia.

The present legal status of the disputed part of
territory incorporating the Cape Oetri Rt and a part of the
Prevlaka hinterland was regulated by the Joint Declarations
of the President of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and
the President of the Republic of Croatia of 30 September
and 20 October 1992. On that occasion, after having
decided to demilitarize Prevlaka, the two sides concurred
that the general security of the Boka Kotorska Bay and
Dubrovnik would be solved through further negotiations.
The Agreement was confirmed by Security Council
resolution 779 (1992), by which the United Nations
resumed responsibility for monitoring the arrangements
agreed to and the observance of the United Nations
security regime pending the reaching of a peaceful
solution to the contentious issue.

During the peace negotiations in Dayton, the
delegation of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia did its
utmost to reach a negotiated solution to the dispute in
direct contacts with the representatives of the Republic of
Croatia, in the presence of the representatives of the
United States. The guarantees concerning the tripartite
exchange of territories among the Republic of Croatia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and the solution of the Prevlaka dispute in
favour of the Republic of Montenegro and the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, which the Republic of Croatia
agreed to on that occasion, are known to all participants
in the proximity peace talks in Dayton. However, since
the Dayton Agreement, the Croatian side has called the
agreed arrangements into question in a number of public
statements of high-ranking officials of the Republic of
Croatia.

Recently, the Republic of Croatia has begun to deny
that what is at stake is a territorial dispute on Prevlaka.
This is indeed a very strange development, since Croatia
has been involved in negotiations or talks with the
representatives of the Republic of Montenegro and the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia for more than four years
on this question. The international community
nevertheless has noted that there is a territorial dispute; it
did so the moment the Security Council decided to deploy
the United Nations military observers with the mandate of
monitoring the demilitarization.

Considering the sensitivity of this issue, as well as
the strategic relevance of the area, we feel that the further
presence of the United Nations troops would be the best
guarantor, if misunderstandings and new problems are to
be avoided.

We commend the Security Council for having
decided to accept the recommendations of the Secretary-
General contained in his report of 12 December 1995 and
to extend the presence of the United Nations monitors on
the Prevlaka pending a mutually acceptable solution. In so
doing, the Security Council has demonstrated political
wisdom, as well as a sense of reality. This is the best
contribution to the strengthening of stability in the region,
preventing new and unnecessary problems.

We are confident that the question of Prevlaka can
be resolved peacefully, as was the case with many other

 

even more complex issues in the territory of the former
Yugoslavia. Historical events in Dayton and Paris bear
witness to that.

The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is ready, on the
basis of relevant mutual agreements on this question, as
well as of Security Council resolutions, to continue to
negotiate with Croatia, on condition that the other side
approaches the problem in a responsible and conscientious
manner. If one seeks the normalization of relations, one
should demonstrate wisdom and readiness to overcome
problems in a peaceful and negotiated manner, rather than
strive to create new ones.
