Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
wishes to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today's meeting. We thank Assistant Secretary-General
Zuev and Ms. Ochoa Nifio for their briefings.

In recent years, thanks to the joint efforts of the
international community, progress has been made in
the area of international mine action. The harrowing
problem of landmines has been mitigated in some
countries and regions. China appreciates the efforts
undertaken by the United Nations in this area.

At present, the international and regional security
situation is undergoing complex and profound changes.
In many countries and regions affected by war or armed
conflict, landmines and explosive remnants of war pose
a serious threat to civilian lives and property and impede
economic development and social reconstruction.
In recent years, improvised explosive devices have
become a means for terrorists and extremists to carry
out their acts of terrorism and violence.

Strengthening international assistance and
cooperation in mine action and effectively reducing the
threat oflandmines and other explosives to civilians and
peacekeepers is an important task. China believes that
to effectively address the humanitarian concern arising
from landmines and other explosives, the international
community should observe the following principles.

First, we must adhere to the principle of ownership
by Member States. It is imperative to fully take into
account the national conditions and needs of the
landmine-affected countries and continuously improve
the capacity and level of the affected countries
participating in demining in order to fully leverage
their role.

Secondly, we must uphold the principle of balanced
treatment. It is important to respect the differences
among countries in terms of security environments
and military strength by both properly addressing the
humanitarian concerns and fully taking into account
the legitimate national military and security needs.

Thirdly, we must uphold the principle of results-
orientation. It is important to focus on improving the
practical results ofdemining assistance and cooperation,
improving the capacity-building of recipient States and
promoting a transition from their reliance on external
assistance to self-reliance as to the mainstay.

China has always paid great attention to the
humanitarian concerns associated with landmines and
actively supported international legal instruments,
including the Geneva Convention and the Convention
on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain
Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be
Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects
(CCW). China is a full member of CCW and its five
additional protocols. We faithfully fulfil our obligations
under those instruments.

For many years, China has maintained close
exchanges and cooperation with the contracting
parties of Ottawa Convention on Landmines and has
participated as an observer in the Meetings of States
parties and its review conferences. It also participated
in the actual Conference of the Convention. China is
actively committed to the international humanitarian
demining assistance cause and has, to the best of its
ability, provided assistance to the affected countries
and victims. Since 1998, the Chinese Government has
provided assistance in the forms of demining equipment
and technology training, as well as donations. It has
also provided humanitarian assistance worth more than
¥90 million to nearly 40 countries in Asia, Africa and
Latin America. It has trained nearly 500 professional
demining technicians.

In September 2015, Chinese President
Mr. Xi Jinping announced at the Leaders' Summit
on Peacekeeping, during the seventieth session of the
General Assembly, that China would in the next five
years launch 10 demining assistance programmes. At
present China, is actively honouring this commitment
and implementing the related programmes.

China attaches great importance to the humanitarian
concerns arising from the abuse of improvised
explosive devices (IEDs) by non-State actors. We
support the discussion of IEDs within the framework
of the amended landmine protocol to CCW. We are
ready for a useful exchange of views with the parties
concerned. Chinese experts and the United Nations,
among others, jointly formulated the United Nations
IED disposal standards and co-hosted the first Meeting
of the Group off Experts last March in Beijing.

China fully understands the aspirations of
landmine-affected countries and peoples for security
and development. We are ready to fulfil our international
obligations, as always, and provide assistance to the
best of our ability. We are ready to join the international
community in addressing the humanitarian concerns
arising from landmines and other explosive devices.

