The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of September, I should
like to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of
the Council, to His Excellency Mr. Kenzo Oshima,
Permanent Representative of Japan to the United
Nations, for his service as President of the Security
Council for the month of August 2005. I am sure I
speak for all members of the Council in expressing
deep appreciation to Ambassador Oshima for the great
diplomatic skill with which he conducted the Council's
business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of
the Congo

Special report of the Secretary-General on
elections in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (S/2005/320 and Add.1)

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the consideration of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the consideration
without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ileka
(Democratic Republic of the Congo) took a seat
at the Council table.


The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
special report of the Secretary-General on elections in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, documents
S/2005/320 and addendum 1. Members also have
before them document S/2005/555, which contains the
text of a draft resolution prepared in the course of the
Council's prior consultations.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Algeria, Argentina, Benin, Brazil, China,
Denmark, France, Greece, Japan, Philippines,
Romania, Russian Federation, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, United States of America


The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1621 (2005).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 10.15 am.

