I thank Mrs. Nakamitsu and Mr. Arias for their briefings. The presence among us of the Director-General of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) gives me an opportunity to remind him of France's full support for the Organization and to thank him for his commitment to our collective security. As long as the re-emergence of chemical weapons remains a major threat, the role of the OPCW is essential. We must support it and defend it against false accusations that question its impartiality and credibility. Under Mr. Arias's leadership, the Organization has maintained the required level of professionalism and impartiality. I would like to commend once again the remarkable work carried out by the OPCW's Investigation and Identification Team, resulting in the publication in April of a report establishing the Syrian regime's responsibility for chemical-weapon attacks in Ltamenah in March 2017. As we have seen month after month, the Syrian regime continues to ignore its obligation to cooperate. Its lack of clarity on the status of its stockpiles is unacceptable and contravenes the provisions of resolution 2118 (2013), adopted more than seven years ago. The draft decision submitted by France on behalf of 40 delegations and adopted in July at the ninety-fourth session of the OPCW Executive Council was quite clear as to the Syrian regime's obligations in terms of cooperation with the Organization. In view of the fact that the Syrian regime continues to flout those obligations, on 24 November, on behalf of 46 delegations from four geographical groups, France officially submitted to the OPCW Technical Secretariat a draft decision with a view to taking the necessary collective measures. That draft decision will be on the agenda of the Conference of the States Parties to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction when it convenes again in April 2021. We call on States parties to learn from the report of 16 October by the Director-General of the OPCW (see S/2020/1033, annex), which leaves no room for doubt. The fight against impunity and a total ban on the use of chemical weapons remain our priorities for the Syrian dossier. They are essential and necessary pillars for achieving a political solution that will enable lasting peace in Syria. That fight is also the basis for ensuring the effectiveness and credibility of the prohibition regime. Together with its partners, France will remain fully mobilized to counter the threat that chemical weapons pose to our global security. That is why we remain mobilized in support of the International Partnership against Impunity for the Use of Chemical Weapons, which we launched with our partners in 2018.
