Mr. Fedotov: I welcome this opportunity to brief
the Security Council on the multifaceted nature of the
transnational organized crime and trafficking in drugs
that are undermining security in many regions and
evolving into major threats to political and social
stability, the rule of law, human rights and economic
development. In recognition of that global challenge,
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) is raising awareness and mobilizing
multilateral action to deliver as one.

Earlier this year, the Secretary-General invited
UNODC to co-chair the United Nations system-Wide
task force on organized crime and drug trafficking. The
heads of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the World Health
Organization, Mr. Guterres and Ms. Chan, are strong
and active partners in those collective efforts.

We work closely with them, as well as with the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the
Department of Political Affairs (DPA), the United
Nations Development Programme, the Joint United
Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS, INTERPOL, the
Convention on International Trade in Endangered
Species of Wild Fauna and Flora and the World Bank,
among many others, to create a multidisciplinary
response in areas such as piracy, drugs, the illegal trade
in small arms, corruption, illicit money flows, human
trafficking and crime involving wildlife.

We also build partnerships with the private sector
and civil society. Our comprehensive and concerted
approach is underpinned by UNODC's guardianship of
the United Nations conventions on corruption, drug
control and transnational organized crime.

UNODC's strength lies in its ability to deliver
operational results in the field. We have developed a
series of regional programmes in Africa, Asia and Latin
America. Those programmes support an integrated
approach, linking the local to the regional and the
global.

Regarding the Middle East and North Africa
region in particular, UNODC's most urgent priority is
to assist post-Arab Spring countries in their progress
towards democracy and the rule of law. To that end,
based on our existing capacities in that region and
building upon new ones, we are refocusing our
3
Regional Programme for the Arab States to adequately
address the new realities.

UNODC is already working closely with the
authorities in Egypt and Tunisia and is developing a
national programme with Libya. There is much to be
done in that region in terms of strengthening the rule of
law, criminal justice, police reform, combating
corruption, assisting in the recovery of misappropriated
funds, fighting against human trafficking and illicit
migration, and terrorism prevention.

Combating piracy off the coast of Somalia by
providing assistance to countries in the region to
prosecute and jail convicted pirates remains our
foremost priority. At the same time, the illicit money
flows produced by piracy must be dealt with in a more
meaningful way. We need also to address the growing
threat of an upsurge in pirate attacks in West Africa, in
particular off the coast of Benin. The United Nations
inter-agency assessment mission, co-led by DPA and
UNODC, that the Secretary-General recently
dispatched to Benin and Nigeria will certainly help to
develop a tailored, comprehensive and effective anti-
piracy strategy for the region.

The impact of transnational cocaine trafficking
has had a devastating effect on both sides of the
Atlantic. In Europe, in particular, the volume of
cocaine consumed has doubled over the past decade.
Our Latin American/Caribbean programmes are
dealing with the issue, but we are also working hard to
assist in the promotion of a collective response among
the West African countries. UNODC has drawn
attention to West Africa's vulnerability as a transit
route for cocaine on a number of occasions. There is a
need for the international community to focus on that
pressing issue. UNODC's Regional Programme for
West Africa 2010-2014 was developed to support the
ability of the regional action plan of the Economic
Community of West African States to address the
growing problem of illicit drug trafficking, organized
crime and drug abuse in West Africa.

Afghanistan, and its surrounding countries, is
another key region where UNODC works to combat
the transnational threat of drugs. The latest news is
hardly encouraging. After the drastic decline in 2010
over the previous high production levels, due, mostly,
to the opium plant disease, poppy cultivation in
Afghanistan has increased by 7 per cent this year. In
the same period, the amount of opium produced

increased by 61 per cent, from 3,600 metric tons to
5,800 metric tons. There are now only 17 provinces
that have a poppy-free status, compared to 20 in 2010.
As a result, production levels may be heading in the
direction of the previous high levels seen before 2010.

In Afghanistan, the farm-gate value of opium
production alone is equivalent to around 10 per cent of
the country's gross domestic product. Opium therefore
makes up a significant part of the Afghan economy,
and provides funding to terrorism and insurgency,
while fuelling corruption. That situation cannot last
forever. The time has come for a more results-oriented
response to the challenge that is based on concrete
action and shared responsibility.

I hope that the fifth Triangular Initiative
Ministerial Meeting, which is scheduled for
28 November in Kabul, will help to agree new
measures among the region's States and to ensure that
the Afghan Government accepts counter-narcotics as a
national priority. UNODC will launch a regional
programme for Afghanistan and neighbouring countries
on 7 December. That is an initiative in which we all
have a shared stake. I hope that I will be able to report
on the first results of our efforts to the third Ministerial
Conference of the Paris Pact, to be held in Vienna on
16 February 2012.

While continuing our efforts to reduce the supply
of drugs, we must also focus on demand reduction and
the prevention of drug addiction. UNODC recognizes
that drug use and drug dependence are health issues,
which include HIV and AIDS, and must be addressed
in full compliance with the conventions on drug
control that form our profound commitment to the
promotion of human rights and the rule of law. Young
people are particularly vulnerable. UNODC's global
programme concerning children exposed to drugs
addresses the issue of drugs in early childhood.
Starting in Afghanistan, the programme will soon be
extended to West Africa and Latin America.

We must appreciate, as well, that transnational
organized crime and drug trafficking are also
development issues, requiring a sustained approach and
the long-term commitment of all partners. At the core
of our multilateral response must be a policy to help
build the capacities of fragile or weak States, while
assisting with the defences of neighbouring countries
and the long-term development of criminal justice
systems.
To conclude, I would like to commend the
Portuguese presidency for its initiative in organizing
this meeting of the Security Council, and all Council
members for their support of UNODC. My Office
stands ready to further brief the Council on all issues
relevant to its important responsibilities in the
maintenance of international peace and security.

