Mr. Nejad Hosseinian (Islamic Republic of Iran): Mr. President, I congratulate you on assuming
the presidency of the Council for this month and thank
you for convening this meeting on the Palestinian
question, which continues to be the focus of attention
of the international community.

The repression of Palestinian civilians in the
occupied territories continues unabated. The recent
siege of the West Bank city of Ramallah, which lasted
three days, was the latest example of the continued
repressive and bloody campaign pursued by the
occupying power. During the siege, invading troops
kept inhabitants under curfew and entrapped them in
their homes. They turned some areas of the city into
piles of rubble and damaged further the headquarters of
Mr. Arafat, which had been damaged earlier during the
five-week siege in March and April.

The retreat of Israeli tanks and armoured vehicles
does not signal an end to aggression against Ramallah.
They are taking up positions outside the city and
keeping it encircled and under the constant threat of
repeated invasion. This has been the case all along in
most other cities and villages across the occupied
territories.

The latest Israeli aggression was timed to
coincide with the visit of head of the Israeli regime to
Washington. What is more disappointing and alarming
is the almost unqualified endorsement he received there
for criminal assaults launched repeatedly by the
occupying army against civilian areas under foreign
occupation, which flagrantly violate the norms and
principles of international law, including the Fourth
Geneva Convention. No doubt such endorsement plays
an important role in emboldening the aggressor,
thereby further endangering the lives of innocent
Palestinian civilians and dashing hopes for a just and
lasting peace in the Middle East.

The clampdown on the movements of
Palestinians within and outside the West Bank and the
Gaza Strip, which continues steadily, figures among the
numerous criminal acts against the Palestinian people.
Because of this act by the Israeli troops, so many
Palestinian cities and towns in the West Bank have
become isolated enclaves surrounded by troops and
tanks. The Gaza Strip, with 1.3 million inhabitants, has
been effectively cut in half and sometimes into thirds
by checkpoints set up to protect Gaza's approximately
7,000 Jewish settlers. Such a criminal practice is being
employed to humiliate and to punish collectively an
entire population. It is constantly adding to the
desperation felt in the Palestinian territories and is
feeding the Middle East conflict day by day.

We share with the rest ofthe world the conviction
that the occupation of the Arab lands, be they
Palestinian, Syrian or Lebanese, by the Israelis lies at
the heart of the crisis and conflict in the Middle East.
We regret that the Security Council has not yet
discharged its Charter responsibility with regard to the
Palestinian question despite so many appeals to the
Council over so many years.

We regret the Council's failure to take firm action
under the Chapter VII of the Charter to stop the
Israelis' continual flouting of its resolutions. It is quite
unfortunate and disappointing that the Israelis blocked
an official inquiry into the war crimes that its troop
committed in the Jenin refugee camp and elsewhere in
the West Bank in April and that the Council could not
enforce the resolution it passed in this respect.
Moreover, the Council's failure to uphold its resolution
on the Palestinian question is another example of the
double standards that paralyse it and affect its
credibility.

In the meantime, we look forward to the report on
war crimes in Jenin by the Secretary-General, as
requested by the emergency special session of the
General Assembly, and we hope that those whose
influence prevented the Council from taking action
with regard to Jenin will not be allowed to tamper with
the efforts of the Secretary-General to present an
objective and frank report.
In the light of what happened recently in the
occupied territories, we believe that the United Nations
must use all the necessary means to force Israel to
comply with the demands of the world community. The
Security Council should take effective measures with a
view to stopping Israeli aggression completely. With
that objective in mind, the establishment of an
international protection force under Chapter VII of the
Charter, to be deployed in the occupied territories and
mandated to protect civilians from atrocities committed
by Israeli troops, is now all the more necessary. It is
also essential that those who ordered and actually
committed war crimes against civilians in the occupied
territories be brought to justice.

