The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of Japan.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General, the
Deputy Secretary-General and Special Representative
Atul Khare for their presence in the Council today. We
very much appreciate the strong commitment of all
those people working within the United Nations to
support the nation-building effort of Timor-Leste. I
would also like to extend a warm welcome to His
Excellency President Jose Ramos-Horta, Foreign
Minister Da Costa and the other members of the high-
level Timorese delegation.

This year marks the tenth anniversary of the
historic popular consultations in which the people of
Timor-Leste demonstrated their strong desire for

independence. Despite the lamentable turmoil that
followed, Timor-Leste has risen, first by gaining
independence and then by following the path of
consolidating peace and stability.

Japan is pleased that it has been able to associate
itself with that transformation as one of the strongest
supporters from the very outset. It hosted the first
donor conference 10 years ago and, as one of top
donors, has provided substantial assistance since then.
Contingents of the Japan Self-Defence Forces assisted
in the reconstruction of the country. We have also sent
police to help train local police officers.

I would like to reaffirm Japan's continued
commitment to supporting efforts in Timor-Leste. So it
is a double pleasure and honour for me, during Japan's
Council presidency, to have the opportunity to discuss
the progress and the prospects of Timor-Leste.

Since 1999, the United Nations has been the focal
point of international assistance for this young country.
The current mission, the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), was established to
help the country regain stability after the crisis in 2006.
We applaud the strides that the Timorese Government
and people have made towards stability and
democracy. The country demonstrated the resilience of
its institutions by weathering the attempted
assassination of the President and the Prime Minister.

Much related to the two major concerns about
security have also been resolved: the first group of
petitioners was disbanded peacefully and a significant
number of internally displaced persons returned home.
We are grateful to those Member States participating in
the international security forces for their contributions.

We also commend the leaders of Timor-Leste for
continuing their efforts to bridge differences through
an inclusive political dialogue. Parliament plays an
important role in promoting a culture of democratic
governance. We should extend support to Timor-Leste
to ensure the success of the forthcoming local
elections, since local governance is also fundamental.

Yet we must face the situation there, which is
calm but fragile. The country is at a critical stage in its
efforts to consolidate its achievements and pave the
path to self-sufficiency and sustainable development.

The orderly resumption of police responsibilities
by the National Police of Timor-Leste (PNTL) is the
key task for UNMIT this year. A strong security
institution is a cornerstone for the country. To build
such an institution, the transfer of responsibilities
should be based on a realistic assessment of the
operational capacity of the PNTL. We endorse the
approach of ensuring that the transfer process is bound
by strict criteria and that the authorized UNMIT police
force stays at the current level, at least for the next 12
months, so that it will be equipped for contingencies.
The Secretary-General should be given flexibility on
the level of police strength to deal with the situation on
the ground.

For the success of the peacekeeping effort, early
planning for consolidating peace over the medium term
is indispensable. We therefore welcome the helpful
strategy and benchmarks. We believe that the
Government of Timor-Leste must take ownership of
the strategy for its implementation, with the assistance
of the international community. We know that the
consolidation of peace requires painstaking, long-term
sustained efforts, as President Ramos-Horta said this
morning, and that it must proceed in an integrated
manner. Together with enhancement of the security
sector and judicial institutions, poverty reduction and
the creation of employment and economic opportunity
must be pursued most vigorously.

It is not too early, while the peacekeeping mission
carries out its mandate, to start focusing a
peacebuilding perspective on how to achieve economic
growth and how to sustain growth and development. In
particular, effective measures for rural development
and agriculture, and creating employment opportunities
for young people, are urgently needed. The population
of Timor-Leste is among the youngest in the world and
its potential is therefore great to develop human
resources. We welcome the fact that the Government
attaches high priority to education and vocational
training, as well as to infrastructure.

We congratulate the new graduates of the national
university of Timor-Leste, who graduated last month. It
is my belief that the future of any country rests with
such young and motivated students, to whom the task
of building the nation is entrusted. Japan will spare no
effort to help the young people of Timor-Leste develop
their full potential and contribute to the development of
their country.

In conclusion, Japan believes that the presence of
UNMIT is an essential stabilizing factor for Timor-
Leste. We therefore support the extension of the

UNMIT mandate for another 12 months, as
recommended by the Secretary-General and as
endorsed by the leaders of the country. As the lead
country, Japan will submit a draft resolution to extend
the mandate of UNMIT. I would like to ask for
members' continued cooperation in expressing the
Security Council's unanimous support for the work of
the United Nations in Timor-Leste, and for the efforts
of its Government and people.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Brazil.

