Mr. Vilovic' (Croatia): Allow me to begin by
thanking you, Mr. President, for organizing this debate
and by thanking the Under-Secretary-General,
Mr. Pascoe, for introducing the Secretary-General's
report, which focused our attention on one aspect of
the Council's activity that, while frequently present in
our discussions, has thus far received relatively little
attention on its own merits.

Croatia believes this is a topic that deserves the
attention of the Security Council, to be approached in a
coherent and coordinated manner. We are grateful for
the Secretary-General's report, which extensively
examines the challenges facing the United Nations and
its partners in providing mediation services in both
inter- and intra-State conflicts at all stages of the
conflict cycle.

While we align ourselves with the statement of
the European Union to be delivered later, permit me to
add some further remarks.

As the report notes, the peaceful settlement of
disputes should be seen as one facet of the sovereign
responsibility of States. Mediation has rightly been
recognized as an efficient and strikingly cost-effective
tool that the Security Council has at its disposal in
addressing threats to international peace and security.
As it is often political issues that lie at the heart of
crises, the importance of early engagement in
preventive diplomacy - including mediation - is
even more significant during this period, in which
United Nations-mandated peacekeeping operations
have experienced unprecedented demand and strain.

We should not forget that Chapter VI of the
Charter of the United Nations offers an array of other
tools for the peaceful settlement of disputes, namely
negotiation, enquiry, conciliation, arbitration, judicial
settlement, resort to regional agencies or arrangements,
or other peaceful means of the parties' choice. Since
every dispute is different, a differentiated, flexible and
tailor-made approach is preferable.

As a politically oriented tool, mediation has a
strategic place in conflict prevention and resolution.
However, that does not diminish the value of other
instruments, which should be used judiciously,
sometimes in combination with one another, and in a
manner that respects the wider normative standards of
the United Nations and promotes the international rule
of law.

The report highlights a number of factors that
determine the success of mediation, from deciding on
the timing, selecting the right mediator and lead actor,
defining the structure of the mediation and identifying
all relevant interlocutors to issues of gender balance,
managing the spoilers and monitoring the
implementation of the negotiated outcome. All those
factors need to be taken into account and, often,
cultivated at the system-wide level.

Croatia supports the Secretary-General's
recommendations aimed at capacity-building and
addressing the inadequacies that have been identified
regarding the ability of the United Nations to carry out
mediation. The establishment of the Mediation Support
Unit within the Department of Political Affairs (DPA),
in response to a growing demand for United Nations
mediation services, should be the platform on which
we are building in developing capacity at the national,
regional and United Nations levels and in
professionalizing mediation support.

When addressing the role of the Security Council
in that context, we should focus on enhancing
coordination and the strategic leadership of the
Council, particularly in situations involving a
multiplicity of actors and mediation issues. The
Security Council has unique leverage derived from its
international legitimacy and moral authority, which
should be used prudently. The Council is often
critically placed to respond during the decisive - and
usually very short - window of opportunity before a
dispute escalates into conflict. It is well placed to
address failures in implementation and the problem of
spoilers.

That being said, we should acknowledge that,
while they are certainly well placed, neither the
Council nor the United Nations has a monopoly on
mediation. That is why coordination and
complementarity of efforts are crucial, both at the
system-wide level and in the context of cooperation
with regional and subregional organizations.
Ultimately, the responsibility for the peaceful
settlement of disputes lies with the parties. That is why
building national and local capacity is crucial and
should be adequately reflected in the mandates defined
by the Security Council.

Finally, at all times, we should remain mindful of
the fact that the very nature of mediation is such that it
commands a degree of discretion and flexibility. A
successful mediation process should be able to strike
the right balance between public and quiet diplomacy.

We believe that the draft text of the presidential
statement we are to adopt today reflects the main
messages of this debate, and it has our support. In that
respect, let me express our gratitude to the delegation
of Burkina Faso for the efforts made in its preparation.
We see efforts to enhance mediation and its support
activities as part and parcel of the wider effort to
strengthen the ability of the United Nations to play its
role to the fullest extent in conflict prevention,
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding, in an
integrated and coherent manner.

