Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, allow me to warmly congratulate the delegation
of the Netherlands on its presidency of the Security
Council last month and, on behalf of France, offer our
full support for the Peruvian presidency.

I thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, for
his very enlightening briefing on the implementation of
the mandate of the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH).

France aligns itself with the statements to be
made by the observer of the European Union and by
the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Haiti.
Following the remarkable work done by the women
and men of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti, at great risk to their lives - as was the case in
the 2010 earthquake - MINUJUSTH took up the effort
by focusing on three tasks: strengthening the Haitian
National Police and the rule of law, and monitoring
the human rights situation. I should like to come back
to these three axes of MINUJUSTH's work during
my statement.

The first point I wish to address is the strengthening
and the role ofthe Haitian National Police. The stability
of the country depends on its ability to train and field
police personnel able to contribute to building social
peace. It is their presence on the ground that often helps
to ease tensions, as we have seen with the significant
decrease in crime. In order to maintain this positive
trend, MINUJUSTH must enjoy the means to support
the Police Force in optimal conditions during its
operations on the Haitian territory, including with the
support of air and medical capabilities.

This international support, however, represents
only a transition towards full ownership by the Haitian
authorities of the maintenance of public order. Indeed,
all the efforts of the United Nations Mission are now
focused on developing a National Police that will
be increasingly capable of independently fulfilling
its missions without international support, from
decision-making to the deployment of police officers on
the ground. It is therefore up to the Haitian Government
to ensure the successful training of more than 15,000
police officers in order to guarantee order and justice.

The second part of the MINUJUSTH mandate is
the strengthening of the rule of law on which social,
economic and political stability is based. We commend
the drafting and adopting of legislative texts jointly
carried out by the Haitian Government and Parliament
in 2017. France will pay particular attention to the next
steps, in particular the enacting of a penal code and
a code of criminal procedure, which will be criticial
before the MINUJUSTH mandate comes to an end.

As with the Haitian National Police, the successes
achieved through international support, including
the good offices of the Special Representative, now
depend on the resolve of the Haitian authorities to
take ownership of the work done so far. This political
commitment is crucial in the fight against the scourge
of corruption, which weakens democracy. We welcome
the announcements issued by the Haitian Government,
especially with respect to corruption, and encourage it
to take all measures necessary to strengthen the rule
of law, which is a prerequisite for the development of
the country.

I will end on the issue of human rights, which
are the keystone of the maintenance of peace and
international security in Haiti. All the objectives that
the international community has set for itself in that
country - strengthening the Haitian National Police,
strengthening the rule of law and the sustainable
development of the country - depend above all on an
active and ambitious human rights policy.

France calls for the careful monitoring of this
significant issue in the implementation ofthe mandate of
MINUJUSTH, always bearing in mind the objective of
the assumption of ownership by the Haitian authorities
and civil society, which is the sole guarantor of the
progress that can be accomplished in all aspects of
human rights. I will cite but a few: the improvement of
the penitentiary system, the defence of women's rights,
and respect for the rights of Haitian citizens vis-a-vis
the State. The United Nations also has a full role to play
and will have to continue to pay close attention to the
fight against sexual abuse in particular.

In conclusion, we call for the renewal of the mandate
of MINUJUSTH before embarking on a transition to a
new form of the United Nations presence in Haiti. The
United Nations and France continue and will continue
to stand alongside the Haitian people, whose courage in
the face of adversity deserves our greatest admiration.
We recall in that regard the suffering endured as a
result of the tragic cholera epidemic, which is now on
the verge of eradication. Given the successes observed
in recent years in many areas, a stable Haiti firmly on
the path of development must be our shared ambition.

