Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to thank Special
Coordinator Mladenov for his clear briefing today. I
also thank him for his reminder about the urgency and
volatility of the situation on the ground and about the
fact that, 25 years after the historic Oslo Accords, we
need to have a serious and frank discussion about the
obstacles to peace and threats to the two-State solution,
which represents international consensus. I would like
to address three elements of resolution 2334 (2016):
settlements, violence and differentiation.

The Israeli settlement policy continues unabated
despite repeated international condemnation. During
the reporting period, the Israeli authorities announced
plans and tenders for thousands of new settlement units
in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, while
Palestinian homes are being demolished and people are
at risk of being forcibly transferred. We second the calls
from both the United Nations and the European Union
(EU) to the Israeli authorities to reconsider their decision
to demolish the Bedouin village of Khan Al-Ahmar
in area E-l. It would have serious consequences for
its residents, the majority of whom are children, as
well as for the contiguity of the Palestinian State and
Palestinian access to East Jerusalem. Israel's settlement
policy is illegal under international law, as are actions
taken in that context, including the demolitions of
Palestinian communities and possible forced transfers
of the population. The policy undermines prospects for
peace and the viability of the two-State solution. We
therefore urge the Israeli authorities to reconsider and
reverse those policies.

We call for steps to prevent acts of violence against
civilians, including acts of terrorism, provocation and
destruction. In line with resolution 2334 (2016) and
well-established EU policy, we call for the distinction
between Israel within pre-1967 borders and occupied
territory. As is obvious from the Special Coordinator's
briefing today, progress on implementing that part of
resolution 2334 (2016) is lacking. We urge all States to
act in that regard.

Since our previous meeting, in August (see S/PV.8239), we welcome the fact that the situation in
and around Gaza has stabilized somewhat thanks to
international efforts, not least by the Special Coordinator
and Egypt. But, as we heard, the situation remains tense
and fragile and, for the sake of long-term stability,
we underline the importance of all relevant parties,
including the Palestine Liberation Organization, taking
part in such efforts. While another devastating conflict
between Israel and Hamas may have been averted, it is
imperative to alleviate the humanitarian crisis in Gaza.
Interventions with quick, direct and immediate impact
on daily lives are possible and urgently needed for the
population in Gaza living under dire circumstances.
We look forward to discussing that issue in greater
detail at the meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
for the Coordination of the International Assistance to
Palestinians next week, but let me underline that it is
crucial to see a lifting of the Israeli closure regime, an
end to acts of violence and acts of provocation, progress
in intra-Palestinian reconciliation and a return of the
Palestinian Authority to Gaza.

We are all aware that the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) plays a critical role on the ground. It
provides education, health and other essential services
to Palestine refugees, but it also constitutes a key factor
for stability in the region, including in neighbouring
countries, until the final-status issue on refugees has
been settled. We therefore regret the decision of the
United States not to provide further funding to UNRWA
after decades of political and financial support. The
United States has traditionally been the largest donor,
and its support has been much appreciated. That decision
has contributed to a serious financial crisis at UNRWA,
with a current funding shortfall of $186 million. A
few weeks ago, UNRWA schools for more than half a
million Palestinian children were opened. However, the
Agency's funding beyond September is not secured.
The remaining financial gap needs to be filled for
schools to remain open.

Sweden is among the top donors to UNRWA. In
August we signed a multiannual partnership agreement
worth over $200 million. We are fully committed to
supporting UNRWA at this critical juncture. Together
with our partners, including Jordan, whose commitment
to UNRWA we commend, we have sought to mobilize
political and financial support over recent months. We
will also use the occasion of the high-level week of the
General Assembly to that end. We call on all countries
to step up support, since the shortfall is unprecedented
and, as mentioned, risks spurring instability and violent
radicalization in both Gaza and the wider region.

Unfortunately, the Oslo Accords did not bring about
the peace that both Israelis and Palestinians deserve. We
reaffirm our support for an end to the occupation and
for the two-State solution, based on international law,
the relevant United Nations resolutions and previous
agreements. There simply is no viable alternative to the
two-State solution, which is the only way the legitimate
aspirations of both peoples can be attained. Yet, as we
have heard today, that goal is becoming increasingly
distant by the day. We therefore need to redouble our
collective efforts to salvage the two-State solution. The
international community and regional stakeholders
have a key role to play in revitalizing meaningful peace
negotiations, which require the full participation of
women. The Council, too, has a role to play, as it did
when resolution 2334 (2016) was adopted.

We often speak in the Chamber about how
important it is that the decisions of the Council be
respected. That is why we are gravely concerned about
the clear lack of implementation of resolution 2334
(2016) and why we were surprised that no report of
the Secretary-General was circulated prior to today's
meeting. We recall that the provision of written reports
is standard practice in the Council, as stipulated by
presidntial note S/2017/507. A report was circulated in
June (S/2018/614), in line with the request made by 10
members of the Council. We encourage the continuance
of that practice and look forward to receiving a written
report for the next quarterly reporting period.

