Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
statement and his recent report on the situation in
Afghanistan (S/2013/l33). I should also like to thank
Ambassador Tanin for his important contribution. I
should also like to recognize the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Jan Kubis
at the helm of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), and the leadership of Australia
on this matter within the Security Council.

Today's debate is taking place at a decisive moment
for Afghanistan as we look ahead to the dual transition
that will take place in 2014: the political transition
culminating in presidential and provincial elections
in April 2014, and the security transition, which will
see the conclusion of the withdrawal of International
Security Assistance Force troops at the end of 2014,
with the full transfer of security responsibilities to the
Afghan security forces. Together, these events will
signal a new phase of sovereignty and independence for
Afghanistan. Attention must therefore be given not only
to how to ensure the steps needed to achieve a successful
transition, which is key to peace and stability in the
country, but also the modalities and configuration of
assistance from the international community following
2014, including the role of the United Nations and
UNAMA, whose mandate the Security Council has
today extended for another year.

With regard to the elections, it is of the utmost
importance that all steps be taken to ensure that we
reach April 2014 with an orderly electoral process. It
will be essential for all Afghan institutions to agree
on a legal framework that will govern this process and
endow it with clear ground rules. The decision of the
Afghan authorities to request assistance from UNAMA
in this area is a decidedly positive development. We
hope that that support continues and produces tangible
results.

We also understand that the ongoing
professionalization of the Afghan National Security
Forces, as well as respect for international humanitarian
law and international human rights law, should
continue to be central elements of a transition that
institutionalizes the protection of civilians and ensures
the leadership and civilian control of the security sector.

On that point we cannot fail to express concern
over the number of civilian victims caused by the
conflict, which, while less than recorded in 2012,
continues to be unacceptable. The rise in the number of
deliberate attacks against civilians merely because they
are believed to support the Government is particularly
alarming, as is the increase in the number of women
and children killed or injured in that same period.
All parties, in particular the anti-Government forces,
responsible for most of the victims, should take the
necessary measures to ensure the protection of civilians
and to fulfil their obligations under international law.

For Argentina, dialogue and reconciliation are
critical in Afghanistan in order to change the dynamic
of the conflict and to address the security challenges.
We understand that any national reconciliation process
that is launched must be headed and led by the Afghans
themselves. In that regard, we support the efforts of
the High Peace Council. At the same time, we wish
to recognize and welcome the steps taken by the
Government of Pakistan so that such a process can take
place. We hope that the emerging positive signs will
lead to a dialogue with clear parametres and objectives.

With regard to the role of the United Nations
in Afghanistan, we believe that UNAMA has a very
important role in the transition phase and post-2014 in
key areas, such as support for the electoral process, the
promotion and protection of human rights, coordination
between donors and the Government, the facilitation of
the peace and reconciliation process, the coordination
of humanitarian assistance, the return and rehabilitation
of refugees and the capacity-building of the Afghan
authorities and institutions, in order to meet the
needs of its population and to increasingly ensure the
exercise of economic, social and cultural rights in the
context of ongoing sustainable development. We must
therefore begin a process of reflection on UNAMA's
future role up to and post-2014. A robust UNAMA
with a clear mandate and the necessary resources for
its implementation are issues of critical importance.
That will signal that the international community
continues to support a democratic, prosperous, stable
and sovereign Afghanistan.

For that reason, we wish to express our satisfaction
with the fact that the UNAMA mandate that we have
renewed today maintains its basic features, including
the Mission's role with regard to elections at the request
of the Afghan authorities, and the emphasis on the
protection of civilians and the monitoring of violations
of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law in Afghanistan, in particular with
regard to women and children. In the light of the
most recent report of the Secretary-General on sexual
violence in conflict (S/2013/l49), we also welcome the
fact that resolution 2096 (2013) continues to underscore
the importance of implementing resolution 1325 (2000)
and the subsequent resolutions on women and peace
and security.

UNAMA has also played, and should continue to
play, a significant role in supporting Afghanistan's
efforts to promote human rights. We encourage the
Afghan authorities to continue strengthening an
effective system of protection, bearing in mind in
particular the recommendations made by the High
Commissioner for Human Rights in her most recent
report on the situation in the country.

It would not be appropriate on our part to try to
offer recommendations on the way in which the Afghan
people and Government should resolve their difficulties.
However, in conclusion, I would like to briefly point
out three important issues for Argentina.

First, while we encourage the Afghan reconciliation
process, we also believe thatjustice and the fight against
impunity should be at the heart of the pursuit of lasting
peace. For that reason, we believe that steps should be
taken to strengthen the institutional capacity in order to
ensure accountability in cases of massive human rights
violations, war crimes and crimes against humanity,
in line with the recommendations in the annual report
on the protection of civilians (S/2012/376) and in the
report of the High Commissioner for Human Rights.

Secondly, according to the report of the Secretary-
General, poppy cultivation has increased for the third
consecutive year. That is to say that, despite the efforts
of the international community, the problem of the
illicit trafficking of opiates continues to be a matter
of serious concern. We understand that dealing with
the issue requires a comprehensive strategy that takes
into account supply and demand and the adoption
of prohibition and socioeconomic measures. For
Argentina, the issue of terrorism and the fight against
drug trafficking are separate matters that require
different and distinct strategies, as well as the clear
commitment of the Government of Afghanistan, the
States of the region and the international community.

Thirdly, we are convinced that the basis for solid
democracy and stable and lasting peace in Afghanistan
can be established only through a focus that includes
the broader dimensions of economic, cultural and social
development, the promotion and protection of human
rights and the strengthening of the rule of law. That is
the future that we desire for the country and to which
the international community is committed.

