Ms. Pierce (UnitedKingdom): Like othercolleagues,
I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for having brought
this subject back to the Security Council's attention. I
think that we have heard a lot of common themes today.
While natural resources often bring great benefits to
a country, they can also contribute to the outbreak of
conflict and feed the conflict cycle. We have already
heard from other speakers that at least 40 per cent of all
intra-State conflicts in the past 60 years have had a link
to natural resources, according to the United Nations.

Natural assets that ought to drive domestic economic
growth all too often can be subverted and diverted. In
Iraq, we have seen how Da'esh used oil resources to
fund its campaign of terror. In Libya, competition for
control of oil resources remains one of the key drivers
of conflict. The trade in diamonds has driven conflicts
in countries such as Angola, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Liberia and Sierra Leone. 1 was very
interested in what our colleague from Cote d'Ivoire
said about the total cost of this being something like
$50 billion per year, exceeding aid budgets. That is a
very telling figure.

Conversely, resolving disputes over control of
natural resources can be a central pillar of peace
processes. For example, oil was a crucial element of
the peace agreement between Sudan and South Sudan.
Beyond oil and diamonds, conflict over land and
water resources is a growing risk. Population growth
and climate change - and I wish once again to thank
the Swedes for their excellent presidency debate on
this issue (see S/PV.8307) - threaten to increase
competition for natural resources and hence the risk
of conflict. Sustainable Development Goal 12 calls
for responsible consumption and production, which is
integral to reducing the risk of conflict and achieving a
sustainable peace.

National responses have, unfortunately, proved
insufficient in tackling such complex challenges. We
believe that a multilateral approach is critical and needs
to be based on international cooperation and respect
for the rules-based international system, including the
relevant parts of international law.

A number of speakers mentioned sanction regimes,
which can provide a useful tool for tackling the role of
natural resources in perpetuating conflict. The Council
has imposed sanctions on the trade in diamonds in
Angola, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Sierra Leone, and timber, for example, in Liberia.
Calibrated sanctions on trading charcoal from Somalia,
oil from Libya and the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea and the absolute prohibition of the oil trade
with the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham all have
helped curtail the ability of spoilers to destabilize
already fragile situations. But the success of these
sanctions regimes, and hence our ability to mitigate or
prevent conflict, relies on implementation by not only
all Council members but also all of the other States
Members of the United Nations.

In United Nations peace operations, our responses
should be tailored to the context. We need to pay attention
to the underlying causes of conflict, including, where
relevant, to support countries in overcoming issues
pertaining to the nexus between natural resources
and conflict. That said, I just wanted to respond
briefly to what the Russian representative said. Not all
interventions are driven by negative motivations. It is
important that the Council and countries be ready to
address crimes against humanity. It is important that
they be ready to address grave human rights abuses and
important that we be ready to address the imminence
of overwhelming humanitarian catastrophes. So I just
want to place on record that we reject his descriptions
of why Western interventions have been made over the
past years.

A number of speakers also mentioned the Council's
recent Visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We heard how the illegal exploitation of mineral
resources by armed militias in the eastern part of the
country is fuelling conflict and imposing suffering on
the civilian population. The value of goods smuggled
across the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
border exceeds that of formal trade, with gold the most
valuable component. So I was very interested in the
ideas that the French representative put forward about
including gold in an enhanced regime. If we are to end
the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
we need to see an end to the smuggling of mineral
resources. We support the role of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in helping the Government to
address that.

We believe that we can also do more to identify and
address risks related to natural resources in conflict
through early warning systems and efforts to support
countries to alleviate potential triggers. We very much
appreciate the work of the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development in this respect. I share
the French approbation of the Extractive Industries
Transparency Initiative. There are also some other
ideas that we believe are well worth exploring. Sweden
had ideas around tax and audit and tackling organized
crime, and China had an interesting idea around using
the Peacebuilding Commission. We would be very
willing to work with colleagues on the Council to try
and advance such instruments.

The Kimberley Process was also raised. The
United Kingdom is proud to be a founding member
of the Kimberley Process, and we support the current
reform process, designed to make the framework
even more effective. In addition to the Process, the
United Kingdom is committed to strengthening the
international framework for regulation of the trade in
minerals linked to conflict. 1 would like to highlight
the mining and trading of tin, tantalum, tungsten and,
as I have already mentioned, gold. These minerals are
key components for modern technology. Under the
right conditions, the mining of such minerals can build
both prosperity and security for local communities. But
otherwise, we end up with deplorable practices - from
human rights abuses to the illicit financing of conflict.

We want to help to address such issues. We
believe that we should be encouraging compliance
with the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development Due Diligence Guidance for Responsible
Supply Chains of Minerals from Conflict-Affected
and High-Risk Areas. Implementation of this guidance
becomes mandatory for the largest importers in the
European Union in January 2021, and I can assure the
Council that, even after Brexit, the United Kingdom
will remain committed to this regulation. We also
support the European Partnership for Responsible
Minerals, which is a multi-stakeholder initiative
comprised of Governments, civil society and the private
sector. The Partnership is recognized by the European
Union (EU) as an official accompanying measure to the
EU regulation.

In conclusion, the role of the Council in tackling
the problem of natural resources as a cause of conflict
continues to be a very important instrument, which we
should ensure that we use to the full.

