Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): We have followed the most recent developments
in northern Kosovo with some concern. We fully support
the need to combat corruption and organized crime,
which is part of Kosovo's reform agenda. We reiterate
the importance of both sides respecting the rule of law
in those efforts. It is important that the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
be able to continue its work in line with its mandate,
without constraints and with complete independence.

We await the results of UNMIK's internal
investigation in order to clarify the 28 May incident.
I would like to thank Legal Counsel Miguel de Serpa
Soares for reminding us of the rules governing the
immunity of United Nations staff.

These developments unfortunately reveal a climate
of mistrust between the two parties. It is important that
the parties refrain from any action or statement that
may cause tensions. In this context, we reiterate our
call to the Kosovo authorities to eliminate the 100 per
cent customs duties on products from Serbia and Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

The future of Serbia and Kosovo lies within the
European Union and will be attained through dialogue.
We welcome the meeting between leaders of Serbia and
Kosovo in Berlin, and we call on both sides to seize
the opportunity offered by the next meeting in July in
Paris to resume the dialogue under the auspices of the
European Union. We hope that the Serbian and Kosovar
leaders will show the necessary political courage.

It is important that the parties implement all the
commitments they undertook in the dialogue in order
to create a climate conducive to the normalization of
their relations. The conclusion of a comprehensive
and legally binding agreement on the normalization of
relations is the only way to achieve a lasting settlement
of the dispute between the two parties and to guarantee
regional stability. Such an agreement is also a condition
for the European integration of Serbia and Kosovo.

We encourage the participation of women both in
the process of normalizing relations between Belgrade
and Pristina and in the Kosovar political process. It
is important to include women in the various stages
of the decision-making process and also to take their
needs into account. Their participation is essential to
achieving a just and lasting peace and reconciliation.
We welcome the efforts of UNMIK and UN-Women in
this regard.

Since the adoption of resolution 1244 (1999) 20
years ago, Kosovo has made considerable progress,
thanks to the presence of the international community.
The United Nations and UNMIK in particular have
played a key role in this regard. The European Union,
which Serbia and Kosovo aspire to join, has also made
a significant contribution through the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo. We believe that it is
important for the international community to contribute
to creating the conditions for the normalization of
relations between Serbia and Kosovo.

