Mr. Acharya (Nepal): I wish to begin by
thanking you, Mr. President, for organizing this open
debate on the important issue of post-conflict
peacebuilding.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
just made by the representative of Bangladesh on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

Post-conflict peacebuilding efforts and their
architecture are works in progress at the United
Nations. Peacebuilding is a multidimensional approach
to preventing war-torn countries from relapsing into a
cycle of conflict. It has the important role of
interposing itself amid security and normal
development activities by nurturing an environment
conducive to moving them onto the path of sustainable
security, peace and socio-economic transformation. It
therefore naturally encompasses diplomatic, security
and economic efforts. We must not lose sight of that
fundamental reality.

There is no doubt that security and development
reinforce each other. There has to be a delicate balance
between the two, so as to effectively lead a country
towards the post-conflict phase. To achieve and sustain
that, we should promote a coherent approach right
from the beginning, with a view to ensuring national
ownership of the whole process, by building capacity,
dealing with immediate security challenges and
promoting stabilizing activities through quick delivery
of services and substantially ramped up development
efforts.

We are all aware of the fragility of the
transitional situation. Hence, the restoration of a
modicum of security should immediately be followed
by the simultaneous promotion of the political process,
the consolidation of security and the effective
promotion of employment-generating economic
activities in order to instil hope in the minds of people.
No other measure can surpass the positive effect of the
early distribution of a peace dividend to the general
public in generating hope and confidence for
reconstruction and recovery. Very often, the cause of
conflict has to do with deprivation. Therefore, ensuring
effective and quick development works even in a
minimum environment of security would be a great
positive multiplier. This is where the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) should create a strong niche for
itself.

The PBC has been envisaged as a specialized and
nodal intergovernmental advisory body focusing on
marshalling resources, raising the international profiles
of the countries on its agenda and coordinating
peacebuilding activities there. It has now has been
accepted as an important instrument in promoting
peace and stability in some of countries emerging from
conflict. However, it has yet to fully consolidate its
work in the field or to make a strong mark on the
ground. Better and robust coordination, coherence and
collaboration on the field and at the regional and
international levels would greatly enhance its
effectiveness.

As peacebuilding is not a linear process,
incorporating and coordinating peacebuilding activities
from the early phase of peacekeeping greatly enhances
its work. Similarly, the availability of substantial
resources for peacebuilding, the effective and quick
delivery of resources on the ground, and the further
strengthening of the Peacebuilding Support Office
would help better to consolidate peacebuilding efforts.
In this context, my delegation is confident that the
2010 PBC review process will come up with concrete
suggestions to make the PBC more effective and
efficient in the days ahead. As a member of the
Organizational Committee of the PBC, Nepal will
make efforts towards that end.

Even though the peacebuilding environment
varies from country to country, we see many
commonalities in the approaches to and building
blocks of peacebuilding. The accumulation of key
components of effective peacebuilding would help to
concentrate our focus on critical components of the
peace process.

The time has come to consolidate our collective
efforts and institutional settings to deal with the
challenges of peacebuilding by promoting security,
rehabilitation and recovery simultaneously with the
substantial utilization of resources and our political
capital. The United Nations has to nurture the hope and
dreams of peace and economic prosperity of the
millions of war-torn society. As has been stated often,
if the international community, led by the United
Nations system, responds rapidly, coherently and
effectively, there is a greater chance of sustaining
peace and laying the foundations for sustainable
development. This could not be more true in the case
of peacebuilding than in any other endeavour.

