Mr. Ayewah (Nigeria): Allow me to extend to you,
Sir, the courtesies of the Nigerian delegation as you
perform the duties of President of the Council this month.
Let me also express our gratitude to the Permanent
Representative of Botswana for his conduct of the Council's
business during February.

It can be rightly stated that today developments in the
former Yugoslav territory have reached a critical point. My
delegation was therefore pleased to vote in support of the
three resolutions just adopted on a continued United
Nations presence in the Republic of Croatia, the Republic
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and The Former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia.

It is important that the United Nations continue to
provide whatever assistance it can in the ongoing efforts to
resolve the political problems in the three countries, aside
from concerns over social dislocation, displacement of

 

population and other human problems that have developed
as a result.

On Croatia, my delegation shares the Secretary-
General's view that the three-phase process of
negotiations - cessation of hostilities, economic
normalization and political negotiation - is the only
practical path to a durable peace. This was valid at the
time of the outbreak of hostilities, and it remains so even
today. The present resolution on Croatia approves a
framework for a reduced Force level and the tasks to be
performed by such a Force.

It is our expectation that whatever Force level is
eventually agreed upon between all the parties will be
such as to enable the United Nations Force to fulfil the
responsibilities outlined in the current resolution -
namely, performing fully the functions envisaged in the
Cease-Fire Agreement between the Republic of Croatia
and the rival Serb authorities; facilitating the
implementation, inter alia, of the Economic Agreement of
2 December 1994; assisting in controlling the crossing of
military personnel, equipment, supplies and weapons over
the international borders between the Republic of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and the Republic of Croatia and the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro);
facilitating the delivery of international humanitarian
assistance to the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina
through Croatia; and monitoring the demilitarization of
the Prevlaka Peninsula.
My delegation believes that continued close
cooperation between the United Nations and the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), the Croatian
Government and local Serb authorities is crucial to
achieving a lasting political settlement in Croatia. In this
regard, we underline the urgent need for the Government
of Croatia to conclude early agreements on the status of
forces and other personnel so as to enable the new United
Nations presence to take off.

Confident of the important role that a suitable radio
and television broadcast facility can play in information
dissemination, public enlightenment and confidence-
building in Croatia, my delegation wishes to join in
appealing to the Croatian Government to cooperate with
the United Nations by granting the necessary access.

On the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, my
delegation would like to join other delegations in
emphasizing the responsibilities of all parties in ensuring
that UNPROFOR is able to perform its tasks without let

 

or hindrance and without further intimidation and violence.
We regret, in this connection, that the Contact Group peace
plan, to which the Government of Bosnia has agreed, has
still not been accepted by the Bosnian Serb party. We urge
the Bosnian Serbs, therefore, to reconsider the situation and
to accept the plan as a starting-point for the negotiation of
a peaceful solution to the conflict. We hope that the parties
in conflict will soon realize that continuation of the war is
a futile option, and that all hands must be on deck to seek
a durable solution.

Concerning The Former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, my delegation is in full support of the
establishment of the United Nations Preventive Deployment
Force (UNPREDEP), with a mandate for a period
terminating on 30 November 1995. The preventive role that
the force deployed by the United Nations has already
played in Macedonia has been instrumental in building a
climate of trust and confidence in the country. We are
convinced that a continued presence is not only useful in
itself, but particularly favourable to reinforcing the
independence and territorial integrity of Macedonia.

With these three resolutions in place, the international
community ensures that it will continue to be directly
involved, especially through the United Nations, in
mediating a peaceful solution to the problem in the former
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. Clearly, as in all conflict
situations, the international community can only assist the
parties, which must play the leading role.
It is my delegation's hope that these conflicts, which
have dragged on for far too long and have brought untold
hardships to the ordinary people in the Republic of Croatia,
in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina and in The
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, will soon be
resolved peacefully.

