Mrs. Albright (United States of America): The
terrorist attack on President Hosni Mubarak on 26 June
1995 was carried out by Egyptian nationals who had used
Khartoum as a base of operations for more than two years
while planning this act. It failed because of the
professional response of Ethiopian and Egyptian security
personnel, some of whom lost their lives. If it had
succeeded, it would have undermined the peace and
stability of the North African and Middle East regions. It
must be condemned not only for this reason, but also in
order to demonstrate the international community's
condemnation of terrorism as a means to affect internal
and bilateral conflicts.

The attack on President Mubarak was one of the
most outrageous recent acts of international terrorism. But
Ethiopia and Egypt are far from the only victims of this
phenomenon. Terrorism, much of it externally sponsored,
is a recurring fact of life, not just for the people of those
two countries, but also in places stretching from Eritrea
to Israel to Pakistan and Sri Lanka. In this city, New
York, terrorists have executed attacks and planned many
more, against the United States and the United Nations,
including the very building in which we are sitting.

But not all facts of life have to be tolerated. With
the growth of worldwide information links in the
government and financial sectors, the web of money,
weapons and communications that sustain terrorists is
ever more transparent. With the stronger international
consensus against dealing with terrorists and the States
that support them, the number of places where terrorists
can find refuge is ever smaller. Today's resolution repeats
the constant message that must be delivered to terrorists
and their sponsors: "You can run, but you cannot hide."

 

The United States finds the evidence gathered by
Ethiopia on the perpetrators of this crime to be compelling
and convincing: we know who the terrorists were, we know
from where they planned their crime, and we know to
where they fled, or attempted to flee, afterwards. The
Government of the Sudan, which must bear responsibility
for the acts it allows its guests to perform, also has the
responsibility to extradite those guests to face justice.
Instead, it failed to give any serious response to the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) mission that visited
Khartoum in November and could not provide proof that it
had made any effort to arrest the three individuals wanted.
It has made a transparently insincere offer to allow an OAU
team to come join in the search, as if the OAU, or any
other organization, had the capability to find three
well-trained terrorists in a country of 2.5 million square
kilometres, when the security forces of that country do not
want them found.

Contrary to what the Government of the Sudan has
been claiming, this resolution is not the product of a
conspiracy. It stems from that Government's failure to
observe the most basic norms of international relations, and
the unanimous vote that adopted it is a measure not only of
the balanced approach of those non-aligned members who
drafted it, but also of the international isolation in which
the Sudanese Government chooses to live. I was struck by
the Ethiopian Ambassador's description of the efforts of his
Government, since it was established, to build friendly
bilateral relations with Khartoum. The United States, too,
shares with the Sudanese Government the wish for good
relations between our two countries. But positive bilateral
relations are not built upon declarations. They are built
upon concrete action.

The Council's demands in this resolution are simple
and straightforward: the Government of the Sudan must,
first, immediately extradite the terrorists it is sheltering, and
secondly, stop its assistance and support for terrorism. We
support this resolution because, like the OAU decisions on
which it is based, its requirements are logical and justified.
Indeed, the obligation to extradite dangerous criminals -
and especially terrorists - is among the minimum
obligations of States that wish to live in peace with their
neighbours. We believe that it is within the power of the
Government of the Sudan to comply immediately and fully
with these requirements. We sincerely hope that the
Secretary-General will be able to report to us within 60
days that the Sudan has extradited the suspects - for the
sake of the war on terrorism we all must commit to fight,
for the sake of improving relations between the Sudan and
all of its neighbours and for the peace and stability of the
region.

