Mr. Imbali (Guinea-Bissau) (spoke in French):
On behalf of my delegations, I would like to thank the
Security Council and, in particular, the Netherlands
presidency, for everything that has been done to make
this meeting a success. I would like to thank all the
speakers for their concurrence with the need to help
Guinea-Bissau in its post-conflict period.
I would like to point out, echoing what the
Tunisian delegation said, the urgency of providing aid.
We should not wait for the round table to provide
assistance. Concerning the statement just made by the
representative of the World Bank, I would like to say
that it is very important for us to see that there is
flexibility and recognition of the urgency of assisting
Guinea-Bissau.

The Council might have observed that our
delegation did not speak at length about the
Representative of the United Nations in Guinea-Bissau.
The reason is simply that we consider Mr. Nana-
Sinkam a brother. We have adopted him and consider
him to be of Guinea-Bissau, so I wonder how the
Council is going to manage, because we want to keep
him. Mr. Nana-Sinkam has played a very important
role, and we hope he will continue to play this role in
Guinea-Bissau.

I would like to say that we are all concerned
about Ansumane Mane at this time. I guarantee that
Ansumane Mane will be captured. I guarantee that,
with the cooperation of the Guinea-Bissau population,
and since he has no external support, he will be
captured and brought to justice, as was done in the case
of Nino Vieira. If the operation has perhaps been
lengthy, it is because of the concern of the authorities
of Guinea-Bissau that he be captured alive, and these
types of operations are always very delicate. This is
one reason why, to date, Ansumane Mane has not been
captured, but I can guarantee that he is still in Guinea-
Bissau territory.

In conclusion, I would like to thank the
Netherlands for everything it has done for Guinea-
Bissau. My delegation is here in this Chamber today
thanks to the material assistance of the Netherlands. On
behalf of my delegation, I would like to thank you,
Madam President.

