Mr. Barriga (Liechtenstein): My delegation would
like to commend and thank your delegation, Madam
President, for organizing today's very timely debate.

I will not repeat some of the basic facts and
figures that we heard this morning, but I would like
to emphasize that local journalists, freelancers and
women are in a particularly vulnerable position. Female
journalists encounter abuses similar to those met by
their male counterparts, but they have also endured
appalling levels of sexual violence. Despite those
obstacles, female journalists have continued to display
impressive dedication to their work, relaying important
stories of people caught in some ofthe world's deadliest
conflicts, such as the one in Syria.

The Council has an important role to play in
promoting the safety ofjournalists, media professionals
and associated personnel in conflict situations. It is
not just an important aspect of the Council's work on
the protection of civilians, it is also an issue of self-
interest for the Council. After all, the Council itself
has to rely on information received from journalists.
Such independent reporting is particularly crucial in
situations of escalated violent conflict, when other
reliable sources of information may be hard to come by.

In considering the Council's role, we must recognize
the dramatic changes in the world's media landscape.
Technology has altered the ways we consume news,
social media has opened new channels for distribution
of information, and smartphones have fuelled the rise
of the citizen journalist. Furthermore, some extremist
groups consider journalists as enemies rather than
neutral observers. They will not hesitate to target them
openly, just as they routinely disregard other basic rules
of international humanitarian law.

It is therefore time for the Council to pay greater
attention to the protection of journalists. We particularly
welcome the adoption of the resolution today (resolution 2222 (2015)) and its strong references to international
humanitarian law, which guarantees equal protection
for journalists and civilians. In many conflict zones,
however, respect for international humanitarian law has
completely eroded. We strongly support efforts aimed at
increasing compliance with international humanitarian
law for this reason and many others, in particular the
joint initiative by the International Committee of the
Red Cross and Switzerland.

Attacks againstjournalists in conflict situations are
not only serious violations of international humanitarian
law, but also in and of themselves are attacks on the
freedom of expression. Governments are obliged to
protect journalists as a matter of human rights law.
We must increase our efforts towards accountability
for those crimes, with a view to increasing deterrence.
The primary responsibility in that regard falls upon
domestic justice systems. The International Criminal
Court, where it has jurisdiction or such jurisdiction is
conferred by the Security Council, could also play an
important role.

I should also say that media organizations also have
an obligation to help ensure the safety of journalists
in armed conflict. Proper training and resources
must be made available to local staff, freelancers and
international war correspondents alike.

The freedom of expression and of information are
essential human rights and are among the main pillars
of a free society. The work of journalists is also an
indispensable tool for the Council, be it in the context
of early warning and prevention or in the middle of
violent conflict. Their activities are not only under
fire by missiles and bullets, but are also threatened by
other means: illegal surveillance, censorship, reprisals
and violence. Oppressive Governments and groups
wage silent wars by suppressing access to information
and imprisoning those who dare to report the facts.
Countering those actions should be high on the
Council's agenda.

