Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Some years ago, Aleppo had a very advanced
eye hospital called Al-Kindi, one of the best in the
Middle East. Some Western Governments claimed that
it had been bombed by the Government of Syria. At the
time, we allowed the representative of the World Health
Organization (WHO) in Syria to visit it and to produce
a WHO report for all concerned on the reality of the
Al-Kindi hospital's situation. As Council members
may recall, at that time eastern Aleppo was still under
the control of terrorists. The WHO representative
visited the hospital under a special arrangement with
the Syrian Arab Red Crescent. When he reported back
to us and to the WHO, he said there was no Al-Kindi
hospital. He said that he entered a building that was
full of terrorists, with no signs of any kind that it was
a medical hospital. By the way, the terrorist entity
that was occupying Al-Kindi was the same Al-Nusra
Front that has been mentioned today and is currently
in Idlib. That was the testimony of the United Nations
representative who visited Al-Kindi at the time.

That episode was repeated many times. My
colleague Mr. Nebenzia mentioned how hospitals in
the city of Raqqa have been destroyed by United States
planes, something that no one talks about, not even the
penholders for humanitarian, social and philosophical
affairs. Dozens of hospitals in Raqqa have been razed
to the ground. However, no one has a problem with that
because it was the Americans who did it. Furthermore,
the British Government sponsored the creation of
another terrorist group, the so-called White Helmets,
whose main task was to fabricate scenes of chemical
attacks in Syria to provide a reason for American,
British or French - or tripartite, as they sometimes
like to term it - acts of military aggression against
my country.

I would like to point out, for the information of
our newer colleagues, who may be hearing about the
chemical issue for the first time, that the first chemical
attack in Syria occurred in March 2013 on the small
village of Khan Al-Assal in rural Aleppo governorate.
As a result, 18 Syrian soldiers and a number of civilians
were killed. I was instructed by my capital a few hours
after the attack to inform then-Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon and ask him to provide assistance in verifying
whether an attack using a chemical weapon had taken
place, and by whom. That was in 2013. Mr. Ban is
still alive, so anyone here can check with him about
it. He asked me to give him some time. He called me
at home a few hours later, at 11 p.m., and told me to
inform my Government that he was ready to assist in
verifying whether a chemical substance had been used
in the attack on Khan Al-Assal. However, with regard
to identifying the perpetrator, he apologized, saying
that as Secretary-General of the United Nations, he
could not assist in the matter. The reason was that the
people he was consulting with, both on the Council
and beyond, knew who had launched the attack and did
not want to reveal the identity of those who were using
chemical weapons at the time.

We agreed to cooperate fully with the Secretary-
General and to let him help us verify whether or not
a chemical weapon had been used in Khan Al-Assal.
We hoped that the assistance would be forthcoming
as soon as possible, given that the use of chemical
materials involves factors such as the so-called chain
of custody, evaporation and wind. Every feature of
a chemical attack could disappear within a matter
of hours or days. We therefore asked the Secretary-
General, in the language of Shakespeare, to provide
assistance "as soon as possible". I would like to inform
the British Ambassador that it took the Secretary-
General four months and 11 days to send Mr. Sellstrom.
"As soon as possible" for the Secretary-General meant
four months and 11 days to send Mr. Sellstrom to
investigate what happened in Khan Al-Assal. When
Mr. Sellstrom reached Damascus and was on his way
to Aleppo, incidentally, paradoxically and incredibly
another chemical attack also took place, this time in
Ghouta, in Damascus. The Secretary-General then
instructed Mr. Sellstrom to go, not to Khan Al-Assal,
but to Ghouta.

The crux ofthe story is that what took place in Khan
Al-Assal in March 2013 has still not been investigated
nor the perpetrators identified, although everyone
knows the identity of the people who carried out the
attack. We have sent the Council dozens of messages
that include full details of the issue and that identify
the people who used the chemical weapon, as well as
how the substance was transported, first from Libya to
Istanbul and then across the Syrian border to Aleppo.
I would like to ask Council members to stop asking
questions that can only cause embarrassment, because
we have answers that will embarrass every one of them.
And we actually have more information than that.

