Mr. Spatafora (Italy): It is indeed an honour for
all of us to have Minister De Gucht among us here. I
would like to thank the President for taking the
initiative to convene this debate, as well as for the very
lucid, focused and forward-looking concept paper that
he has provided. This debate provides a very good
opportunity to take up the theme of natural resources
and conflict from the perspective of the Security
Council while at the same time stressing the
importance of the role and experience in this field of
the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council. I would therefore like to extend a warm
welcome to Sheikha Al Khalifa and Ambassador Dalius
Cekuolis, and thank them for their statements. I would
also like to thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for
his substantial introductory remarks.

Italy fully associates itself with the statement to
be delivered by the representative of Germany on
behalf of the European Union. Allow me to make just a
few additional remarks.
There is no doubt that the mismanagement of
natural resources can become a cause of conflict or
contribute to fuelling and sustaining an ongoing
conflict, especially when it comes to the illegal trade or
trafficking of high-market-value resources. Moreover,
in the post-conflict phase, lack of good governance in
the management of natural resources could create
instability, increasing the risk of relapsing into conflict.

In that regard, Italy supports stronger engagement
by the United Nations system in preventing the
exploitation of natural resources by the parties to a
conflict and making the utmost effort to that end,
keeping in mind that the issue must also be addressed
from the point of view of development and as part of
the development agenda. We can benefit a great deal
from the lessons learned in cases such as Angola,
Liberia and Sierra Leone, where the Security Council
responded to the crises by imposing commodity
sanctions in a successful and effective manner. Italy
also believes that whenever commodity sanctions are
in place, peacekeeping operations should be given an
appropriate mandate to assist the Government
concerned to prevent the illegal exploitation of natural
resources from further fuelling the conflict.

As for the post-conflict period, it is fundamental
to ensure accountable and transparent management of
natural resources in order to generate the financial
resources that are needed for reconstruction and
development and to let people share in the dividends of
peace. In that regard, as other speakers who have taken
the floor before me have done, we would like to stress
the crucial role that the Peacebuilding Commission
could play in this field by assisting the Governments
concerned. At the same time, regional initiatives can
also play an important role, such as the Protocol
against the Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources,
which was adopted last December by the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region.

With regard to the wider range of initiatives that
are not directly linked to the Council's own efforts but
that make a contribution to the same goal, I would like
to underline the importance of the efforts being made
in the area of combating corruption, promoting the
transparency of revenues and corporate responsibility
of private-sector enterprises through initiatives
undertaken within the European Union and the G8
framework, to which Italy continues to contribute
actively, such as the Extractive Industries Transparency
Initiative.
The efforts of the General Assembly with regard
to the very issue we are debating here today are of
fundamental importance. In that regard, as all other
speakers have done, allow me to refer to the Kimberley
Process as the best example to date of international
cooperation in this area.

Finally, I would like to conclude by referring to
the significance of the myriad United Nations
frameworks overseen by the Economic and Social
Council intended to improve the management and
sustainable use of natural resources at the global level.
I am thinking not only of major multilateral
environmental agreements on climate, desertification
and biodiversity, but also of a variety of mechanisms
and initiatives, ranging from the Global Compact, to
UN-Energy, to the Secretary-General's Advisory Board
on Water and Sanitation, and so forth. It might be
useful for the future to consider those activities in a
more coherent framework, bearing in mind their
broader impact on long-term conflict prevention.

Lastly, I think that the idea raised by the
Mr. Pratomo, Indonesia's Deputy Minister for Foreign
Affairs, with regard to a conference certainly deserves
to be explored, especially because, as the Minister
implied, the conference should have a focused,
comprehensive and action-oriented approach that
builds upon what has already been achieved.

