Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): Let me join others in
expressing our thanks to Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Arnault for his briefing on the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia (S/2017/lll7).

I am pleased to welcome the Vice-President of a
country that is, despite the well-known challenges, on
the cusp ofmaking history in peacemaking. We wish him
success; we need that success as an example. Colombia
has indeed been the good news in the Council, and we
all have been applauding the remarkable achievement
made by the country in turning the page on a long-
standing conflict.

As we have come to understand, and as stressed
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, there are formidable challenges in terms of
implementation that require patience and perseverance
to achieve sustainable peace. We have always known
that the road ahead would be difficult and complex, and
that it would not be a cakewalk.

We certainly welcome the positive progress made
over the past year, including the laying down of arms,
which was successfully completed just a few months
ago and represented a significant milestone in the
implementation of the Peace Agreement.

However, we are conscious of the fact that there
are sensitive issues that need to be handled carefully,
including the reintegration of Fuerza Alternativa
Revolucionaria del Comun (FARC) combatants into
civilian life; the implementation of personal and
collective security and protection measures in the
absence, or with an inadequate presence, of State
institutions in places left by FARC combatants; and other
issues highlighted in the report ofthe Secretary-General
that might potentially create political complications.

We take note of the approval of the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace, the backbone of the Peace
Agreement, on 30 November. We are convinced that
the approval of the Agreement alleviates the concerns
of former combatants and facilitates their reintegration
into society.

The Constitutional Court's endorsement of the
Comprehensive System for Truth, Justice, Reparation
and Non-Repetition, on 14 November, as well as
FARC's registration as a legal political party and its
announcement that it would participate in the 2018
presidential and congressional elections, are very
significant. While we commend the continued political
will being demonstrated by the Government and FARC,
we understand that more needs to be done in order
to accelerate the implementation of the Agreement
and sustain the gains made in the first phase of the
peace process.

We note that the parties are committed to addressing
this challenge, and they can only be encouraged to stay
the course. The Council should continue to provide
all of the necessary support, and we remain fully
committed to supporting the Colombian parties in the
implementation of their Agreement.

On the ceasefire agreement between the Colombian
Government and the Ejercito de Liberacion Nacional
(National Liberation Army) ,we can only hope that
things will improve for the better despite the latest
setback. We know how strongly the Government is
committed in this regard.

We express our appreciation to Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Arnault and to United Nations
personnel in Colombia for all their efforts in support of
the Peace Agreement. We also reiterate our appreciation
to the countries of the region and other international
partners that continue to closely support and accompany
the implementation of the Peace Agreement.

Finally, we take this opportunity to reaffirm our
support for the full implementation of the Colombian
Peace Agreement and continue to stand in solidarity
with the people and the Government of Colombia in
their efforts to transition to a sustainable peace.

I want to stress how critical the success of this
process is, not only for the people of Colombia but
for us all, particularly for those of us in parts of the
world where we have the major challenge of keeping the
guns silent. Colombia should continue to serve as an
example. For that to happen, it is important that nothing
happen to dim the hopes that have been engendered,
which we had the opportunity to witness during the
Security Council mission last May.

I want to conclude by taking this opportunity to
express profound appreciation to Matthew for his
friendship and for the notable contribution he has made
to the work of the Council. As everybody knows, with
Matthew one can always be sure about the position
he takes, and therefore one can always count on him,
as we have. I am personally indebted to him for all of
that. I wish him success as he assumes a responsibility
back home that is in no way less important than the
responsibility he has had as the representative of his
country on the Council. He will be missed very much,
andI share the sentiment expressed by the representative
of the United States in that regard.

