Mr. Apakan (Turkey): Over the past five years,
the parties to the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
(CPA) have worked together peacefully to address their
issues and take this historic rapprochement forward.
There have been successes and there have been
failures, but through the ups and downs the parties
have stayed the course and, for the most part, stability
has prevailed. We commend the parties for their
commitment to peace and the courage they have shown
in difficult circumstances.

We have come to the final stage of CPA
implementation. At this point, all efforts must focus on
ensuring that the referendums in Southern Sudan and
Abyei are free, fair, transparent, credible and held on
time and in a peaceful manner. These points are all
crucial, since a result that is legitimately contested will
be controversial not only in the Sudan, but also in the
eyes of international public opinion. In this context, we
welcome the conclusion of the voter registration
process.

On the other hand, once the process is concluded
properly, all parties concerned should respect the
outcomes of the referendums. Turkey welcomes the
very high-level statements made in that regard in
recent days. We also welcome the political
commitment made by the parties to finding peaceful
solutions to all outstanding matters, never again
resorting to war, and not undermining one another's
security. These are all very important political
pronouncements and must be followed through.

The future of the Sudan is now in the hands of the
Sudanese. They will make their choice at the
referendums, but whatever the outcome of the voting,
all Sudanese people, regardless of their race or religion
and be they in the North or the South, will continue to
be interdependent. The need to find solutions that
ensure peaceful coexistence among diverse
communities will not change after January; indeed, it
will become more immediate. That is why
comprehensively addressing all post-referendum
arrangements is crucial, and we welcome the progress
already made in this regard. We encourage the parties
to continue to engage on these issues after the
referendums as well.

Abyei is a crucial issue, and a negotiated,
balanced and viable solution must be found. The
parties also have to provide ongoing reassurances that
the rights of all vulnerable populations at this sensitive
time will be safeguarded. The international community
and the United Nations stand ready to support all these
efforts, but ultimately peace must come from within.
No amount of outside support can replace or substitute
for the political will of the Sudanese stakeholders
themselves to pave the way to a peaceful future.

With regard to Darfur, Turkey condemns all
attacks on civilians, humanitarian workers and the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur, and calls for the perpetrators to be brought to
justice. We urge all rebel movements in Darfur to join
the peace process in Doha without further delay and
without preconditions. The humanitarian situation
cannot be addressed properly until a steady state of
security is attained, and that will be impossible so long
as rebel groups prefer military aggression to political
dialogue. There have to be real consequences for rebel
groups that propagate conflict. Intransigence cannot be
accepted. Turkey fully supports the African
Union/United Nations joint mediation effort.

It is not only the Sudan that is rapidly
approaching a critical juncture; the resolve of the
international community to maintaining peace and
security will also be tested in the days ahead. We have
in place a multitude of mechanisms, processes and
structures, as well as high-level engagement.
Translating that high level of effort into success will
not be easy. The CPA is not just a series of timelines
that need to be met; it is a political arrangement that is
most likely leading to the break-up of a very large
country and its peoples into two. This will be a
potentially traumatic experience, the benefits of which
may become apparent only in the long term.

Having come so far, we must not now
underestimate the challenges that lie ahead in the post-
CPA period, including with regard to the massive task
of State-building in the Southern Sudan. In the final
analysis, the Security Council's main responsibility is
the maintenance of international peace and security.
We hope that its continued political involvement in the
process will ultimately be helpful in advancing that
essentially important goal.

In closing, let me express Turkey's ongoing
commitment to peace and stability in the Sudan and the
region, and our full support for the invaluable efforts
exerted by the United Nations and the African Union.

