Mr. Le Roy: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
situation in Darfur and the efforts of the United
Nations, working with the African Union, to bring an
end to that terrible conflict.

The Council has before it the most recent report
of the Secretary-General on Darfur (8/2008/659). In
accordance with Security Council resolution 1828
(2008), the report provides a detailed update on the
status of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), the political process,
the security and humanitarian situation in Darfur and
compliance by all parties with international
obligations.

I will not repeat the contents of the report, of
course, but would instead like to share with the
Council some of the impressions of my visit to the
Sudan earlier this month. This afternoon, members of
the Council will also be briefed by Under-Secretary-
General Malcorra, who will speak on the logistical
aspects of UNAMID's deployment.

I visited Darfur from 8 to 11 October. During that
time, I travelled to El Fasher, Nyala and El Geneina, as
well as to the site of the UNAMID team in Labado,
South Darfur. I was also able to spend time in the
internally displaced persons (IDPs) Kalma and
Ardamata camps in South and North Darfur,
respectively.

In addition to discussions with the leadership and
staff of UNAMID and informative visits to the Mission
and sector headquarters, I met with Government
officials and had fruitful exchanges with IDPs both in
Kalma camp and in El Fasher and with representatives
of the humanitarian community. I also met with Minni
Minnawi in a remote location in Northern Darfur.
08-57267

I concluded my visit to the Sudan with
conversations in Khartoum, where I met a range of
senior Sudanese Government officials, including the
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Deng Alor; the Senior
Adviser to the President, Nafie Ali Nafie; the Director
of National Security, Salah Gosh; and the senior
official responsible for liaison with UNAMID, Mouttrif
Siddiq.

Perhaps above all, the visit allowed me to obtain
a first-hand understanding of the situation in Darfur,
the conditions under which the 2.5 million displaced
persons are forced to live and the many daunting
challenges facing UNAMID in its effort to contribute
to an improvement in the overall situation.

Turning to the peacekeeping operation, I would
like to assure the Council that every effort is being
made to move forward rapidly with deployment.
Meeting the targets described in the Secretary-
General's report, namely 60 per cent deployment by
the end of the year and 80 per cent by the end of March
2009, is one of our highest priorities. Under-Secretary-
General Malcorra will speak in more detail on this
issue.

We speak of increased numbers, but more
important is increased capability, which will give
UNAMID a chance to implement the wide-ranging
mandate given to it by the Security Council. Above all,
it will give UNAMID the tools to protect civilians, as
initially envisaged by the Security Council.

I believe we are making good progress. I visited
the Nyala super camp, which is now an impressive
facility nearing completion, built by UNAMID troops
from a brownfield of scrub and desert. I saw first-hand
the impact of effective relations between UNAMID
and the humanitarian community in West Darfur, where
the fighting of last January brought the peacekeepers
and the humanitarians together to respond to the needs
of the displaced. This partnership is now maturing and
strengthening.

I also heard for myself from the internally
displaced persons in Kalma camp that the 24-7
presence of UNAMID police in the camp was a clear,
positive development of great importance, because in
their view it greatly increased their safety. I also heard
from Government officials at every level that a new
page had now been turned and that every effort would
be made to support our efforts to deploy UNAMID.
08-57267

Those are all signs that the Mission is now taking
shape and that the hard work of troop and police
contributors and civilian staff is beginning to bear fruit.
Nevertheless, I will be the first to tell the Council that
we still have a considerable way to go. In many
locations, we are still living with the legacy of the
African Union Mission in the Sudan (AMIS), where
troops were equipped through ad hoc arrangements
with donors and were often forced by circumstances
and by the demands of the Mission to deploy to remote
locations without the necessary materiel.

As a result, there are still locations where the men
and women of UNAMID are seriously underresourced,
vulnerable and living and working in extremely
difficult conditions. I saw this clearly in Labado, where
Rwandan soldiers are doing their best to project a
presence despite evident shortages of some key
equipment. This problem will ultimately be addressed
by the rotation into UNAMID of new units that will be
equipped to United Nations standards, drawing on
assessed contributions.

In the meantime, business as usual is not an
option, so we are doing everything we can to ensure
that the basics are in place so that our troops and police
can function. But the real solution will come with
increased deployment of robust troops with the
necessary capabilities.

That is why deployment continues to be the focus
both here at Headquarters and for colleagues in Darfur.
In practical terms, this means the senior leadership of
the Mission is heavily concerned with the political,
logistical and operational complexities of deployment.
It means that significant military and police assets are
being dedicated to escorting convoys and protecting
construction sites. It also means that the Mission itself
is in a state of real-time evolution. New units are
arriving, new sites are being built and the overall
picture is really dynamic. This should be viewed as
positive news. Of course, we must continue to press
forward to put the Mission in place.

At the same time, while we need to deploy and to
focus our energies on the strengthening of the Mission,
we cannot do so in isolation from the day-to-day
tumult and tragedy of Darfur. There is still fighting.
There is still displacement. We still receive reports of
rapes and of civilians under imminent threat. In short,
deployment may be UNAMID's focus, but it is not the
3
Mission's only priority. We are also implementing our
mandate with regard to protecting civilians.

This presents a serious challenge. The
environment is volatile. In fact, over the past weekend
alone, we received reports of military action by the
Sudanese Armed Forces in the North Darfur town of El
Hilif, and of clashes between Government forces and
the rebel forces of the Sudan Liberation Army (SLA)-
Abdel Wahid near Kutum, also in North Darfur. There
is also a relentlessly high level of banditry and
criminality in Darfur. This year, up to mid-October, the
United Nations and international non-governmental
organizations have had their cars taken forcibly 273
times. In all of 2007 there were 158 such carjackings.
In 2006, there were 116.

All of these aspects add up to a high-risk
environment. In fact, it is an environment where there
is not yet peace to keep. In United Nations terms, it is a
phase IV security environment, where we are obliged
to minimize risk for United Nations civilian staff by
reducing their numbers until we are able to provide a
reasonable level of security for them as they carry out
their duties.

It is in this environment - short of the envisaged
number of troops, without the envisaged military
transport and attack helicopters and with infrastructure
still being put in place i that the United Nations must
act. It is a high-risk proposition, and I remind the
Council that UNAMID has already sustained a
significant number of casualties. Nevertheless, we
must press on, because where we are able to lean
forward there are tremendous opportunities to have a
positive impact.

I mentioned Kalma camp earlier, and the 24-7
presence there of UNAMID police. That presence has
clearly improved the security of the IDPs, who
themselves say so. The humanitarian community says
so as well, and the Government, in my meetings with
Southern Darfur Government representatives, also
welcomed our presence in the camps.

(spoke in French)

During my visit to Darfur, I has the opportunity
to meet with Mission leadership and with colleagues in
each of the Mission's three sectors to discuss how we
could work together to multiply such forward-leaning
action: by replicating the Kalma experience, by
increasing patrols and by increasing outreach to our
humanitarian colleagues. That must be our collective
goal, even as civilian and military colleagues work to
deploy in a difficult phase IV security environment.

Achieving this goal will require a unified effort.
We will need leadership that is courageous even as it
seeks to mitigate risk. Here at Headquarters, we will
have do everything possible to move the remaining
troops, police and equipment into the Sudan. But
Member States will also have a central role to play.
Troop and police contributors will have to continue
mobilizing personnel and equipment, and donors will
have to assist in filling resource gaps. Most important,
the Mission will obviously need the full support of the
Security Council and the acknowledgement that the
risks being taken will be accepted as a collective and
full responsibility.

I hope that we will be able to share some concrete
achievements with the Council when this issue is next
considered.

I should like also to take this opportunity to
reiterate that the message I received from the
Government at all levels, both in Khartoum and from
the governors in the field, was uniformly supportive of
the deployment of UNAMID. My predecessor,
Mr. Guehenno, always stressed that there could not be
deployment without the complete and sustained
support of the Sudanese Government. That is as true
today as it was then.

I believe that we have come a long way in clearly
defining the expectations and obligations both of the
Government on the one hand and the African Union
and the United Nations on the other. This clarity will
help us to measure progress and to identify and address
difficulties in going forward. Naturally, we shall
continue to work in this way with the Sudanese
Government in a spirit of transparency and good faith.
Ms. Malcorra will be speaking to this issue in some
detail shortly.

The report before you also provides a brief
summary of the work of the Joint African Union-
United Nations Chief Mediator for Darfur, Mr. Djibril
Bassole. In addition to what is found in the report, I
would like to confirm that Mr. Bassole' is pursuing his
intensive consultations with Government and rebel
leaders.

In that respect, we look forward to the results of
the Sudan People's Initiative launched by the
Government of the Sudan. As Mr. Bassole himself said,
when he assumed his functions, one of the central
challenges for the Sudan People's Initiative will be to
ensure that it prepares the conditions required for
direct dialogue among the various movements.

Of course, in the meantime, Mr. Bassole' has
maintained contacts with the Qatar initiative. As his
work progresses, such contact has become increasingly
important to ensuring that he receives the broad
support required for him to effectively discharge the
mandate given to him by the Council. For my part, I
emphasize that Mr. Bassole is continuing to benefit
from the broad support of the United Nations, its
Secretariat and the African Union in the
implementation of his mandate.

I have spoken at some length about the status of
UNAMID and our intention to do our utmost to protect
civilians, even as we press forward with deployment -
all in an extremely volatile environment. It is crucial,
however, to be completely clear: UNAMID will not
solve the problems of Darfur. Our around-the-clock
presence in one camp cannot be replicated in the 71
camps of Darfur on behalf of 2.5 million refugees and
displaced persons. UNAMID can only assist and
contribute to a solution and alleviate the sufferings of
part of the population. The conflict will end only
through a negotiated political settlement, predicated, of
course, on a decision by the parties to halt military
action and engage in peace negotiations.

In that context, the recent violence in North
Darfur is deeply disturbing. Unless there is a
fundamental change in the intent of parties and the
ambitious declarations made in Khartoum are reflected
quickly on the ground, I fear that we will still be
meeting in this Chamber to discuss Darfur for many
months to come.

