Mr. Kumar (India): At the outset, I would like to
welcome High Representative Valentin Inzko to the
Council and to thank him for his comprehensive
briefing and for the report on the situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina (see S/2012/307).
It is a matter of satisfaction that there were
positive political developments in Bosnia and
Herzegovina during the reporting period. The parties
reached a broad agreement that facilitated the
formation of a new Council of Ministers after nearly
15 months of stalemate following the October 2010
elections. The Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina
has been meeting regularly and has taken a number of
foreign policy decisions that should promote the
country's eventual Euro-Atlantic integration.

It is also commendable that progress was
achieved on a global fiscal framework and that two key
European Union-related laws on State aid and the
census were adopted. The agreement on unblocking the
State-owned electricity transmission company was also
a welcome development.

The joint declaration of the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia,
Montenegro and Serbia on cooperation to protect and
promote the rights of refugees, returnees and internally
displaced persons should serve as an important
confidence-building measure. Such cooperation will
not only promote regional cooperation but also
facilitate those countries' common aspirations for
Euro-Atlantic integration.

We have noted that none of the outstanding items
among the five objectives and two conditions
necessary for the closure of the Office of the High
Representative has been fulfilled so far. However, we
are glad that the 9 March agreement on State property
and defence property has the potential for an
acceptable and sustainable resolution of the issue of the
apportionment of property that will meet two of the
five objectives and two conditions. In addition,
progress in the ongoing discussion on the future of
supervision of Brcko can help to meet another of the
five objectives.

We hope that the Bosnian parties will, in the
spirit of compromise and maturity, continue their
commitment to addressing fiscal problems so that the
current trend of deteriorating economic prospects is
reversed and the country returns to the path of high
growth of the pre-recession years.

Through their continued presence in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the European Union and NATO military
missions have played an important role by ensuring the
safety and security of the country's citizens, even when
the political situation has been tense. We commend
those efforts.

As we have said in previous Security Council
meetings, Bosnia and Herzegovina is a novel
experiment in building a new nation from the rubble of
a civil war that the peoples of the former Yugoslavia
had to endure in the 19905. It is never easy to build a
multi-ethnic, multilingual, multicultural and multi-
religious country. The problems discussed in the High
Representative's report and briefing are those bound to
be encountered on the path of building a nation
inhabited by people of different faiths, ethnicities and
languages. Our own experience over the last six
decades has convinced us that, although the path
towards building such a nation is long and arduous, the
fruits are well worth the efforts.

Resolving the problems facing the Bosnian
peoples therefore calls for patience, determination and
mutual accommodation. Unilateral actions, mutual
suspicion, rhetorical statements and violation of the
General Framework Agreement for Peace will only
vitiate the political and social atmosphere and delay the
achievement of the peoples' goals. We would therefore
urge the leadership of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
international community to persevere in spite of the
problems encountered.

In conclusion, I would like to highly commend
the work being done by High Representative Inzko in
assisting the people and leadership of Bosnia and
Herzegovina in their nation-building endeavours. We
fully support his efforts.

