Mr. Takasu (Japan): I, too, would like to extend a
warm welcome to the Foreign Minister, His Excellency
Mr. Kanat Saudabayev, and to thank him for his useful
briefing on priority issues for the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). As an
OSCE partner for cooperation and a good friend of
Kazakhstan, Japan would like to congratulate him and
say that we have high expectations of the Chairman-in-
Office with regard to his proactive efforts in leading the
OSCE. I wish him the best in that capacity and in his
efforts to contribute to peace and stability in Europe
and the entire Eurasian continent.

Security in the European region is integrally
related to that of Asia and the Pacific. It is essential for
the OSCE to address global threats through close
cooperation between Europe and Asia. Partnership for
cooperation makes a good contribution to broadening
the OSCE security concerns. A significant example of
such inter-reliance is the OSCE's increasing
engagement in the stabilization of Afghanistan.

We are doing a lot of things for our part,
including our contribution last year to five OSCE
projects to improve the border security capacities of
Central Asian countries having borders with
Afghanistan. Such projects help to enhance peace and
stability in that country as well as in the wider Central
Asian region.

Japan believes that the cross-dimensional and
comprehensive security agenda of the OSCE could be
effectively addressed by emphasizing human security
and a human-centred perspective. I have been
personally involved in organizing several initiatives to
promote human security in OSCE activities. Japan
appreciates the strong interest and close cooperation
that the OSCE has demonstrated in promoting the
human security perspective on issues such as ethnic
reconciliation, the movement of people, human
trafficking and environmental degradation. We endorse
and strongly support Kazakhstan's priority agenda,
with its strong emphasis on the human dimension.

Japan also pays tribute to the important role of
the OSCE in supporting the democratization process in
Eurasian regions. We have been actively cooperating in
facilitating free and fair elections in many OSCE
countries, including Ukraine, by sending election
monitors.

I would like to emphasize the particular value of
regular dialogue between the Security Council and the
OSCE, which is mutually beneficial and supportive.
Let me reiterate Japan's commitment to closely
cooperate with the OSCE and to support the
chairmanship of Kazakhstan. We hope that good
preparatory work will be done for a successful summit.

