The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of December, I should
like to take this opportunity to pay warm tribute, on
behalf of the Council, to His Excellency Mr. Andrey I.
Denisov, Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation, for his service as President of the Security
Council for the month of November. I am sure I speak
for all my colleagues, members of the Council, in
expressing our appreciation to Ambassador Denisov
and his team for the way in which they conducted the
business of the Council last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Security Council mission

Report of the Security Council mission to
Central Africa, 4 to 11 November 2005
(S/2005/716)

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Burundi, Rwanda and Uganda, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion, without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nkingiye
(Burundi), Mr. Kamanzi (Rwanda) and
Mr. Butagira (Uganda) took the seats reserved
for them at the side ofthe Council Chamber.


The President: I should like to welcome and
recognize the presence among us, in the seat of the
delegation of Japan, of Ms. Akiko Yamanaka,
Parliamentary Secretary for Foreign Affairs.

The Security Council will now continue its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document 5/2005/716, which contains the report of the
Security Council mission to Central Africa that took
place from 4 to 11 November 2005.

I should first like to call on His Excellency
Mr. J can-Marc de La Sabliere, Permanent
Representative of France, who led the Security Council
mission to Central Africa, to introduce his report. I
would especially like to thank him for the leadership he
provided the mission.


