Mr. Rifkind (United Kingdom): Allow me first to
congratulate you, Madam President, on presiding over this
historic meeting of the Security Council.

The world in which the United Nations Charter was
drafted 50 years ago was very different from the one in
which we now live. But the Charter and the Security
Council have stood the test of time. They remain central to
the management of international relations. Even during the
cold war, Security Council resolutions played an important
part in efforts to sustain a fragile peace in areas of conflict
such as the Middle East and Cyprus, and in pointing the
way to just solutions. Peace-keeping operations were
mandated, and the concept of peace-keeping developed.

The end of the cold war also made it possible for the
Security Council to work by consensus in a way which has
transformed its influence and its effectiveness. But the
recent emergence of new and very different threats to
international peace and security have also presented the
Council with new and more complex challenges. Members
of the Council have united in tackling the threats posed by
international terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, and by naked aggression such as that
which occurred in Kuwait in 1990.

Nothing has done more to strain consensus than the
dreadful war in Bosnia, but the fact that Council members
have continued to place a high value on working by
consensus has undoubtedly helped to contain the conflict,
to prevent the poison spreading into a wider international
area and to sustain the hope of peace. In recent years - in
Europe, in Asia, in Africa and in Latin America - the
Council has faced the problems of States torn apart by
civil conflict and complex crises in which the political,
military and humanitarian dimensions are inextricably
intertwined. It remains the body to which people look to
solve the most intractable crises. Despite the criticisms,
despite the reverses, the record remains, in our view,
overwhelmingly positive.

The management of peace-keeping operations
mandated here has stretched resources and placed even
greater burdens on the Member States of the United
Nations. Few national ministries of defence are as small
as the Department of Peace-keeping Operations of this
Organization, which has only 300 staff supervising the
activities of no less than 70,000 troops in the field. These
peace-keepers operate in difficult and often remote and
hostile environments. Many lessons, political and
operational, have been learned. Nothing would have been
possible without the contributions of the troop-
contributing Members of the United Nations. The
improvements in transparency between Council members
and troop contributors are among the most important
recent developments in the affairs of the Council.

Britain is proud that it is currently the largest
contributor of troops to United Nations peace-keeping
operations. The men and women of our armed forces can
be found with the United Nations from Georgia to
Angola. We are also working with others to develop new
mechanisms here, in Africa and in operations in the field
which we hope will strengthen the United Nations
capacity for conflict-prevention, peace-keeping and peace-
building in accordance with the Charter. But, even in this
commemorative gathering, none of us can ignore the stark
fact that the impending financial crisis of the United
Nations could undermine our collective endeavours.
Important Members are not paying their contributions.
There has been recourse to the voluntary financing of
peace-keeping activities. And troop contributors are
bearing the United Nations burden of debt for unfunded
peace-keeping and regular budget activities. This situation
cannot go on. The day may not be far off when the
creditors will revolt. Then who will pick up the cost of
the still greater conflict and humanitarian suffering that is
likely to ensue? This question cannot be answered in the
Security Council, but it needs to find an answer soon.

One other important question hangs over the
Council: that of its future size and composition. Britain's
position is well known, and I have just reiterated it in the
General Assembly. In our view, the productive habit of
 

consensus is related to manageable numbers, and larger
numbers do not in themselves guarantee a more
representative Council. We support an enlargement of the
Council commensurate with the need to maintain its
effectiveness. We recognize that certain countries, by virtue
of their global interests and their contribution to
international peace, should be invited to accept the
responsibilities of permanent members. We support the
permanent membership of Germany and Japan. There is a
need now to move from debate to real negotiation and
decisions.

May I conclude by reaffirming my country's
continuing dedication, in word and in deed, to strengthening
the vital work of this Council and of the United Nations in
international peace and security.

