Mr. Al Musharakh (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to express my
thanks to Sweden for convening this open debate. The
United Arab Emirates emphasizes the importance of
today's discussions.

We condemn the terrorist attack on the Kandahar
Governor's guest house, which injured the United
Arab Emirates Ambassador to the Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan and a number of Emirati diplomats who
were accompanying him on a humanitarian mission
under the United Arab Emirates programme to support
the brotherly Afghan people to end conflicts and
sustain peace.

Today's meeting is a critical first step towards
building an important relationship between the new
Secretary-General and the Security Council. Having
such dynamic, strong linkages between the Secretary-
General and this organ is integral to utilizing and
maximizing the United Nations tools for prevention. We
would like to thank the Secretary-General for sharing
his vision earlier today and for revitalizing conflict
prevention across the United Nations. We endorse his
call for a diplomacy of peace and stand ready to support
all his efforts in that regard.

Nowhere is there a need for conflict prevention
greater than in the Middle East, our region. It is
urgently needed. We sense the grave impact of
violence and instability. The persistent conflicts in
Syria, Yemen, Iraq, Libya and Palestine, among other
protracted conflicts in the region, have implications for
the security of countries near and far, as they fuel a
state of global instability and undermine international
security. It is high time to find political solutions to
those conflicts, with the aim of building sustainable
and resilient societies in our region.

We believe that there is a very clear connection
between extremist ideologies and terrorist acts. Those
acts must be addressed simultaneously, through a
comprehensive, long-term approach. The narrative
of extremists is in stark contrast to the United Arab
Emirates model as a modern, progressive Arab society.
It is also in contrast to the Middle East as we envision
it - a vibrant tapestry of cultures and backgrounds
coexisting in peace.

For too many years, the international community
has managed humanitarian political crises only by
minimizing their impacts, instead of truly finding
solutions to them and preventing them from occurring.
We would encourage taking strong measures to prevent
such crises. The list of conflicts is too long, their nature
is too complex, the actors involved are unconventional,
the magnitude of lives lost and humanitarian need is

too staggering for us to continue to avoid confronting
crises head on.

The United Arab Emirates adopts a comprehensive
approach that has human beings as a pillar. We try to
address all aspects, not only economic factors. We
invest in our people by encouraging women and youth
to be active members in protecting our communities
by empowering them and providing them with the
necessary tools and opportunities. We also try to prevent
the recurrence of conflict by rebuilding institutions and
infrastructure and by underscoring the rule of law.

At this critical juncture, we hope that there is
scope for renewed multilateral, regional and bilateral
cooperation. In that connection, the United Arab
Emirates is pleased to offer recommendations to the
Security Council with the aim of ensuring progress
and results in preventing conflicts and maintaining
international peace and security.
First, the Security Council must better consult
with regional organizations and countries concerned.
Regional organizations are often closer to conflicts and
have a special understanding of their dynamics.

Secondly, crisis prevention must start with
addressing the roots causes that lead to violence and
instability. The United Arab Emirates is dedicating its
efforts to countering violent extremism and terrorism.
We firmly believe that we must combat extremism
before it becomes violent.

Thirdly, we call upon the members of the Security
Council to work together to achieve the best outcomes
that would benefit the world at large. All States
Members of the United Nations must fully benefit from
all the tools available to prevent conflicts, as outlined
in Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations.

In conclusion, I would like to congratulate Sweden
on its election to the Security Council. We wish it
all success in stewarding the Council for the rest of
the month.

