Mr. Ettalhi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): I should like to join those who spoke before
me in welcoming to the Council His Excellency
Mr. Dileita Mohamed Dileita, Prime Minister of the
State of Djibouti. I take this opportunity to thank him
for the warm welcome and generosity with which he
received the Security Council mission in Djibouti
earlier this month, as well as for the facilities offered to
the mission for its meetings with the Somali parties.
We thank His Excellency the Prime Minister for his
statement to the Council today, and we also express our
gratitude to the representative of Eritrea for his
statement. Our thanks also go to Mr. Honwana for his
briefing.

The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya expresses its deep
sorrow and concern over the military confrontations
that have recently taken place between two
neighbouring countries that not only have ties of
geographic proximity but also numerous other ties, so
numerous that it is difficult to imagine any recourse to
arms or force in order to resolve even the most
profound differences.

Africa in general and the Horn of Africa in
particular have long been paying a high price as a
result of armed conflicts. That price has been paid in
the lives of its men and women, in human suffering and
in lost development opportunities. It is also unfortunate
that while armed conflicts are receding everywhere
else in the world, even in Africa, armed conflicts in
Eastern Africa are only spreading and growing more
intense.

Libya hopes that the Security Council, in
cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations, as the organ with primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security,
will work towards putting an end to these conflicts and
preventing their escalation by assisting the conflicting
parties to reach a peaceful solution. I do not wish to
say that the Council's inability to settle the dispute
between Ethiopia and Eritrea or to put an end to the
instability and insecurity in Somalia might be among
the reasons for the threat posed to peace along the
border between Eritrea and Djibouti.

My country strongly condemns the use of force
and the resort to arms. My country calls on the two
friendly countries Djibouti and Eritrea to turn to
dialogue, and we ask them to heed the call at the 136th
meeting of the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union, as well as the Arab League resolution
dated 12 June 2008 and the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2008/20) issued by the Security Council at its
5908th meeting. We call upon both parties to return to
the status quo on the borders before the crisis erupted.

My country reaffirms the principle of respect for
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States and
stresses that any attempt to undermine that concept
constitutes a threat to peace and security. My
delegation reaffirms and recalls the need for African
States to respect the borders inherited from the days of
colonialism, which they voluntarily agreed to do within
the framework of the Organization of African Unity,
now the African Union.

We hope that the Council will look into resolving
this issue by helping both parties to reach a political
settlement.

In closing, we thank the French delegation for
preparing the main elements of a verbal presidential
briefing to the press, and we support them.

