Mr. Ryan (Ireland): We welcome the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ambassador
Adeniji, to the Council, and we appreciate his very
useful briefing. We also welcome Swedish State
Secretary Dahlgren and congratulate him on his recent
appointment as European Union Special Representative
to West Africa. We look forward to his briefing on the
Union's high-level visit, which he led to West Africa
from 29-31 May.

We are encouraged by the Secretary-General's
view, reinforced by Ambassador Adeniji this morning,
that the current situation in Sierra Leone merits
cautious optimism but at the same time continued
vigilance. It is clear that the two-track approach,
comprising the forward deployment of the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) and the
opening of political dialogue with the Revolutionary
United Front (RUF), has achieved tangible progress.

We must ensure that this momentum is not lost
but built on. The Council should continue to exert
pressure to ensure that the RUF have changed really
their approach from bullets to ballots. In this regard,
Ireland welcomes the recent practical steps taken by
the Government of Sierra Leone to facilitate the
transformation of the RUF into a political party.

Despite the important territorial advances that
have been secured and consolidated by UNAMSIL,
there remain justifiable concerns at reports of recent
attacks by the Civil Defence Force (CDF). Indeed,
there were reports last Saturday that the RUF
threatened to withdraw its cooperation if, in its view,
allegations of CDF attacks were not adequately
investigated.

While the peace process can hardly be driven by
the demands of the RUF, there is a real concern here. It
is crucial that both the CDF and the RUF are equally
aware of their common obligation to facilitate the work
of UNAMSIL and to disarm in line with the agreement
reached on 15 May in Freetown. Accordingly, it is
important that this Council send a strong message to
both the RUF and the CDF. They must fulfil the terms
of the agreements reached in Abuja on 2 May and in
Freetown on 15 May in good faith, completely and
simultaneously.

Ireland welcomes the successful completion on
schedule of the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) programme in the Kambia and
Port Loko districts. I am very gratified by Mr. Adeniji's
report of the success of the test case operation in
Kambia. It was exemplary, and it will, I hope, have a
well-deserved knock-on impact on the wider process,
including along the Sierra Leone-Guinea border. We
note that the DDR camps in the Kono region, near
Koidu, and in Bonthe will shortly be operational, and
we look forward to progress in disarmament in these
key areas. We agree fully with the Secretary-General's
assessment that the DDR programme is crucial to all
aspects of the peace process.

The Secretary-General is absolutely correct to
focus on the gaps that remain in the reintegration
programme and to state in his report that a provision
should be made to track ex-combatants in order to
ensure their successful reintegration into society. We
welcome the work of the United Nations Development
Programme alongside the National Commission for
Reconstruction, Resettlement and Rehabilitation to
create income-earning opportunities for ex-combatants
in the Kambia region. It is also important, as the
Secretary-General notes, that sensitization and
awareness campaigns he stepped up for ex-combatants
to ensure that they are fully aware of what reintegration
support actually entails. We have taken careful note of
the Secretary-General's comments about the funding
requirements for the DDR programme.

Ireland welcomed the very positive meeting
between Presidents Kabbah and Conte that took place
on 3 June, in which the two Presidents agreed to the
reopening of the road between Forecariah in Guinea
and Kambia in Sierra Leone. Continued close
cooperation between the Governments of Sierra Leone
and Guinea is very important for the creation of
stability in the border area.

We agree strongly with China that the regional
interrelationship is at the heart of both the political and
humanitarian problems that afflict the subregion, but
also of the solution to those same problems. In that
context, we strongly support the Secretary-General's
call on the three leaders of the Mano River Union to
engage in political dialogue. We strongly endorse the
perspective that Assistant Secretary-General Fall
brought to the Council on 14 May following the inter-
agency mission that he led to West Africa. Ireland
regards very highly the tremendous efforts of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) to forge regional peace.

Sadly, Sierra Leone, in addition to - indeed,
largely because of - the appalling violence it has
suffered, still languishes at the bottom of economic
development indices. The military work is well under
way, but we should be thinking ahead to the urgent task
of reconstruction. The restoration of State
authority, the provision of basic services, the conduct
of free and fair elections and the establishment of good
governance are crucial tasks. We are encouraged in that
regard by the improvement in the level of coordination
between UNAMSIL and the development and
humanitarian parts of the United Nations system.
Ireland has put on record in the Council our desire to
see a joined-up approach in the United Nations, at
Headquarters and in the field, and our belief that an
entry point for the development dimension must be
ensured at all levels. The appointment of the Deputy
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Governance and Stabilization in Sierra Leone, Mr.
Alan Doss, has had a positive impact, and we commend
his good work.

The foundation stone of national reconstruction
will be individual forgiveness and national
reconciliation. The Truth and Reconciliation
Commission will have a vital role to play in that
regard, and I was gratified to hear Mr. Adeniji
emphasize that point earlier. But justice too will be
required. We are encouraged by the progress made
recently in respect of financial commitments to the
Special Court for Sierra Leone. I am hopeful that
Ireland will very shortly be in a position to pledge a
commitment in that regard. We very much hope that
other donors will quickly make up the present shortfall.
As the Secretary-General emphasized to the Council
over lunch yesterday, it would be essential to avoid
setting up the Special Court but, because of financial
shortfalls, having to suspend its work, perhaps even in
mid-session, at some future point.

In closing, let me pay tribute to the excellent
work carried out by the staff of UNAMSIL and of the
United Nations agencies on the ground. A year ago, the
degree of cautious optimism felt today would have
been inconceivable. Political courage and
farsightedness on the part of the Government of Sierra
Leone, and the matching determination of the Council
and of the peacekeepers it has deployed, have brought
us this far. It is our sincere hope that when we review
the next stage - the next crucial phase of
disarmament 4 matters will have improved further.

