Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in China): Mr.
President, the Chinese delegation would like to thank
you for convening this meeting. The Chinese
delegation would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Koenigs,
and the Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, Mr. Costa, for their
briefings. We would also like to thank the Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Italy, Mr. Massimo D'Alema, for his presence at this
meeting.

The latest report of the Secretary-General
concerning the situation in Afghanistan has presented
us with a mixed picture. On the one hand, with the
support of the international community, the Afghan
Government, under the leadership of President Karzai,
has made some headway in maintaining stability,
improving governance and the people's livelihood,
establishing law and order and protecting human
rights.

On the other hand, all the progress that has been
achieved so far is still very fragile. Afghanistan
continues to face a series of formidable challenges,
such as the increase in armed insurgencies that have
caused a record number of civilian casualties, slow
progress in economic and social recovery and lack of
sustained improvement in the humanitarian situation,
as well as the trend of widespread poppy cultivation,
drug production and drug trafficking. On these issues,
the Afghan Government has not yet taken firm and
resolute measures.

Furthermore, the Afghan Government has not yet
established effective authority and control throughout
the territory of the country. Its military police and
justice systems have yet to be strengthened. The
Security Council should attach great importance to all
these issues.

Afghanistan is now confronted with complex
challenges and intricate problems. Military actions
cannot replace other means, nor, in the long run, can
they, address the root causes of all these problems.
There is an emerging consensus among the
international community to adopt a comprehensive
strategy to address all the challenges facing
Afghanistan at present.

While firmly combating terrorists and extremists,
it is necessary to step up the efforts to promote national
unity in Afghanistan so as to achieve self-sustaining
peace and development in the country.

I would like to take this opportunity to
underscore the following three points.

First, the comprehensive implementation of the
Afghanistan Compact must continue. Over a year has
elapsed since the Compact was endorsed. It is now
necessary to review and sum up the progress of this
implementation and to adopt further implementation
measures so that the Compact can bring about a
tangible and positive impact benefiting the broad
population in Afghanistan at an early date. The
international partnership should also effectively
implement its obligations under the Compact. That is
also a decisive factor.
Secondly, it is necessary to continue to support
the Government of Afghanistan. President Karzai and
the Government of Afghanistan are determined to
normalize the situation in the country and to integrate
it into the international community. That is an
encouraging development. We welcome all the policies
to be adopted by the Government that are conducive to
lasting peace and stability in the country. We support
its efforts for national dialogue and unity. The
international community should provide more direct
support to the Government of Afghanistan and fully
respect its ownership in the areas of internal and
foreign affairs.

Thirdly, support for the unique role of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
must continue. We welcome the efforts made by
UNAMA, when the security situation permits, to
expand the scope of activities to more provinces, so
that more Afghanis can know that they are not
forgotten. We would also like to encourage UNAMA to
further intensify its efforts to mobilize the international
community's participation in and support for the
reconstruction in Afghanistan.

The year 2007 will be a decisive year for the
stability and development in the country. We fully
share the analysis by the Secretary-General in his
report in which he states, "Afghanistan and its
international partners once again find themselves at a
critical juncture in the country's transition"
(S/2007/ 152, paragraph 85). Under such circumstances,
it is all the more important for the international
community to continue to make united and unremitting
efforts towards peace, stability and development in
Afghanistan. China will continue to provide assistance
to Afghanistan, within its capacity.

