Mr. Briz Gutie'rrez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me to welcome Mr. Valentin Inzko,
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
to thank him for his report (see S/2012/813).

We regret that the optimistic landscape of May has
been overshadowed by ill-timed actions and rhetoric.
We believe that it is Vital that the international presence
continue to focus on acknowledging the balance gained
under the General Framework Agreement for Peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the subsequent political
structures. We agree with paragraphs 22 and 28 of
the High Representative's report, and we once again
express our commitment to the Dayton Agreement and
to the defence and preservation of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The international presence cannot and should not
supplant the primacy ofthe State in the performance ofits
tasks and responsibilities. The principle responsibility
for security and stability in the country falls to the
Government and people of Bosnia and Herzegovina. If
the necessary basis for a national political agreement
is missing, any involvement of the international
community will have potentially adverse consequences
and could set up serious obstacles to success and the
maintenance of a secure environment. We appeal to the
political leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina to resume
the national dialogue that was proceeding earlier
this year, in order to achieve political consensus and
promote confidence.

We believe that conditions on the ground justify
the fact that the European Union (EU) Force in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, which has an executive mandate
pursuant to Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter,
remains in the country and continues to help the Office
of the High Representative and other international
organizations to carry out their respective mandates.
We assure the High Representative of our full support
in fulfilling his mandate.

Allow me to now highlight three relevant events
noted in the report of the High Representative.

The first is the holding of local elections. We
welcome the fact that these were administered entirely
by national authorities and certified by electoral
observers as meeting democratic standards. We trust
that the situation in Mostar will be resolved so as to
enable the electoral process to be completed.

Secondly, I note the suspension of the supervision
of the Brcko district. We welcome that step, which
recognizes the capacity of local institutions to function
effectively and permanently. However, it is still
necessary to retain the Arbitral Tribunal, established
pursuant to annex 2 of the General Framework
Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
as a mechanism to guarantee the important binding
obligations arising from the Final Arbitral Award.

Thirdly, we welcome the historic decision of 30 July
2012 issued by the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and
Herzegovina on the constitutionality of the law on State
property in the Republika Srpska. This ruling protects
the interests of Bosnia and Herzegovina and enables a
negotiated solution on this issue. We also note that the
decision will have implications for resolving the issue
of military property.

To conclude, we recall that a decision must be taken
as to whether the Office ofthe High Representative will
be closed as soon as the remaining five objectives and
two conditions are met. My delegation is concerned
about the fact that, in the reporting period, no endeavours
were made to that end. We therefore urge all parties to
play an active part in the conclusion of this process,
which requires the High Representative to complete his
task and Bosnians to bear full responsibility for their
country. We await with interest the upcoming meeting
of the Steering Board of the Peace Implementation
Council in late November.

