Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the outset, I thank Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu
for his briefing and welcome the presence of Foreign
Minister Trujillo Garcia among us today.

We acknowledge the progress made in the
implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace over the past three months, as the Secretary-
General has indicated in his report (S/2019/780). We
particularly welcome the success achieved in the areas
of reintegration and the initial implementation of the
development programmes with a territorial focus.

Belgium condemns in the strongest terms the call
by a small number of former commanders of the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del
Pueblo (FARC-EP) to take up arms once again. History
will bear witness to the gravity of their error. Every
party and sector of society were quick to condemn
that decision. As an indication of the strength of the
agreement and the peace process, the overwhelming
majority of former FARC-EP members continue to
respect the agreement and to work towards their
reintegration as law-abiding Colombian citizens. In
that regard, we acknowledge the positive and inclusive
efforts to find a solution with regard to transitioning
from the former territorial areas for training and
reintegration and call for specific and practical
measures to be formalized in a spirit of constructive
cooperation as soon as possible.

In general, it is important to strengthen and
solidify trust and cooperation with regard to the
implementation of the final agreement. The parties
have everything to gain by taking advantage of the
consultation, monitoring and verification institutions
and mechanisms established to that end. Comprehensive
and renewed implementation is predicated on additional
progress, particularly in terms of the extension of State
presence in conflict-affected areas, including access to
public services, as well as the launch of rural reforms,
including with respect to access to land - the lack of
which is one of the root causes of the conflict.

I commend the three components of the transitional
justice system for their work and reiterate the
importance of the independence and autonomy of the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace. In addition to transitional
justice, the increased funding of which I welcome, every
Government entity responsible for implementation
must receive adequate funding. We also welcome the
leadership of the Colombian authorities in the area of
the reintegration and protection of children, but we
remain concerned about the increase in the recruitment
and use of children, as well as sexual violence, by
non-State armed groups.

The security of social leaders, human rights
defenders and former FARC-EP members must be
strengthened and guaranteed, in particular during
the holding of elections, by focusing on the conflict-
affected areas. We regret the fact that 24 former FARC-
EP members have been killed in the past three months.

Belgium stresses the importance of protecting
all candidates and their families, taking into account
the specific challenges faced by women candidates.
Progress has been made in the implementation of the
comprehensive programme of guarantees for women
leaders and human rights defenders, but it must be
equipped with adequate resources to ensure access to
preventive and protective measures. The most recent
presidential elections were the most peaceful in the
country's recent history. Peaceful local elections
would serve to reveal that peace has its dividends.
In that regard, the National Pact for Political Culture
and Non-Violence during the Electoral Campaign is a
welcome initiative.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Belgium's
strong support for the full implementation of the
peace agreement and the positive role played by the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia. The
unanimous adoption last month ofresolution 2487 (2019)
to extend the mandate of the Mission demonstrates
what the Council can achieve when it is united. In the
same vein, we call on all parties and Colombian society
to foster consensus and combat polarization in order to
build a better future.

