Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish first of all to thank High Representative Christian
Schwarz-Schilling for his briefing. We commend him
for the efforts he has made to advance the political
process in Bosnia and Herzegovina since he took up
his post. My thanks go also to His Excellency
Mr. Nikola Spirie, Chairman of the Council of
Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, for his
statement. We are pleased to note during the more than
10 years since the signing of the Dayton Peace
Agreement, Bosnia - through its own efforts and with
the help of the international community - has taken
many positive steps and has achieved notable results in
institution-building, economic recovery, the rule of law
and ethnic harmony.

In October 2006 Bosnia and Herzegovina
satisfactorily held general elections and formed a new
Government. It has begun the process of gradual
integration into the European Union (EU). We
commend the EU for its important role in promoting
stability, security and economic and social
development. We are pleased to see Bosnia and
Herzegovina's gradual integration into European
society. The current political progress was hard-won;
we hope that all parties will cherish that progress and
that Bosnia and Herzegovina, with the help of the
international community, will continue to make
progress and breakthroughs in key areas of reform in
order to put in place a more mature political system
and achieve genuine harmony and common
development for all ethnic groups.

China is pleased to note that the issue of the non-
certification of former police officers - a legacy of the
country's history - has been resolved in a satisfactory
manner. We commend the High Representative, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and others for
their efforts. We hope that Bosnia and Herzegovina
will strictly implement the decisions of the Security
Council, expedite the reform process and maintain
social stability. China wishes to join with the
international community and to make our own efforts
to assist Bosnia and Herzegovina to attain long-term
stability and development.

