Mr. Sow (Guinea) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like once again to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for the month of November, and to assure you
of our full support. We are grateful to you for having
organized this meeting on the importance of mine
action for peacekeeping operations, an item that is of
high priority in the maintenance of international peace
and security.

I wish also to thank Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
and Mr. Martin Dahinden, Director of the Geneva
International Centre for Humanitarian Demining, for
their detailed briefings, which provided additional
information on the threat posed by antipersonnel mines
and on the ongoing work to clear such mines and to
help victims and countries afflicted by this deadly
scourge.

We know from experience that the international
community, and the General Assembly in particular,
has a major political role to play in mine clearance.
But, while the General Assembly has a political role in
mine action, the Security Council bears the operational
role through its peacekeeping operations. That is the
context of our consideration of today's item, which
gives us the opportunity to think together about the
best way to tackle the question of mine action.

The 1997 adoption of the Convention on the
Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and
Transfer of Anti-personnel Mines and on Their
Destruction - which now has 134 States parties - and
preparations for the convening at Nairobi, Kenya, in
2004 of the first review conference connote significant
progress.

We welcome the outcome of the intersessional
meetings; those meetings give the international
community an opportunity to reaffirm its abiding
commitment to eliminating all antipersonnel mines, to
reaffirm its awareness of the humanitarian tragedy of
which they are a principal cause, and to further raise
public awareness of the danger and of the advantages
of acceding to the Convention.

The commitment of the United Nations is based
on its six strategic mine action goals for 2001 to 2005
and is reflected in the progress that has been made
towards their implementation, as described in the
report of the Secretary-General (A/58/260). All of this
merits our attention.

The work of the United Nations - in particular,
that of the United Nations Mine Action Service, the
United Nations Development Programme, the United
Nations Office for Project Services, the Geneva
International Centre for Humanitarian Demining, non-
governmental organizations and actors from civil
society - should be supported. In order to promote the
exchange of information and experience, there is a
need for internal coordination, not only within those
bodies, but also between them and the other actors in
the international community.

The cooperative relationship that has been
established between the entities of the United Nations
and universities, non-governmental organizations and
civil society deserves our support. This synergy has
allowed us to determine the nature and scope of
problems posed by mines, to identify the obstacles to
be overcome, to outline plans of action and to make
recommendations towards more efficient global action.

Along the same lines, my delegation welcomes
the establishment of the electronic mine information
network, educational activities on the dangers posed by
mines, the establishment of networks and information
exchanges between mine-affected countries, actions
undertaken in the mobilization of resources, legal
measures to ensure compliance with the Convention,
and assistance to victims.

The creation of the United Nations Mine Action
Service within the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations attests to the importance of this issue and to
the Council's commitment, through the Secretariat, to
finding a radical solution to the problem. We welcome
the activities undertaken by the Service, in close
cooperation with the relevant bodies of the
international system. Such activities should be
encouraged. Mine-action operations under way within
peacekeeping missions should be consolidated and
their experiences widely disseminated. Similarly, the
endorsement by the Inter-Agency Coordination Group
on Mine Action of a new series of International Mine
Action Standards on the use of mine-detecting dogs, as
is being done in Afghanistan, should be shared.

My delegation believes that we should consider
mine-action requirements at the very outset of planning
for peacekeeping operations and that troop-contributing
countries should integrate demining into their training
programmes, in strict compliance with international
norms. We appreciate the decision of the Inter-Agency
Coordination Group to develop guidelines for the
integration of a gender perspective into mine-action
programmes and we encourage the continuation of
consultations on that issue with United Nations
personnel on the ground.

We welcome the integration of mine action into
peacekeeping, humanitarian and development
programming and budgeting. In that context, we
support the work of the Mine-Action Support Group to
promote regular contacts between the United Nations
and donors, as well as the management by the United
Nations Mine Action Service of a database that updates
the investments and resources necessary to efficient
and planned mine action.

The issue of anti-personnel landmines and
unexploded ordnance is closely linked to conflict
prevention and management and to peace-building. The
statements of Mr. Guehenno and Mr. Dahinden were
extremely important in that respect. In order to attain
these interdependent objectives, we need to ensure
compliance with international conventions, prevent the
ongoing use of these weapons and, above all, eliminate
those already deployed. At the operational level,
medium- and long-term success will depend on
integrating mine action into national and regional
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
projects.

My country, the Republic of Guinea, is a party to
the 1997 Convention on the Prohibition of the Use,
Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-personnel
Mines and on Their Destruction and will continue to
strive to implement its standards, working with our
partners in the international community in order to
make anti-personnel landmines a thing of the past.

In conclusion, my delegation, supports the draft
presidential statement to be issued at the outcome of
the debate. We remain convinced that the Security
Council will strengthen its work for international peace
and security by taking into consideration in its debates
the proposals and recommendations to be put forth at
this meeting.

