Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): We thank Mr. Staffan
de Mistura and his team for briefing us today. I find
it incredible that we should have to rehearse, for the
benefit of the Syrian authorities, why the United
Nations needs to be involved in Syria. It is not a matter
of national sovereignty that there are over 1 million
refugees. It is not a matter of national sovereignty that
there are 400,000 dead in Syria. What we have there
is a threat to international peace and security, and it is
right that the United Nations is involved. The United
Nations has been involved on the humanitarian aspect,
the refugee aspect and the health aspect. It is absolutely
front-and-centre correct that it should be involved in the
political process. I will therefore go further than Mr. De
Mistura, who talked about a serious challenge. I think
that we actually face a grave challenge in the way that
Members of the United Nations have been cooperating
with the Organization, and as my American and French
colleagues have said, we face a grave challenge in terms
of the situation on the ground.

Additionally, there is now enormous doubt
over what the Sochi agreement was and what it now
represents. Either Russia has given the United Nations
and the Council assurances that it has proven too
weak to deliver on, or it was all a cynical smokescreen
designed to divert attention and energy While Russia,
Syria and Iran prosecuted the military campaign. That
military campaign has been brought to a halt only by
the international outrage at the threat to 2 to 3 million
civilians in Idlib, before the Turks bravely stepped in
and brokered an agreement that was designed to protect
those civilians.

I therefore think that we need five things, in support
of what my French and American colleagues have said.
We need clarity on the status ofthe Sochi agreement and
the new proposals of the Syrian authorities. What do
they mean? What do Russia and Iran think about them?
We need clarity on what steps need to be taken by all
the players before 19 November, when Mr. De Mistura
has offered to come back and brief the Council, and
before the end of November when he steps down. We
need clarity that Russia, as one of the five permanent
members of the Council, an Astana guarantor and
the convener of the Sochi agreement, will work
constructively and tirelessly with the United Nations,
along with Syria and Iran. All United Nations Members
have a responsibility to support Mr. De Mistura as the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria. We
need to hear today that that promise of constructive,
tireless and dedicated engagement is there to bring this
conflict to an end.

We need the agreement on Idlib to hold. We need
for that opportunity that others have mentioned to
be seized. We need the constitutional committee to
be convened, and I share the views of my American
and French colleagues on that. We need humanitarian
access to be improved, and we need resolution 2254
(2015) to be upheld. The Council needs to come together
to support the political process. Without the political
process, this dreadful conflict will never truly end,
whatever happens militarily on the ground. We look
forward to further reports following the international
meetings in the coming days, but I believe that we must
hear today from all Council members that they will
support the United Nations as it tries its very best to
move the political process forward.

