Mr. Estreme (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation welcomes the opportunity to address the
Security Council. We also wish to thank the delegation
of the United States for having convened this most
timely and important debate on the threats posed to
international peace and security by illicit flows across
unsecured borders. The statement on this topic made by
the Secretary-General early in this debate was highly
relevant.

In several decisions, the Council has urged States
to take measures and to cooperate in defending their
borders against trafficking in drugs, weapons, persons,
the movements of terrorists and their financial assets,
and other threats to State sovereignty. Since these
threats are often interlinked, a holistic approach would
seem to be the most appropriate to developing adequate
responses at the national, regional and international
levels. Such a holistic approach should not and cannot
ignore the unique features of certain threats. Moreover,
these threats do not always go hand in hand. For
example, while terrorism is often financed by other
criminal activities, in other crimes terrorism is not
necessarily part of the equation.

It is necessary to acknowledge that border control
is the primary responsibility of each State through the
coordinated action of the various agencies with
jurisdiction in the matter. Nevertheless, Argentina
believes that it is critical to continue strengthening the
cooperation mechanisms among neighbouring
countries so that control can be ensured through the
adoption of legislation and the building of national
capacities to identify possible solutions to the
challenges regarding borders.
At the national level, in late 2010 the Ministry of
Security was created in my country with the objective
of strengthening security and prevention mechanisms,
with specific and exclusive jurisdiction in the
prevention and fight against terrorism and transnational
organized crime.

At the regional level, Argentina cooperates
closely with members of the Southern Cone Common
Market (MERCOSUR) and associate member States
through the harmonization of national legislation on
the control of firearms, ammunition and explosives and
policy coordination in the field. It also cooperates with
the other countries of the region in strengthening their
national capacities to enable full implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). Cooperation is also carried out
with the security forces of neighbouring countries,
instrumentalized through bilateral cooperation
agreements between gendarmeries and coast guards,
and the development of integrated information systems
such as that being developed with Brazil on trafficking
in persons, to be implemented in 2012.

In our common border region, a joint command
made up of police and security forces from Argentina,
Brazil and Paraguay has been operating in our common
border region since 1996 and is playing an important
role in efforts to combat illicit trafficking in weapons
and ammunition, all form of smuggling, drug
trafficking, kidnapping, money laundering and illegal
trafficking in persons. It also constantly monitors data
on the activities of international terrorism and related
crimes.

Those initiatives illustrate an early awareness on
the part of Argentina and its MERCOSUR partners as
to the need for greater cooperation and coordination to
secure their borders and defend themselves against
illicit flows.

Although strengthening border security is
essential to effectively combat illicit flows, we
understand that under certain conditions low levels of
development in one or more countries can provide an
appropriate context for non-traditional threats to peace
and security, such as, among others, terrorism, illicit
trafficking in weapons, drug trafficking and
transnational organized crime - as has recently
become evident in the Sahel.

It is clear to everyone that it is not the task of the
Council to assume responsibilities falling to other
structures of the system, such as the General Assembly,
the Economic and Social Council or the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime. Instead, the heart of the
matter lies in thinking about how the Council should
consider development issues in its decisions regarding
peace and security.

In addition, border security should not come at
the expense of, or be used as an excuse to, impede or
prevent the exercise of basic human rights such as the
rights of migrants, as the Secretary-General mentioned
this morning. We do not believe that security should
come about at the expense of the rule of law, nor do we
accept the idea that human rights violations should be
permissible under certain circumstances.

Argentina awaits the assessment of the Secretary-
General on the work of the United Nations with regard
to assistance to States in securing their borders against
illicit flows. We also look forward to the convening of
a broad and transparent dialogue among the entire
membership to discuss the Secretary-General's
findings and to continue to consider the issue.

