Mr. Okello Oryem (Uganda): Allow me to
start by acknowledging the presence of my fellow
Ministers - my brother His Excellency Mr. Joao
Lourenco, Minister of Defence of Angola and Chair
of the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region; and my senior and elder brother His Excellency
Mr. Raymond Tshibanda N'tungamulongo, Minister
for Foreign Affairs, International Cooperation and
Francophonie of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Let me take this opportunity to congratulate you,
Sir, and your country, the United Kingdom, on the
assumption of the Security Council presidency for this
month and on having organized this important debate
on the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great
Lakes region. Let me also thank Mr. Martin Kobler,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO), for his briefing. I wish to commend Her
Excellency Mrs. Mary Robinson for her tireless efforts in
ensuring the implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region. I have no doubt that her
efforts have achieved credible results in realizing peace
and security in the region. I wish her all the very best in
her new assignment. I would also like to congratulate
Mr. Said Djinnit on his appointment as the new Special
Envoy for the Great Lakes Region and to assure him of
Uganda's full support and utmost cooperation.

The Great Lakes region has experienced recurrent
and devastating armed conflicts, as well as humanitarian
crises, resulting in social and human destruction. In
various parts of the region, the legacy of colonialism,
ethnic conflict, weak State structures, transnational
crime and terrorism, the proliferation of small arms
and light weapons and the illegal exploitation of natural
resources have given rise to a vicious cycle of violence,
instability, displacement and institutional collapse. The
state of peace and security in Africa, in particular in the
Great Lakes region, remains a worrying phenomenon,
with successes and continuing challenges. Indeed,
the establishment of many regional and subregional
organizations, such as the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR), the East African
Community, the Southern African Development
Community, to mention but a few, and their great
and promising achievements in the region should be
venerated.

However, there are diverse challenges, which
are often based on confrontation and rivalries to the
detriment of concepts and ideological orientations
that are more receptive to the exigencies of peaceful
solutions anchored in dialogue, the peaceful settlement
of disputes, compromise and a win-win proposal for
mutual benefit. I wish to cite quote one of our founding
fathers, Kwame Nkrumah, who stated,

"The survival of free Africa, the extending

independence of this continent and the development

towards that bright future on which our hopes and
endeavours are pinned depend upon political unity."

There is no doubt that Africa, in particular the Great
Lakes region, has consolidated its efforts to address
challenges and combat conflicts, giving impetus to the
regional dimension. During its chairmanship of the
ICGLR, Uganda spearheaded the Kampala dialogue and
ensured that the parties to the conflict in the Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo, that is, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23),
were brought to the table to peacefully resolve their
conflict. It is worth noting that the Nairobi declarations
were the result of the tireless effort and commitment
of the Government of Uganda, in particular President
Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, in facilitating dialogue
between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the M-23. It is therefore incumbent on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the M-23 to ensure the
full implementation of the Nairobi declarations. The
tasks and responsibilities were fully outlined in the
declarations. It is therefore important to take stock of
the status of compliance and implementation.

On the basis of our observation and engagements
over recent years, there is no doubt that there is a
desire and commitment on the part of the region and
international partners to resolve conflicts in the region.
That desire and commitment are well expressed in
previous and recent regional efforts undertaken to
ensure security, stability and development in the Great
Lakes region.

However, if commitments and agreements such
as the Nairobi declarations are not fully implemented,
they create a gap, allowing for a relapse into conflict in
the region. We commend the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the United Nations Force Intervention
Brigade for the joint operations against the Allied
Democratic Forces (ADF) and urge continued efforts in
dealing with other armed groups to pacify and stabilize
the region.

The repatriation of former M-23 combatants
remains unresolved. Uganda received them but feeding
them and looking after them have exerted pressure
on our meagre resources. We therefore call on the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to expedite the repatriation process as much as possible.
It is even more disheartening that the Group of Experts
on the Democratic Republic of the Congo has chosen to
make false and unfounded allegations against Uganda
that the M-23 are moving freely in Uganda despite the
close cooperation provided by my Government to make
available all the detailed information, such as the list
of former combatants, the weapons and many other
elements, that was communicated to the Government
of the the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It truly
casts doubt on the intention and purpose of the Group
of Experts.

The main challenge to the region is the lack of
guaranteed ways to finance the efforts and development
projects, especially the implementation of the Nairobi
declarations and the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework. Commendable work has been carried out
by the Technical Support Committee in that regard.
That all requires stable funding. More genuine support
from development partners and the international
community is therefore paramount. Last year, on a trip
to the Great Lakes region, the World Bank President,
Mr. Jim Yong Kim, announced that $1 billion would be
made available for development projects in the Great
Lakes region. However, more financial commitments
are still necessary in order to provide infrastructure
and other development programmes in the region. It is
even more important that the pledges be fulfilled.

For our part, Uganda established the ICGLR
regional training facility on sexual and gender-based
violence in Kampala to train judicial officers, social
and medical workers, police and prison officers and
many others to prevent crimes of sexual violence. We
welcome the support of the World Bank for the regional
training facility and call upon all development partners
and the international community to support its activities
and operationalization.

Finally, I wish to emphasize the following issues.
It is necessary to support and strengthen regional and
subregional organizations, owing to their comparative
advantage, proximity and complementarity to the role of
the United Nations in the maintenance of international
peace and security. The Nairobi declarations and the
national commitments of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework must be speedily implemented.
The disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
process for former M-23 combatants must be expedited.
There is a need for the joint and coordinated effort
of the United Nations and regional mechanisms,
such as the Expanded Joint Verification Mechanism,
MONUSCO and the joint intelligence fusion centre.
The Force Intervention Brigade, MONUSCO and the
Forces arme'es de la Republique democratique du Congo
must continue to pursue the armed terrorist groups
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, such as the ADF. The Security Council must
give regional groupings, such as the ICGLR Committee
of Ministers of Defence, the opportunity to regularly
brief it on peace and security in the Great Lakes region.
There must be sustainable and predictable funding for
regional initiatives and efforts.

In conclusion, we are convinced that fostering
strategic partnerships will bolster the effective
maintenance of international peace and security. We
therefore call for regular interaction, coordination
and consultation between the Security Council and
regional and subregional organizations on matters of
peace and security. That will enable us to augment
complementarities and avoid the duplication of efforts.
The Council should strive to be more even-handed
and transparent in its approach and decisions so as
to dispel the perception that on some issues under its
consideration, vested interests override fairness.

