Mr. Bessedik (Algeria): At the outset, my delegation
would like to express its appreciation for the convening
of this important high-level open debate dedicated to
the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMD). The adoption of resolution 1540 (2004)
has contributed to facilitating the implementation
of important measures to prevent the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and their means of
delivery among non-State actors. However, we stress
that its full implementation by all States is a long-term
task that will require continuous efforts at national,
regional and international levels.

As a State party to the main treaties related to
weapons of mass destruction, Algeria reaffirms its
long-standing position that the only guaranty against
use or the threat ofthe use ofthese weapons by non- State
actors is to eliminate them once and for all. Algeria
remains committed to resolution 1540 (2004) and has,
in that regard, regularly submitted its national reports
in accordance with its provisions. My delegation would
like to emphasize the following points.

First, we look forward to examining in depth the
review just concluded as clearly stated in resolution
2325 (2016), which was adopted this morning, with
a View towards strengthening and following up on
resolution 1540 (2004).
Second, we view that step as part of the architecture
of disarmament in all its aspects. We firmly underline
that it is our common duty to make sure that no WMD,
no WMD technology and no WMD acquired through
trade end up in the hands of non-State actors. It is the
firm conviction of my delegation that the elimination
of WMDs is the surest way to prevent the threat that
they potentially pose to humankind in general, as was
stated 70 years ago during the very first session of the
General Assembly.

Third, we truly look forward to seeing an
articulated an appropriate balance between the need for
the peaceful use of technologies aimed at development
and socioeconomic progress and the concern to
protect ourselves from their misuse by unchecked or
inappropriate actors.

Fourth, it is evident to us that the review should
clearly indicate the right to access those technologies for
peaceful purposes and define precisely what constitutes
international cooperation and appropriate funding.

Fifth, the African Common Defense and Security
Policy of the African Union clearly defines all those
objectives, lends strong support to resolution 1540
(2004) and greatly counts on international cooperation
in all areas linked to combating WMDs, Moreover, the
African Commission on Nuclear Energy established by
the Pelindaba Treaty is today an impressive reality that
should be supported. In that regard, we recall resolution
1977 (2011), and in particular paragraphs 10, 15 and 17,
and we expect the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) to take practical steps going
forward for regional cooperation.

Sixth, we understand that the actions needed
in general to achieve those goals require additional
and strong encouragement. However, we believe,
particularly in certain cases, - as set forth in the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT) - that nuclear-weapon States owe it to the world
to begin fulfilling their commitment to disarmament
and to allowing equal access to the peaceful use of the
related technologies. In the case of the prolonged delay
of that fulfilment, the relevance of the Treaty could be
questioned. We do not consider those commitments
to be promises on shaky ground but indisputable
international legal obligations.

Seventh, the path taken by the international
community with regard to chemical and biological
weapons should set a similar example pertaining to
their nuclear counterparts and the threat that they pose.
My delegation deeply regrets that we are not even at
the starting blocks for the establishment of a nuclear-
weapon-free zone in the Middle East, which is an issue
that prevented any positive outcome of the most recent
NPT Review Conference.

Eighth, let me reiterate the importance of the
negotiation process and multilateral mechanisms. They
all have to be strengthened and respected. They remain
the most appropriate frameworks, in particular the
Conference on Disarmament and the General Assembly.

Finally, my delegation, which is chairing the First
Committee of the General Assembly at its seventy-
first session, is sparing no effort towards achieving the
general goals of disarmament enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations. Our deep conviction continues
to be that the elimination of the threat of nuclear,
biological and chemical weapons must be based on the
complete elimination of those same weapons to prevent
the otherwise doomed fate that otherwise would lie in
store for all humankind.

