Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): First of all,
I would like to thank Mr. Jan Kubis for his
comprehensive briefing on the report of the Secretary-
General on the situation in Afghanistan (S/2012/ 133). I
would also like to congratulate the German delegation
on its crucial role in managing the Afghanistan issue
and for preparing the draft resolution that will be
submitted to the Council on the renewal of the mandate
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA).

The report under consideration takes stock of the
substantial progress made towards the established
indicators, some of which I will mention here. With
respect to security, the public image of the Afghan
police has considerably improved, thanks not only to
an increase in well-supervised officers who are trained
and operational, but also to the increased role of
women within those ranks.

In the political sphere, since the Bonn Conference
of 5 December 2011, the debate has focused on the best
way to manage the country's political process. From
that standpoint, national and regional mechanisms to
strengthen efforts towards promoting peace as well as
reintegration and reconciliation processes that are open
to all have been developed and implemented by the
Afghan Government. Furthermore, my country is
delighted that the Afghan authorities are seeking to
extend their authority in the context of good
governance throughout the country, to which the
authorities have given top priority.

The involvement of the international community
in capacity-building, both of the authorities and
institutions, that particularly takes into consideration
women's participation and constitutionally guaranteed
quotas is to be commended. Additionally, it should be
noted that the fight against corruption has also seen
progress due to establishment of the joint Government
and international Monitoring and Evaluation
Committee composed of national and international
representatives. Its mission is to achieve 60 well-
targeted aims, which Togo would like to see
implemented gradually.

Those encouraging developments have only been
possible thanks to a favourable regional context that is
characterized by good cooperation on work aimed at
peace and security in the country. Such a positive sign
could herald the return of investors in Afghanistan.

Togo hopes that the ministerial conference
planned for Kabul in June will lead to conclusions
capable of improving coherence within existing
regional mechanisms. My country would like to take
the opportunity of this debate to express its gratitude to
the countries that are friends of Afghanistan for their
unwavering efforts to help the country to bring an end
to the situation of crisis and insecurity in which it has
found itself for now more than a decade.

We hope that the NATO summit and the Tokyo
conference to take in place in May and July,
respectively, will constitute a turning point in the
implementation of the mutual commitments defined in
Bonn in December 2011. At the same time, Togo is
delighted that UNAMA, in line with the pertinent
resolution, is implementing its political mandate,
which includes good offices, political outreach, support
for the processes under way in the country related to
strengthening electoral institutions as well as
protecting, promoting and enforcing human rights.

Furthermore, we cannot fail to mention the
crucial role that the International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF), under NATO command, continues to
play alongside Afghan national forces in ensuring the
people's security and protecting the country's
infrastructure and institutions.

My delegation congratulates the entire United
Nations system as it continues to work steadfastly, in
an extremely difficult context, to support the peace
process, at the end of which Afghanistan will be able to
take control of its own destiny, in line with the decision
taken at the Bonn Conference stipulating the departure
ofa large majority of foreign forces in 2014.

Despite such progress, it is unfortunate that the
peace process in Afghanistan continues to face
numerous obstacles and challenges that hinder the long
and laborious march of the Afghan people towards full
autonomy. Those include the recurring question of
security represented by terrorist acts and a campaign of
intimidation and assassination targeting senior
Government officials and security forces, local
political leaders and religious leaders. That climate of
violence is coupled with local power struggles.

The recent and unfortunate events that have been
attributed to ISAF forces are not likely to calm the
ostensible hostility of certain organized groups, such as
the Taliban, against the foreign presence that,
nevertheless, benefits the country. It is important for a
frank and constructive dialogue to be established
between the Government and representatives of those
groups in order to create a climate of confidence and
achieve the task at hand.

Furthermore, the fight against terrorism, drugs
and contraband remains a major challenge in terms of
ensuring peace in the country. For that fight to be
successful, all neighbouring countries must cooperate,
in particular through participation in the regional
programme developed by the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime.

Above and beyond those challenges, UNAMA
has worked in synergy with other organizations and
programmes of the United Nations, and we commend
the Mission once again. It must continue its work to
ensure stability in the country. That task requires more
time and the support of the Council at this time, to
renew the mandate of UNAMA for an additional
12 months.

Togo firmly supports the extension of the
mandate of UNAMA and at the same time wishes
Mr. Kubis and his team every success in carrying out
their task.

