Mr. Bessho (Japan): Ijoin others in expressing our
deep condolences to the people of the United States for
the passing of President George H. W. Bush, the forty-
first President of the United States of America.

I would like to express my appreciation to Cote
d'Ivoire and President Alassane Ouattara for convening
and presiding over this very important debate. It is
an honour to be given a chance to speak here today.
We believe that this discussion will help keep up the
momentum for peacebuilding and sustaining peace,
which is one of the most important issues for Japan.

Let me also express my gratitude to Secretary-
General Guterres and the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, for
their insightful briefings. I also thank the speakers
before me for sharing the experiences of their own
countries, which, I believe, has enriched today's
debate immensely.

Japan believes that peace is not a transitory thing
such as a ceasefire or peace agreement, but rather
involves the continuous maintenance of security and
stability long after an agreement is signed. A year ago
this month, during its presidency of the Council, Japan
convened an open debate (see S/PV.8144) that focused
on the peace continuum. Speakers at that debate
highlighted the importance of taking a comprehensive
and integrated approach by embracing perspectives
of the peace continuum, as well as the humanitarian,
development and peace nexus.

In order to achieve peace, security and stability
in post-conflict countries, it is essential to build the
State's capacity and institutions and to strengthen
trust between the State and its people. Peacebuilding
and sustaining peace has become an area of high focus
across the United Nations system and in particular
within the Council and the Peacebuilding Commission.

As the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Japan stated
in 2016 when he presided over the Security Council's
open debate (see S/PV.7750) on peacebuilding in Africa,
Japan has three principles on peacebuilding in Africa.

First, there is an emphasis on people in the field.
That belief goes hand in hand with the concept ofhuman
security, which, in partnership with all the relevant
actors, aims at protecting and empowering vulnerable
individuals with a view towards prevention.

Secondly, living standards must be improved
through inclusive economic development. It is
crucial to ensure that all people can benefit from the
peace dividend.

The third principle is tolerance of diversity. While
emphasizing universal values, Japan also respects the
importance of ethnic diversity and local ownership.

These principles are in line with the basic philosophy
of the Tokyo International Conference on African
Development (TICAD): ownership and partnership. In
the run-up to TICAD VII, which will be held in Japan
next August, we hosted an eminent persons group to
which we invited five former presidents of African
countries to participate, and we discussed the challenges
and measures towards the realization of peace and
stability in Africa. We believe that Cote d'lvoire is a
good example ofthe peacebuilding and sustaining peace
model. It is with great pleasure that Japan is currently
implementing a project to promote reconciliation and
trust between that State and its people by developing
infrastructure and deploying experts.

While we have taken many steps to advance
peacebuilding and sustaining peace, there is still
much to be done. How can we best utilize the
Security Council, the Peacebuilding Commission and
bilateral and multilateral ties in order to implement
peacebuilding and sustaining peace? How can we
leverage our efforts in an effective manner to make a
difference on the ground? While there is no silver bullet
that can solve all the issues at once, today's debate
offers an opportunity to have a deeper discussion on
how to move that work ahead. That is why I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting. For its
part, Japan will continue its support, which includes
contributions of both financial and human resources,
in order to enhance peacebuilding and sustaining peace
in the world.

