Mr. Diallo (Guinea) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Hedi Annabi for his introduction of the report of
the Secretary-General and for the additional
information he has just given us.

I take this opportunity to reiterate my delegation's
condolences to the Government of Serbia and to the
family of Zoran Djindjic, the late Prime Minister of
Serbia.

My delegation's reading of the report before us
prompts us to express our appreciation of the fact that
the Provisional Institutions are gradually learning their
functions and responsibilities. We encourage the
continuation of programmes of civic education and the
recruitment of senior officials, particularly that
launched by the Office of the Prime Minister for
members of minority communities.

The successful exercise of administrative,
political, economic and cultural power requires the
involvement of representatives of all components and
segments of Kosovo society. The authorities of the
provisional and municipal institutions, in cooperation
with the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), must play a leading role
in this regard.

With respect to the rule of law, we note and regret
the upsurge of violence and ethnicity-based crime, as
well as organized crime. We support any measure that
seeks specific solutions to these problems and we
encourage efforts under way to improve the
functioning of the judiciary, the Kosovo Police Service
and the regional UNMIK Police Witness Protection
Programme. We call on the Belgrade authorities to take
the necessary steps to put an end to the operation of
parallel tribunals, the existence of which can only
jeopardize the effective implementation of resolution
1244 (1999).

My delegation is also concerned about continuing
difficulties with regard to freedom of movement -
particularly for members of minority communities -
as well as about the difficulties encountered by those
groups throughout Kosovo when it comes to freely
utilizing their languages and alphabets. UNMIK, the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government and the
municipal authorities must intensify their efforts to find
concrete solutions to those problems.

Issues pertaining to the right of return and to
minority and property rights continue to be a source of
concern. Resolving them would mean greater stability
in the province. The steps taken by UNMIK, the
Provisional Institutions, local authorities and the donor
community to improve structures intended to facilitate
the return process should be fully supported.

My delegation welcomes the progress made in the
inter-ethnic dialogue and in the area of municipal
integration thanks to the activities of UNMIK, KFOR,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and non-governmental organizations.

With regard to property rights, we welcome the
result of the steps taken by the Housing and Property
Directorate. We encourage it to continue its work. We
also appeal to the donor community to provide the
necessary resources to complete work in the areas of
return, integration and property rights.

With regard to economic activities, my delegation
appreciates the continued strengthening of the
legislative and administrative framework. We note in
particular the drafting of new legislative acts that stress
compatibility with European Union standards,
especially the Stabilization and Association Process
Tracking Mechanism with the European Commission.
Despite those achievements, however, increased
involvement by the international community would
contribute to reversing the downward trend in
economic activity. We should also turn our attention to
the regional dimension of trade, and clearly define
regional mechanisms in that regard.

With regard to the dialogue with Belgrade, my
delegation encourages Mr. Steiner to continue his
efforts. We call upon Belgrade and Pristina to
overcome the obstacles being encountered on the path
to reason, in order to find solutions to outstanding
problems.

Moreover, the reorganization of the Kosovo
Protection Corps and its transformation into a multi-
ethnic body specializing in civilian emergency
intervention should continue, and should lead to
conclusive results in the interest of all Kosovans.

Lastly, my delegation supports the Secretary-
General's recommendations. We would like to
emphasize that Kosovans must abandon their internal
disputes and favour dialogue in defending the common
values essential to building a multi-ethnic and
prosperous society.

