Ms. Colakovie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): On
behalf of the delegation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, I
would like to express our appreciation to the Secretary-
General for his comprehensive report (S/2011/675). We
also welcome the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Kosovo, Mr. Farid Zarif, and
thank him for his comprehensive briefing. We would
like to express our support to the work of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK).

We welcome the participation in today's meeting
of His Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremie, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, as well as
Mr. Enver Hoxhaj.

Bosnia and Herzegovina reiterates its
appreciation for UNMIK's efforts in fulfilling its

mandate, including support for the process of
reconciliation, facilitation of constructive dialogue and
regional cooperation, its focus on mediation between
the communities, as well as its support to minority
communities.

During the reporting period, as a result of recent
incidents that we strongly condemn, the security
situation, mainly in northern Kosovo, has been
deteriorating. Furthermore, these latest developments
have also resulted in the worsening of inter-ethnic
relations throughout Kosovo, the polarization of
political positions, and the widening of gaps between
the communities. The aforementioned incidents and the
overall situation in Kosovo are causes of concern for
our delegation.

Taking into account all the circumstances, now
more than ever we remain convinced that sustained
dialogue is indispensable to achieving mutually
acceptable solutions to all outstanding issues in
Kosovo. It is therefore necessary that both sides remain
committed to the resumption of dialogue on pending
issues, facilitated by the European Union. We believe
that the international community, as well as all relevant
stakeholders, should continue their efforts to create
conditions for the peaceful resolution of long-standing
issues for the benefit of all.

It is our well-known position that the rule of law
is crucial to stability and progress in the Balkans. In
that regard, we reiterate our support to the activities of
UNMIK and the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo, operating within the status-neutral
framework of the United Nations.

In the context of improving inter-community
dialogue and building confidence among the parties,
we believe in the crucial role of UNMIK and welcome
its efforts to decrease tensions, draw attention to
common needs and provide conditions conducive to
sustainable returns.

The problem of missing persons remains a great
challenge to the process of reconciliation between the
communities and prolongs the process of returns. In
that context, we take positive note of the fact that the
Belgrade-Pristina Working Group on Missing Persons
resumed its activities and cooperation on that important
issue. Despite all efforts, the number of voluntary
returns remains low, including due to socio-economic
difficulties associated with the reintegration of
returnees and the tense security situation.

During the reporting period, UNMIK, the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights and the Danish Refugee Council facilitated
several go-and-see and go-and-inform visits, which
provided displaced persons an opportunity to visit their
properties and make first-hand assessments of
conditions in the receiving community.

In conclusion, we reiterate our enduring position
that stability and security in Kosovo are of great
significance for achieving lasting peace and prosperity
in our region. We consider that the international
community should continue to play an important role
in supporting the aspirations of the countries of the
region towards their integration into European and
Euro-Atlantic structures.

Finally, Bosnia and Herzegovina commends the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo, operating within the framework of resolution
1244 (1999), and its role of maintaining peace,
security, stability and respect of human rights in
Kosovo.

