Mr. MacKay (New Zealand): May I first express
my delegation's pleasure at seeing Mr. Ramos-Horta
and Mr. Gusmao in the Council today as we consider
the important matters covered in the Secretary-
General's interim report. I would also like to express
my appreciation for the excellent briefing given by Mr.
Annabi this morning.

As one of the larger troop contributors to the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET), with a battalion group and
helicopter detachment deployed in the Western Sector,
we share the Secretary-General's assessment of the
security situation in the territory. Recently, the
situation has been generally good. In part this can be
attributed to the robust response made by the
peacekeeping force to militia incursions during the past
dry season. The positive contribution of the Indonesian
armed forces to the relative stability on the border
during this period should also be acknowledged. But
the situation does remain unpredictable.

We agree with the Secretary-General when he
says the overall capability of the militias has not
diminished and they remain a force to be reckoned
with. Their continued existence in spite of Security
Council resolutions calling on the Government of
Indonesia to disarm and disband them is a matter of
great concern to us. In this regard we recall that those
responsible for the murder of United Nations
peacekeepers Private Leonard Manning of New
Zealand and Private Devi Ram J aishi of Nepal have yet
to be brought to justice. New Zealand looks to the
relevant agencies of the Indonesian Government to
expedite, in close cooperation with UNTAET, the
prosecution of Jacobus Bere, who has admitted killing
Private Manning. We expect also that others involved
in these attacks on United Nations peacekeepers in East
Timor will be arrested and put on trial.

We must also join others in recording our dismay
at the manifestly inadequate sentences handed down to
those who carried out the brutal murders of the three
workers of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in Atambua,
West Timor, last September. The international
community cannot hope to promote the safety of
United Nations personnel when those who have
admitted carrying out such acts receive such trivial
sentences. Therefore we welcome the Indonesian
authorities' decision to appeal these sentences, and we
look forward to justice being fully served.

We also share the Secretary-General's deep
disappointment at the extremely limited jurisdiction of
the Indonesian ad hoc human rights tribunal for East
Timor, and we join others in asking Indonesia to bring
to account those responsible for the serious human
rights violations committed in East Timor during 1999.
The international community must remain closely
engaged on this issue.

Across the border the situation of the refugees in
West Timor remains unresolved. While we
acknowledge recent initiatives by the Indonesian
Government in this area, we urge greater expedition in
implementing plans to register, resettle and repatriate
the refugees in accordance with international standards.

Taking all these things into account, we believe
the Secretary-General's emphasis on a prudent
approach when it comes to security is the right one.
This is reinforced when we look ahead to the political
calendar leading up to East Timor's independence. The
Secretary-General has provided an objective
assessment of all the relevant factors. We agree with
his proposal to review the question of force levels
again after the election of the Constituent Assembly.

East Timor's independence is now not far away,
yet a very great deal remains to be done. We fully share
the Secretary-General's View that there will be a need
for a significant international presence in the post-
independence period. New Zealand wishes to see an
appropriate and adequately resourced United Nations
presence beyond independence, with core military,
police and civilian administration functions funded by
assessed contributions. These core functions are too
critical to be left to the vagaries of voluntary funding,
and there are established parallels elsewhere for what
we are proposing.

We are pleased that detailed planning for the
United Nations post-independence presence is
underway in Dili and at Headquarters. The Secretary-
General's report highlights the importance of this
planning being based on a careful assessment of East
Timor's needs and conducted in close consultation with
the people of East Timor. We agree that the ultimate
goal is to ensure that the new State can exist on its
own.

We believe the Secretary-General described the
situation now before us most aptly when he said in his
recent report on the closure or transition of
peacekeeping operations, "No exit without strategy",
and I quote him here:

"The essential requirement in the case of
East Timor is to ensure that the enormous
sacrifices of the East Timorese, the substantial
investments of the international community, and
the cooperation of the parties required to bring
about a successful transition to independence are
not squandered for lack of international attention
and support for the new State". (S/2001/394, para. 43)

This is the challenge we collectively face and we must
not allow ourselves to be diverted from it.

