Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I would like to
Stephen O'Brien and all the humanitarian workers who
trying to do their jobs as best they can in Aleppo and
the rest of Syria.

We gather in the Chamber every month, and
we routinely reduce the situation in Syria to simple
statistics - statistics such as 400,000 killed, over
2 million injured and millions more forced to flee. A
number one does not hear often in Syria is zero, but that
is the number I would like to focus on today. That is the
exact number of aid convoys that have reached besieged
and hard-to-reach areas this month.

We sat time and time again in the comfort of the
Chamber and agreed on the need for humanitarian
assistance to reach those in need, and yet zero crates of
food have arrived in Aleppo and zero medical supplies
have arrived to replenish the makeshift hospitals that
care for civilians. As the Secretary-General's report
(S/2016/714) makes clear, four of those hospitals, as
well as the central blood blank, were hit by air strikes
in east Aleppo city on 23 and 24 July. There is zero
justification for those attacks. Either these facilities
are being directly targeted or air strikes are being
conducted with deliberate disregard for civilians on the
ground. Both scenarios are wholly inexcusable.
And yet it gets worse. Human Rights Watch reported
last week that the joint Syrian-Russian air campaign
had violated international law by dropping incendiary
munitions on civilian areas. A single occurrence of that
would be unacceptable, and yet the report says that it
has happened twice a week, on average, for over two
months. Those weapons have no place in war, and
urban spaces in Syria are clearly not an exception. I
call on Russia to end the use of those weapons in the air
campaign and to use its influence on the regime to end
all attacks on civilians.

The list of heinous weapons being deployed in
Syria, sadly, does not end there. Over half a year after
the destruction of Syria's declared chemical weapon
stockpile, reports now suggest that there is a resurgence
of chlorine gas attacks in Idlib and in Aleppo. Is there
a more sickening way to mark the third anniversary
of the gas attack in Ghouta? Let us therefore all be
clear: the use of those weapons is abhorrent and we
unequivocally condemn those who unleash them. Later
this week, we will have an opportunity to hear a fuller
picture, when the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism reports. The Council must stand ready to
demonstrate a robust response to that report, whatever
the findings.

All the horrors that I have just described are the
reality of life today in Syria and in Aleppo. Those
committing those horrors have a responsibility to
change the reality, and yet they show no willingness
to do so. Let me spell out for them what they have to
do. First stop the bombing - stop the indiscriminate
attacks on medical facilities and civilians. Secondly,
guarantee safe and sustained access to humanitarian
agencies. Thirdly, resume political talks. It is really
that simple.

The United Nations call for weekly, 48-hour pauses
to get aid into Aleppo is a step forward. We fully support
it, as it could ensure that those in dire need of medical
evacuation can access medical treatment. And, with
Russia's indication of support for that initiative, I hope
we can all now agree to it. I also hope that we can all
agree to the point just put forward by the representatives
of New Zealand, Spain and Egypt. I certainly do.

I started this intervention with some statistics, but
sometimes statistics cannot show the true human impact
of conflict. Anyone who has been on social media or
has watched the news this week will know the name
and face of Omran Daqneesh, the stunned, bloodied,
terrified little boy who sat in an ambulance, having
narrowly escaped death. As Stephen reminded us, his
brother and hundreds of thousands of his fellow Syrians
were not so fortunate. Omran has become the human
face ofthe Syrian conflict for millions around the world,
but we must not forget that there are 13.5 million faces
in Syria just like his - the faces of men, women and
children in desperate need of humanitarian assistance.
We can help deliver that. The United Kingdom stands
ready to play our part, and I implore each and every one
of us gathered here to do the same.

