Mr. Babaa (Libyan Arab Jamihiriya) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me at the outset to express our
congratulations to you, Sir, and our hopes for full success
in your presidency of the Security Council this month. I
should also like to express our appreciation to Ambassador
Anwarul Chowdhury, representative of Bangladesh, for the
wisdom and skill with which he conducted the work of the
Security Council last month.

Debating the issue of sanctions in a frank and serious
manner in this Council raises a number of questions. First,
is the objective behind imposing sanctions to punish a
particular State? Is it to implement Security Council or
United Nations resolutions? Is it to promote international
law? Or is it merely an attempt to implement the specific
political objectives of a major State, or even a specific
lobby within that State?

Secondly, are sanctions imposed by the international
community as a whole? Is there a consensus on sanctions?
Is there unanimity on their imposition? Or are sanctions a
decision taken in the capital of a particular State, which is
then ramrodded by that State into the Security Council in
order to serve its own interests and objectives? Thirdly,
were such sanctions imposed after all means were
exhausted, as provided by Article 33 of the Charter - "The
parties to any dispute shall, first of all, seek a solution by
negotiation, enquiry, mediation, conciliation, arbitration,
judicial settlement" - or not?

Fourthly, as is clear in the title of Chapter VII of the
United Nations Charter, sanctions are actions and
procedures taken with respect to threats to the peace,
breaches of the peace and acts of aggression against other
States. Sanctions so imposed must be lifted when such a
threat or breach of the peace ceases to exist. Does the
Security Council follow that Article?
In most cases, the reply to most of these questions
is in the negative. The Security Council has ignored
threats to the peace and acts of aggression perpetrated by
a number of States while at the same time imposing the
severest sanctions when there was no threat to
international peace and security, in order to achieve the
specific political objectives of particular States, utterly
unrelated to international peace and security.

Our bitter experience with sanctions compels us to
make several demands. First, if a member of the Security
Council lodges a complaint in the Council against a non-
member, or is involved in a conflict with that State, the
issue must be dealt with transparently and debated in an
open meeting so that all its aspects can be explored,
together with all the ways and means of finding a
peaceful settlement to the problem. The State concerned
must be invited to participate in the discussion and must
be allowed to fully express its point of view. Naturally, if
any member of the Security Council is party to a dispute
with a non-member of the Security Council, it must
remain neutral when the issue is debated in the Security
Council with the objective of imposing sanctions against
that State. This is in accordance with paragraph 3 of
Article 27 of the Charter, which provides that "a party to
a dispute shall abstain from voting".

Second, when the Security Council debates the
possibility of imposing sanctions on any State, adequate,
irrefutable evidence proving that that State has threatened
international peace and security or that it has perpetrated
aggression against another State must be presented, in
accordance with the rules of international law. The
Security Council must lift sanctions if it is proved that
such evidence runs counter to international law and to the
Charter of the United Nations.

Third, if any State believes that it is being harmed
by the imposition of sanctions or by any other measure
adopted by the Security Council, or by a Security Council
resolution in that regard, it should have the right to seek
redress at the International Court of Justice, which should
consider the legitimacy of such a resolution. The Security
Council should respect the judgment of the Court.

Fourth, no single State or minority of States in the
Security Council should prevent the Council from lifting

 

the sanctions imposed against any other State. The Security
Council must review its resolutions and must take
responsibility for lifting sanctions without being subject to
the will of one State alone.
Fifth, the international community should provide
assistance to the State that is the victim of sanctions so as
to help it to rebuild its economy, and the States responsible
for imposing sanctions must pay compensation for any
harm done to that State if it is proved that it was innocent
of the accusations that had led to the imposition of
sanctions.

Sixth, the Security Council should not apply double
standards by imposing sanctions against some States while
completely ignoring other, similar, situations. The history
of the United Nations is replete with examples and
situations of certain States violating United Nations
resolutions and threatening international peace and security.
Yet for one reason or another, international legitimacy is
apparently upheld in a clearly discriminatory fashion.

Seventh, the Security Council should not use sanctions
to force people to abandon their political choices or values,
or to impose a particular pattern of behaviour. This is
completely contrary to the letter and spirit of the Charter.

Eighth, the use of economic and political pressures
and strong-arm tactics in adopting sanctions resolutions by
unanimity, whereby a resolution wanted by one State is
pushed through the Council, cannot really be called
international legitimacy. Furthermore, dictating instructions
to capitals to agree a priori to a particular measure desired
by one Member State cannot be termed international
legitimacy.

My country has been the victim of sanctions imposed
on us in the dark - unjust sanctions, imposed without
proof or evidence, because one or two Member States in
the Security Council were involved in a political dispute
with us. Many States have since expressed surprise at the
speed with which the sanctions were imposed and at the
manner of their imposition, which took place without the
accusations against us being proved. The result is that my
people have suffered under these unjust sanctions for seven
years, and the direct damage they have caused amounts to
$33 billion, as we informed the Security Council recently,
in a letter contained in document S/2000/243.

As other speakers have said today in the Security
Council, those sanctions did not lead to a resolution of the
dispute, which was the supposed reason for their
imposition. Indeed, the dispute was resolved through one
of the peaceful means provided for in the Charter:
negotiation and compromise among the parties, with the
assistance of the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
Although a solution acceptable to all parties was reached,
and although the Secretary-General has affirmed that
Libya had abided by its part of the equation, the sanctions
have not yet been lifted, because one State objected and
imposed its opinion on the majority. Despite the fact that
that State is a party to the dispute, it stopped the Security
Council from lifting the sanctions.

Where is international law, and where is
international legitimacy? Where is the credibility of the
Security Council? We again call on the Security Council
to immediately lift the sanctions imposed on my country.
We call on the Council not to resort to a policy of
imposing sanctions upon people. Sanctions lead to
tragedy, pain and suffering at all levels of society. Let the
Security Council instead seek peaceful means to resolve
disputes among States.

