Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): Let me first thank
you and your country, Madam President, on assuming
the presidency of the Council and thank the delegation
of Mexico for their outstanding work last month. We
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Zannier and General De Kermabon for their
comprehensive briefings. We also thank His
Excellency President Tadie and His Excellency Foreign
Minister Hyseni for their statements. We have listened
to them very carefully.

Like other speakers before us, and in line with the
statement made by High Representative Ashton, we
condemn the act that led to the death of Mr. Dzekovie
and the injury of several others during the protests in
North Mitrovica on 2 July. We call on the Kosovo
police to investigate that deplorable incident with the
support of European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX) and to bring those responsible to
justice. We expect all parties to fully cooperate in this
effort. We would like to express our gratitude and
appreciation for the professional work of EULEX and
the International Security Force in Kosovo (KFOR).

We do not believe that the incident that we have
been informed about today constitutes a threat to
international peace and security, and what General De
Kermabon has said to us about the security situation
confirms this evaluation. At the same time, the latest
events clearly show the importance of the presence of
EULEX in northern Kosovo in order to avoid a further
deterioration of the security situation. Austria fully
supports the efforts of the European Union Mission to
exercise its mandate, including in northern Kosovo, in
full conformity with resolution 1244 (1999).

We call on all sides to refrain from any escalation
and to ease the existing tensions. We are quite aware of
the continuing fundamental disagreement between
Belgrade and Pristina on the status issue, and the
position of my Government and my country on this
matter is known. But we do not believe that this
disagreement can or should preclude sustained efforts
by all parties - and let me repeat, by all parties -
towards greater stability, a peaceful dialogue and
pragmatic solutions. That kind of pragmatic dialogue is
exactly what is needed today in Kosovo and in the
region, and that kind of dialogue also includes the need
for increased cooperation by all sides with EULEX and
the other international actors in Kosovo. Let me
underline that that dialogue would also be in the
interest of the European perspective of the entire
region, as well as of its constituent parts.

