Mr. Malok (South Sudan): I thank you, Sir, and
the members of the Security Council for giving me
another opportunity to address the Council. I would
also like to take this opportunity to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. David
Shearer, for his briefing.

The Transitional Government of National Unity
takes note of the renewal of the mandate of the South
Sudan sanctions regime and the Panel of Experts
(resolution 2353 (2017)). The Transitional Government
of National Unity reiterates it commitment to continue
to cooperate with the Security Council and the Panel
of Experts so that they can fulfil their mandate. My
delegation still maintains that the use of sanctions
is not the best solution for addressing the conflict in
South Sudan.

The Transitional Government of National Unity
also welcomes the recent arrival in South Sudan of the
first contingent of the Regional Protection Force (RPF)
and rejects the suggestion that it is hindering the RPF's
deployment, since it has in fact been very cooperative.
The delay in the RPF's deployment cannot be blamed
on the Government alone since, as the Council knows,
there are other factors operating in that regard.

Since the events of July 2016 that reignited the
conflict in South Sudan, President Kiir has worked
persistently to achieve lasting peace in the country.
He has taken a number of positive steps to ensure the
implementation of the Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in South Sudan, engaging with
relevant stakeholders such as the leadership of the
African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission and the United Nations. He has announced
several amnesties aimed at encouraging the rebels to
lay down their arms and return to the fold so as to
rebuild the country. Unfortunately, the other side has
been unyielding, choosing to stoke the fires fuelling the
conflict and taking the war to regions such as Greater
Equatoria and some parts of Greater Bahr el Ghazal
that had previously been relatively peaceful.

On Monday, 22 May, in Juba, President Kiir
launched a national dialogue in his quest for peace. He
has instructed a steering committee, led by national
figures, to conduct across-the-board consultations
and make the process as inclusive as possible, so that
all South Sudanese have the opportunity to air their
grievances. The new initiative by no means replaces the
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in South
Sudan; rather, it is an opportunity to accommodate
views and address issues that the Agreement does not
tackle, and is thus complementary to it. The national
dialogue will be inclusive, free and credible, because the
Government is not leading or controlling the process.

Effective from 22 May, and in accordance with the
Security Council's request for an immediate ceasefire
as a vital prerequisite for the credibility of any national
dialogue, in his speech launching the national dialogue
President Kiir declared a unilateral ceasefire, in order,
as he said, "to create an environment for inclusive
dialogue and to facilitate the movement of humanitarian
aid to famine-stricken areas." In addition, he warned
the armed and security forces against harassing
rebels and opposition members who decide to join the
national dialogue. These important pronouncements
represent a genuine effort on the Government's part
to create conditions conducive to a free and successful
dialogue process.

In response to the Security Council's request for
an immediate end to the obstructions and attacks on all
the national and international humanitarian personnel
who are bringing much-needed, lifesaving assistance
throughout South Sudan, President Kiir stressed in his
statement that the unilateral ceasefire will facilitate
the delivery of humanitarian aid to famine-stricken
areas. Instructions to that effect have already been
given to field commanders to ensure that humanitarian
organizations are allowed unimpeded access. The
Transitional Government of National Unity will neither
impede nor deny access to humanitarian actors. It is
our responsibility to ensure that peacekeepers and
humanitarian workers are not caught in any crossfire
during active fighting.

In conclusion, since the signing of the 2015 peace
agreement, the Transitional Government of National
Unity has been committed to implementing it in the
letter and the spirit so as to achieve permanent peace in
our country. It will continue to leave no stone unturned
in order to achieve that goal. Ultimately, however, it
will be incumbent on the rebel movements to meet the
Government halfway if they are serious about finding
a durable solution to the conflict. The Transitional
Government of National Unity urges the Security
Council and the international community to put
pressure on those groups to join the national dialogue
with a view to achieving peace.
The meeting rose at 12.30 pm.
