Mr. Mansour (Palestine): Palestine welcomes
this open Security Council debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. We firmly share the belief
that the protection of civilians in armed conflict is a
matter of immense importance and that the Council's
attention to that issue is both appropriate and
necessary. We hope that the Council will continue to
address the issue in an effective manner until the
serious protection of civilians in armed conflict is
ensured in all cases, without selectivity or inaction
based on political considerations.

For Palestine, today's debate is especially timely.
For the nineteenth day now, Israel, the occupying
Power, has continued with impunity to unleash its
military wrath on the defenceless population of the
Gaza Strip, killing nearly 1,000 Palestinians, including

more than 400 children and women, and injuring nearly
5,000. Those who were killed not only were trapped,
traumatized and terrorized along with the 1.5 million
other inhabitants there, but also were denied the
protection accorded to civilian persons under
international law. In the light of that, the Palestinian
people and their leadership - especially our people in
Gaza - continue to call upon the international
community to provide much-needed and long overdue
protection for the civilian population and for measures
to be swiftly taken in that regard to prevent the loss of
more innocent lives.

As the Palestinian civilian population continues
to be subj ected to Israel's indiscriminate, excessive and
disproportionate use of force by means of tanks, F-16s,
helicopters and other heavy weapons, including white
phosphorous shells and dense inert metal explosive
bombs, the profound human suffering continues to
mount, as the people of Gaza have nowhere to run and
nowhere to seek refuge. Moreover, among countless
other violations, the occupying Power has attacked
medical workers and clearly marked ambulances,
wantonly destroyed public and civilian infrastructure
and institutions, targeted United Nations schools and
buildings, denied access to medical treatment for the
sick or wounded, and used Palestinian civilians as
human shields, all the while continuously denying an
entire population their most basic rights, including the
right to food and water.

Clearly, international law forbids such brutality.
Humanitarian and human rights law prohibits, inter
alia, the killing and bodily injury of civilians, reprisals
against civilians and civilian objects, the wanton
destruction of homes and other civilian property, and
the collective punishment of civilians. Such actions,
wilfully perpetrated, constitute war crimes.

The belief that the occupying Power has in fact
committed war crimes is also being reported by several
human rights organizations now working on the ground
in Gaza. In that regard, the appeal by the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and by
the Human Rights Council, in its resolution dated
12 January 2009, for an independent investigation of
crimes committed by Israel, the occupying Power, in
Gaza is important and should be acted upon. We would
also like to recall the suggestion made by Secretary-
General in his latest report on civilians in armed
conflict (S/2007/643), in which he stated that, in
situations where parties to a conflict commit systematic
and widespread breaches of international humanitarian
and human rights law and thereby create the threat of
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes, the
Council should be willing to intervene under Chapter
VII of the Charter.

Here, we would like to recall resolution 1860
(2009), adopted less than a week ago, which, among
many other important provisions, calls urgently for an
immediate, durable and fully respected ceasefire and
for the unimpeded provision and distribution
throughout Gaza of humanitarian assistance, including
food, fuel and medical treatment. Of course, the
ceasefire that the Security Council called for was
intended to lead to a total withdrawal of Israeli forces
from Gaza.

Unfortunately, Israel continues to ignore the
resolution adopted by the Council, pressing on with its
military aggression against the Gaza Strip and even
intensifying it over the past couple of days. We call on
the Council to compel Israel to heed the calls of the
Council, in accordance with its obligations as an
occupying Power under the Fourth Geneva Convention
and its obligations under the United Nations Charter as
a State Member of the United Nations.

Moreover, we call on the Security Council and all
concerned parties to make the necessary efforts and
work to ensure the effective implementation of the
resolution in order to bring an end to all military
activities and violence; to address the serious
humanitarian and economic needs of the Palestinian
civilian population in the Gaza Strip, who for too long
have been under Israel's inhumane siege; and to help
the parties return from the precipice to which this crisis
has brought us and back to the path of peace.

In addition to the massive carnage against the
Palestinian people in Gaza, the civilian population
there continues to suffer from unlawful measures of
collective punishment being imposed on them by the
occupying Power. The situation before the Israeli
assault in Gaza was already dire owing to Israel's
inhumane 19-month siege, by which it deliberately
obstructed humanitarian access and the movement of
persons - including sick persons needing treatment
unavailable in Gaza - and of all goods, including the
most essential, such as food and medical and fuel
supplies. All aspects of life were severely impacted,
with poverty, hunger, disease and instability rising to
alarming levels, particularly among the refugee
population and children - who constitute nearly 56
per cent of the population - exacerbating the

humanitarian crisis to catastrophic proportions.

Protecting civilians in situations of foreign
occupation must be a priority mission of the United
Nations, and the Security Council has clear
responsibilities in that regard. Regrettably, the
international community's failure to hold Israel
accountable for its violations and crimes over the past
four decades has reinforced Israel's lawlessness,
permitting it to continue using military force and
collective punishment against the defenceless
Palestinian people under its occupation and, in essence,
absolving it of its legal obligations as an occupying
Power.

As Israel continues to breach its legal obligations
towards the Palestinian civilian population, the Security
Council, if it cannot compel Israel to abide by the law,
has a duty to determine and undertake appropriate
measures to protect the civilian population. Respect
must be demanded for the instruments of international
law that are supposed to provide the Palestinian civilian
population with protection from human rights
violations and crimes committed under occupation.

It should be recalled that the basis and guiding
principles for the protection of civilians in armed
conflict are embodied in the rules of international law,
particularly humanitarian law and human rights law.
The need to protect civilians, promote their welfare and
safeguard their human dignity is at the core of the
spirit and purpose of these laws. Protection provisions
can be found in many instruments of law, including the
Geneva Conventions - particularly the Fourth Geneva
Convention, which comprises provisions explicitly
aimed at ensuring the safety of civilians in armed
conflict, including specific provisions for civilians
under foreign occupation - the Additional Protocols,
the Human Rights Covenants, the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court and United Nations
resolutions.

We have the legal instruments and tools that are
required, and we know what actions need to be taken to
ensure the protection of civilians in armed conflict. We
are convinced that the international community has no
choice but to make progress and create a different and
safer situation than that faced today by civilians not
only in Palestine but everywhere else affected by
armed conflict.

Before closing, we would like to commend the
work of many United Nations bodies, including the
Office of the High Commissioner of Human Rights, the
Human Rights Council, the High Commissioner for
Refugees, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
UNICEF and the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), as well as the work of many international
humanitarian organizations that have worked tirelessly
to launch initiatives and programmes to ensure the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. We continue
to support and encourage their work in this field.

