South Africa fully supports the Secretary-General in his call for an immediate global ceasefire as well as Special Envoy Pedersen's call for a nationwide ceasefire in Syria in these uncertain times with the exponential spread of COVID-19 around the world. The current environment in Syria, particularly in the north-west, poses significant challenges to curbing the spread of COVID-19. South Africa welcomes the steps that have been taken by the Syrian Government, including the implementation of curfews and the closure of public spaces, schools and shops and the restriction of access into Syria. Similar steps have also been implemented in areas not under the control of the Syrian Government. Of great concern to my delegation is the possibility of the COVID-19 virus spreading among vulnerable populations, particularly those in internally displaced persons camps, who live in overcrowded locations, with limited access to health care or water and sanitary infrastructure. The closure of borders in the north of Syria is also of concern, as the continued shipment of vital humanitarian assistance through those crossing points may be limited and insufficient to meet the expected needs caused by the pandemic. In this regard, South Africa supports the Special Envoy's call for the large-scale release of detainees on humanitarian grounds. We also call on all parties to ensure that the relevant medical supplies and equipment, including testing kits, ventilators and personal protection equipment and necessary humanitarian assistance is made available throughout Syria, wherever it is needed. South Africa greatly appreciates the efforts of the United Nations and the World Health Organization, in particular, to minimize the impact of the virus on the Syrian population. The commitment of the personnel who continue to work in these challenging and changing circumstances is commended. However, even as we respond to the challenges brought by COVID-19, we cannot forget the already dire humanitarian situation in parts of Syria and must ensure that the assistance required in these areas is provided in a full, safe, impartial and unimpeded manner. South Africa welcomes the maintenance of the 6 March ceasefire agreement between Turkey and Russia and the resulting decrease in hostilities, despite sporadic reports of shelling on the front lines. We urge all parties to adhere to the provisions of this and prior ceasefire agreements, including their obligations under international humanitarian and international human rights law for the protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure. In this regard, we welcome the resumption of the flow of water from the Allouk water station, which services nearly half a million people and the Al Hol camp. The Syrian people in this area cannot afford to have such a vital service jeopardized at this time. As the people of Syria continue to face this dire humanitarian crisis in the face of the continuing conflict and the COVID-19 pandemic, the easing of economic measures placed on Syria should be considered. Turning to the political situation, South Africa welcomes the agreement by the Constitutional Committee on the agenda for the next meeting. We hope that the necessary arrangements can be made to ensure that the Constitutional Committee can meet safely during these extraordinary times. My delegation also appreciates the efforts of the Special Envoy to continue his engagements with the various stakeholders to move the process forward towards achieving a lasting political outcome reflective of the will of the Syrian people, with guaranteed protection for all groups in Syrian society. In conclusion, South Africa reiterates that the situation in Syria can only be resolved through negotiations and dialogue and calls on all parties to exert every effort towards the full implementation of Security Council resolution 2254 (2015) to further avoid the displacement of Syrians and loss of innocent lives. For it to be sustainable, the political process must be Syrian-owned and Syrian-led. External interference in this process is detrimental to its success.
