Mr. Johnston (United Kingdom): I should like to
join others in thanking the Assistant Secretary-General
for his briefing and, through him, to thank the
Secretary-General for his end of mandate report
(S/2005/310) on this important United Nations success
story.

Like its European Union colleagues, the United
Kingdom fully associates itself with the statement to be
made shortly by the representative of Luxembourg on
behalf of the European Union presidency.

As this will be the last Council discussion of
Timor-Leste during the mandate of the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET), I wish
to join others in paying tribute to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Sukehiro
Hasegawa; to his predecessor, Mr. Kamalesh Sharma;
and to all the people of UNMISET for the excellent
work that they have done and for the help that they
have provided to the people of Timor and to the
international community over the past few years.

With the establishment of the United Nations
Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL), United Nations
activities in that country move into a new phase. The
Organization will now be in a position to refocus and
concentrate its efforts on areas where the people of
East Timor still require targeted assistance. We look
forward, over the course of the one-year mandate, to
further progress being made towards achieving the goal
of self-sufficiency, in particular through training and
mentoring activities.

Given the importance of the border issue, we are
particularly pleased that training of the Border Patrol
Unit will be a priority under UNOTIL's mandate. We
welcome the assurance that the work of military
advisers and police advisers assisting the Border Patrol
Unit will be closely coordinated, and we hope that the
work of the police advisers will also be coordinated
with the activities of all the donors working in the field
of police development and training.

In relation to the border, and more generally in
relation to Timor-Leste, we would underline - as others
have done - the continuing importance of bilateral
commitments from the international community to
reinforce the multilateral assistance from the United
Nations.

On the issue of serious crimes, we look forward
to the forthcoming report by the Secretary-General's
Commission of Experts, and we welcome the news that
Indonesia has now agreed to issue visas to allow the
Commission to visit Jakarta. We welcome the fact that
measures are being taken to safeguard the institutional
knowledge of the existing serious crimes process, and
we support the comments of the Secretary-General on
the need to respect the assurances of confidentiality
which have been provided to witnesses as part of that
process. It is obviously important, as others have said,
that the core staff of the Serious Crimes Unit will be
retained to continue the crucial work of protecting and
safeguarding the information for as long as is
necessary.

Finally, a word of thanks and congratulations go
to the Timorese themselves, who have achieved so
much in the past few years. The Secretary-General's
report highlights the range of United Nations actors
who are supporting their efforts in East Timor, but the
people themselves also deserve our thanks for the
contribution they are making to this important
development.

