Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): Ukraine appreciates the
initiative of Poland to hold this open debate, as well
as your personal participation, Mr. President, in this
meeting. We would also like to wish the delegation of
Poland every success in its presidency and appreciate
the attention it pays to Ukraine.

We thank the Secretary-General for his report on
the issue at hand (S/2019/509), as well as the briefers for
their participation and useful presentations.

Before delivering a statement in my national
capacity, I would like to note that Ukraine aligns itself
with the statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union.

Let me start with the quote of a notable Polish
doctor and pedagogue Janusz Korczak:

"Children are not the people of tomorrow, but
are people of today. They have a right to be
taken seriously and to be treated with tenderness
and respect".

As we mark a number of important dates this year,
namely, the thirtieth anniversary of the Convention on
the Rights of the Child and the tenth anniversary of
resolution 1882 (2009), it is regrettable that universal
protection of the rights of the child remains a goal yet to
be achieved. The scale of violations committed against
children, as reflected in the Secretary-General's report,
is nothing short of staggering. Behind dry statistics
lie the fates of thousands of children who have
lived through horrors and sufferings that few in this
Chamber can imagine. When we factor in the issue of
underreporting, the picture becomes even bleaker.

It is obvious, therefore, that the work of the United
Nations in this area is far from complete In fact, this
challenge warrants more attention and effort today than
back in 1989, when the Convention on the Rights of the
Child was adopted, under Poland's leadership. That is
why the right and urgent thing to do is to scale up our
common actions to ensure that the implementation of
existing ambitious resolutions and conventions does not
just remain on paper.

Impunity for grave violations against children
cannot be tolerated. Military recruitment and the use
of children in armed conflicts must finally come to
an end. It is equally important to develop effective
rehabilitation and reintegration programmes. If we
fail to protect our children 4 or "people of today", as
coined by Korczak - how can we protect the future
of humankind?

Thirty years ago, the international community
was united in the understanding that children's
rights require special protection and a continuous
improvement of the situation of children all over the
world, as well as their development and education in
conditions of peace and security. Unfortunately, as a
result ofthe ongoing Russian aggression, children in the
Donetsk and Luhansk regions of Ukraine are deprived
of an opportunity to enjoy life without fear, violence
and death. They continue to account for numerous
casualties from killing and maiming, the indiscriminate
use of force, landmines and cluster munitions.

UNICEF confirms that every escalation of the
hostilities in Donbas threatens access to water and
sanitation for 3.2 million people, including 500,000
children. According to the latest report on the human
rights situation in Ukraine by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, almost
150 children have lost their lives in Donbas. Thousands
of children have become victims of physical and
psychological violence.

It really pains me to show Council members this
photograph. Just look at this young face full of hope,
energy, life, innocence and optimism. This is 16-year-
old Stepan Chubenko, a schoolboy from Kramatorsk,
Donetsk oblast, Ukraine. He was a goalkeeper in the
Ukrainian first league youth football team, an activist
and one of the organizers of a local club called Funny
and Inventive People. Those who knew him recall that
he was all smiles, even taking care of a children's home
in Kramatorsk. He loved life and life loved him back.

A week ago it was exactly five years since his
horrendous killing in cold blood by Russian proxies
near Donetsk. His three killers first tortured him badly,
then fired three shots into Stepan's head - one shot
from each of them. Does the Council want to know why?
It was simply because Stepan, my young compatriot,
had a blue and yellow ribbon on his backpack. Blue and
yellow - the colours of the Ukrainian flag. He was
killed for simply being a patriot of his own land. The
identities of his executioners are well known; at least
two of them are hiding from justice in Russia.

The human rights and fundamental freedoms
of all residents, especially children, also living in
Crimea 4 temporarily occupied by the Russian
Federation - continue to be significantly threatened.
Approximately 170 children have been left without
breadwinners, with their fathers arrested, abducted or
murdered by the occupying Power. That is why I would
like to call on the Secretariat once again to include a
reference to the situation of Ukrainian children living
in the temporarily occupied territories of Ukraine in
the relevant thematic reports.

On its part, Ukraine, as party to the Convention on
the Rights ofthe Child and its Optional Protocol and the
Paris Commitments and Paris Principles on Children
Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups, is
exerting utmost efforts to develop and secure social
protection and reintegration for children who have
been affected by the conflict and displacement. In that
regard, we greatly appreciate longstanding cooperation
with United Nations agencies - with UNICEF at the
top of the list 4 in order to ensure the protection of
children. We stand ready to remain a reliable United
Nations partner in this crucial area.

