Mr. Campbell (Ireland): I am grateful for this
opportunity to speak on behalf of the European Union.
The following associated countries align themselves with
this statement: Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Hungary,
Latvia, Malta, Poland, Romania, the Slovak Republic and
Slovenia. Iceland and Norway have also aligned
themselves with this statement.

This will be the third occasion in the space of six
months that the Security Council is considering the
situation in Abkhazia, Georgia. It is also, I regret to say,
yet another occasion on which we have to note the
continued failure of the parties to achieve a
comprehensive political settlement. The economic and
political consequences of this failure are serious; but it is
the human dimension of this stalemate which is a source
of particular concern to the European Union.

The scale of this human tragedy is eloquently
described in the letter of 6 July 1996 to the President of
the Security Council from the President of Georgia. The
European Union wishes to express its condemnation of
the ethnically motivated killings that have occurred in the
region and other related acts of violence. The international
community cannot tolerate such barbaric violations of
human rights and fundamental freedoms and urges that all
steps be taken to arrest the perpetrators of such acts and
bring them to justice.

We deeply deplore the obstacles which the Abkhaz
authorities have mounted by preventing the early return of
refugees and displaced persons. We call on them to take
immediate steps, in cooperation with the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), to enable all displaced persons and refugees to
return freely to their homes under secure conditions and

 

without any linkage to the question of the political status of
Abkhazia, Georgia.

The European Union welcomes the programme for the
protection and promotion of human rights which will be
carried out by the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights in cooperation with the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and we look
forward to the establishment of an office in Sukhumi. We
call on the parties to lend their full cooperation to this
important initiative.
The comprehensive report of the Secretary-General
concerning the situation in Abkhazia, Georgia, shows very
clearly that despite the very considerable efforts of the
United Nations and the Commonwealth of Independent
States (CIS), insufficient progress has been made in
arriving at a mutually acceptable solution to the conflict.

The European Union is especially disappointed that in
spite of the very positive gestures which the Government of
the Republic of Georgia has made in putting forward a
framework for political compromise, no serious response
from the other side has been made which would allow
meaningful negotiations to take place.

This attitude on the part of the Abkhaz authorities
ignores two fundamental principles to which the European
Union remains totally committed: first, full respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of
Georgia within its internationally recognized borders; and
second, our refusal to allow the valuable work of the
United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG)
and the Commonwealth of Independent States to be
undermined by those determined to pursue their own goals
without regard for the well-being of their own peoples.

The European Union wishes to express its full support
for the efforts which the Secretary-General and his Special
Envoy, Ambassador Brunner, and his resident Deputy,
Mr. Bota, have made to encourage the parties to move
towards a political settlement which is both comprehensive
and balanced.

We also support the work which the Russian
Federation, in its capacity as facilitator, has undertaken to
intensify the search for a peaceful settlement to this
conflict. We should like to pay tribute to the OSCE, and we
welcome the reference that has been made in the draft
resolution before the Council today to their collective
efforts in a search for a negotiated agreement.

The laying of mines in the Gali region and the
deaths which have been caused by them are utterly to be
condemned. The consequent severe limitation on the
capacity of UN OMIG to move freely in the area, together
with the closure of the three team bases that have
resulted, are totally unacceptable. The European Union
urges the parties to take all necessary measures to prevent
the laying of mines. In this regard, we welcome the steps
which the Secretary-General has so far taken to arrange
for the provision of mine-protected vehicles and some
engineering support.

The safety and freedom of movement of the peace-
keeping personnel of UNOMIG and the CIS remain of
paramount importance, and the fullest cooperation must
be provided by all parties to allow them to carry out their
mandate in a proper, safe and effective manner.

The European Union looks forward to the
resumption of negotiations between the Abkhaz
authorities and the Government of Georgia. As the
President of Georgia writes in his letter to you, Sir, we
must not abandon the course of negotiations. It is only
through such negotiations that a lasting solution can be
brought to this conflict which has already caused too
much human suffering. Only a comprehensive political
settlement can guarantee the security of all and lay the
foundations for economic and social development in the
region.

The European Union would welcome the adoption of
this draft resolution today. It is a clear demonstration of
the concern of the international community at the
continuing stalemate in resolving this question and
constitutes an urgent appeal to the parties for every effort
to be made to resume early and conclusive negotiations.

