Mr. Trullols Yabra (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, let me thank you, Mr. President,
for having convened this meeting, and we take this
opportunity to express our gratitude to all the briefers
for the important remarks that they delivered.

The Dominican Republic will always echo the
concerns of States when international peace and
security are jeopardized. In that regard, we understand
that the concerns expressed and the potential impact of
the latest developments on the peace process contravene
the commitments undertaken by the parties in the
Minsk agreements. The Security Council has assumed
that the Minsk agreements are the genuine expression
of the will of all those involved, including the Council,
which endorsed them in resolution 2202 (2015)
and strengthened them with presidential statement
S/PRST/2018/12, of6 June 2018.

The parties must reaffirm their commitment to
multilateralism and the peaceful settlement of disputes.
In that regard, we call on the parties to refrain from any
unilateral action that could hinder the process and the
efforts being made to achieve peacebuilding in eastern
Ukraine. Only in that way will it be possible to restore
the conditions that will lay the foundation for ensuring
the country's stability and sustainable development.

Just a few days ago, Ukraine concluded its elections,
in which the popular vote chose a single winner. In that
context, we strongly welcome the timely statements
made by the President-elect that he will revive the
Minsk agreements and work towards the achievement
of the long-awaited peace. In that light, we reiterate
our rejection of any hostile act that might undermine
the aspirations of the parties to end the conflict. Those
are the very wishes of the Ukrainian people and the
international community, which vehemently desire a
return to normalcy in eastern Ukraine and the region.

The Dominican Republic takes this opportunity
to commend the solidarity of and efforts that the
United Nations continues to make, together with the
international community, to mitigate the difficulties
that the civilian population has endured since this
situation began. Furthermore, we highlight the high
level of commitment of the international community
to building a sustainable peace in Ukraine. We call for
continued support for all actions that would facilitate
a return of peace and restore hope to a nation that,
through free elections, has placed its trust in youth,
unity and a more promising future and, as a result, will
bring an end to the confrontations that have caused so
much harm to the country and its people.

In conclusion, our delegation asks that the dialogue
between the parties in the current Normandy format
and the Trilateral Contact Group be maintained. At
the same time, we express our firm commitment to the
defence of the independence, territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Ukraine, in absolute adherence to the
spirit of the Charter of the United Nations.

