Mr. Osman (Somalia): At the outset, I wish to
extend the appreciation of the Federal Government to the
briefers - Ambassador Swan, Special Representative
ofthe Secretary-General; Ambassador Madeira, Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission for Somalia; Ms. Halima Ibrahim, Chair
of the National Independent Electoral Commission; and
Mr. Osman Moallim, Executive Director of Somalia
Youth Development Network.
Together, their insights give us an overview of the
significant progress that Somalia continues to make,
and their work is contributing to the vision of Somalia's
future that has been clearly set out by the Federal
Government of Somalia. That vision was endorsed and
strongly supported at the Somalia Partnership Forum,
convened by the Federal Government of Somalia with
its partners in Mogadishu on 1 and 2 October. The
Forum was an important opportunity to set out the
Federal Government's reform agenda and the significant
progress that has already been achieved and to secure
partner support for the remaining challenges.

We now have an agreed direction for the coming
year and Somalia's priorities are very clear. We intend
to conclude the constitutional review process and to
continue preparations to hold one-person one-vote
elections in the last quarter of 2020. Furthermore, we
are defeating the terrorist group Al-Shabaab through
offensive operations led by the Somali National Army
as we strengthen our security institutions and processes
to support our security forces and protect our people
and territory.

We are a step closer to meeting the ambitious
benchmarks in the fourth staff-monitored programme
of the International Monetary Fund early next year.
We continue to build Somalia's resilience to weather
events, both drought and flooding, while improving
social services for all Somalis.

This is a bold reform agenda, but the Federal
Government is fully committed to achieving it with the
support of our partners. We urge all partners to redouble
their efforts to help us to achieve these objectives and to
align their support to these agreed priorities.

The Federal Government of Somalia recognizes
that our goals will not be met without the cooperation
and engagement of the federal member states. They
are a vital component of the governance in Somalia.
It is essential that we work in partnership in the
national interest.

President Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed Farmajo
and the Federal Government of Somalia are currently
engaged in a dialogue with all federal member states
and expect an agreed blueprint to advance the national
interests of Somalia. We are committed to ensuring that
all federal member states play their part and we urge
our partners to support us in holding the leadership of
each member state accountable and to contribute to the
Somalia of the future, not the past.
That means undertaking genuine reconciliation
efforts and holding fair, transparent and inclusive
elections, not only at the federal level but also at the
level of the federal member states. Where the electoral
process does not meet those criteria, the Federal
Government of Somalia will not recognize the outcome,
and we call on our partners to do the same.

We are working to overcome past practices
of electoral interference and influence over the
independent bodies appointed to administer elections.
Therefore, despite ongoing political disagreements, we
call on our partners to continue to support the National
Independent Electoral Commission on the whole,
including technically and financially, with a View to
implementing the agreed critical benchmarks, such as
voter registration, and thereby moving a step closer to
fulfilling the promise of elections in 2020-2021.

In order to build trust in the Government, we
must hold the Federal and state-level Governments
to a higher standard of conduct than in the past.
Falling back on old, destructive ways certainly has
no place in Somalia's bright future. We are making
significant progress in laying the foundations for more
inclusive and transparent governance. In Galmudug,
reconciliation efforts are ongoing and we are working
with all the stakeholders to ensure that communities are
fairly represented and that elections can be held under a
unified Galmudug administration.

In Jubaland, the Federal Government of Somalia
and the international community are engaging with all
stakeholders, including members of the local authorities,
with a view to finding a way forward and allowing
the people of Jubaland the same opportunities for an
inclusive and forward-looking state administration.
The Federal Government of Somalia is continuing
to make preparations for the holding of one-person
one-vote elections in the last quarter of 2020. To do
that, the Somalia Partnership Forum is committed to
passing the electoral law by the end of December and
to concluding a review of the Constitution by June
2020. Just yesterday, President Mohamed Abdullahi
Mohamed Farmajo met with two of Somalia's former
Presidents - His Excellency Sheikh Sharif Ahmed
and His Excellency Hassan Sheikh Mohamud. The
President is also meeting all other political parties and
peaceful opposition leaders this coming Saturday. The
unity of purpose and leadership shown by President
Mohamed Farmajo in convening to meet those former
Heads of State and other opposition leaders sends a
strong signal of Somalia's commitment to holding truly
historic democratic elections next year.

Somalia also continues to make strides in
strengthening security. Operations have continued in
Lower Shabelle in order to better protect Mogadishu
and form part of a strategic Mogadishu security plan.
For the first time, the Somali National Army is capable
of holding ground and can successfully repel Vicious
Al-Shabaab attacks. We pay tribute to the African
Union and our colleagues from the African Union
Military Observer Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
who fight alongside the Somali security forces, and
we extend our sincere thanks to the troop- and police-
contributing countries to AMISOM, who demonstrate
every day their solidarity in our fight against terrorism.
Another significant step in that direction was the
passing of the anti-corruption bill, signed into law by
President Farmajo in September. That forms part of a
wider package of reforms designed to tackle corruption
and to ensure that funds are not diverted from urgent
national priorities.

In order to fund those priorities, in October the
Cabinet approved a budget of $350 million for the years
2019-2020. That rise in revenue was made possible by
fiscal reform and the Somali population, who worked
with the Government to collect taxes. Fifty-five per
cent of the budget will be financed by internal revenue
sources, while the deficit will be financed by donor
support, representing another significant step on
Somalia's path to self-sufficiency. As we build on those
reforms, we are working steadily towards the decision
point on debt relief in early 2020, and we count on all
our partners to support us in achieving that important
milestone for Somalia.

Despite our energetic efforts, Somalia continues
to face significant challenges, and no more so than in
facing severe weather events. The rains experienced
across central and southern Somalia have brought
destruction and devastation to hundreds of thousands
of people. The Federal Government of Somalia has
responded with emergency support and relief efforts,
but in parallel we are putting in place measures that will
enable Somalia to build resilience in order to better deal
with future events of that kind. Infrastructure, water
management and the management of the water economy
are critical components of that strategy, and the Federal
Government of Somalia is committed to addressing
not only the immediate needs of those impacted by the
floods, but the long-term needs of Somalia in coping
with severe weather events in the future. We therefore
emphasize the importance of the nexus between
humanitarian and development assistance.
In conclusion, significant sustainable change,
especially in the complex process of State-building, is
taking place at a steady rhythm of incremental progress.
The briefers today have set out how that change is
taking place on the ground. We are cognizant that
the change might be viewed as not happening quickly
enough or immediately enough, as numerous obstacles
remain. But with the strong commitment of the Federal
Government and people of Somalia and the continuing
support of our partners, we will continue to overcome
them one step at a time.

