Mr. Cardi (Italy): Italy voted in favour of resolution
2373 (2017) in order to emphasize its firm and
unwavering support for a peacekeeping mission that in
our View, in a region plagued by conflicts and division,
helps to maintain calm and stability for both Lebanon
and Israel to enjoy. Italy is proud to be a member of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL),
a mission whose excellent performance is due to the
quality, dedication and bravery of the personnel
provided by 41 troop-contributing countries. We
therefore understand fully the security concerns related
to the presence of non-authorized weapons in the area
of operations and the two other violations of resolution
1701 (2006) by Hizbullah. However, we strongly
caution against blurring the line between duties that,
according to resolution 1701 (2006), are entrusted to
the Government of Lebanon and those with which the
peacekeepers are tasked.

Their responsibilities are very different, and the
primary role of the sovereign Government of Lebanon
needs to be stressed and respected. Promoting confusion
in that regard undermines UNIFIL's operations and
strips the Lebanese authorities of their own sovereign
prerogatives. Nevertheless, we take note that today
the Council has followed its long tradition of unity
and consensus on UNIFIL. However, I would like to
underline our remaining concerns, with regard to the
language ofparagraph 15, which we accepted at the very
last minute to avoid a division of the Council and to keep
its unity, which is paramount for us, and also because
we are a responsible component of the peacekeeping
mission, being its largest troop-contributing country,
together with Indonesia.

In any case, as a troop-contributing country,
we reserve the right to assess the measures that the
Secretary-General may envisage according to what
is requested of him by paragraph 15. Furthermore, it
must be stressed that paragraph 15 does not change the
existing mandate of UNIFIL.

I would like to conclude with a brief comment on
the working methods of the Council. As a member of
the Security Council and as UNIFIL's largest troop
contributor, with Indonesia, and as a country that
has fielded three of the last five Force Commanders
of UNIFIL, we would have hoped for more inclusive
negotiations. Receiving information from, or being
updated by, the penholder, which we thank, in any case,
or by the members involved in the negotiations, is not
the same as allowing all 15 members of the Council to
have a real positive impact on the same negotiations.
The Security Council should always remember to give
due consideration to the views of the troop-contributing
countries, whose men and women risk their lives on
the ground. That applies not only to UNIF IL but to the
work we do every day.

As an elected member of the Council, Italy attaches
great importance to those principles. I would like to
commend Ambassador Bessho on the work done in
relation to the working methods, but we think that more
should be done to promote working methods that can
better serve our common purpose.

