Mr. Adom (Cote d'lvoire) (spoke in French): At the
joint initiative of C6te d'lvoire and Equatorial Guinea,
the representatives of the Member States of the Security
Council carried out a visit to West Africa, with my
country, Cote d'lvoire, being one of the two legs of the
visit. To recall, the visit was devoted to experiences
and best practices with regard to the transition towards
peacebuilding in Cote d'lvoire and Liberia, two
countries that hosted United Nations peacekeeping
missions. Those two countries experienced different
routes out of crisis; and, owing to their own potential and
the challenges they face, they are today experiencing
different rates of economic and social development.
In accordance with the usual practice, I should like to
provide the Security Council with a brief account of our
stop in Abidjan, which is the economic capital of cote
d'Ivoire.

The Security Council delegation arrived in Abidjan
on the evening of 14 February and was received in
audience on 15 February from 8.30 to 9.30 in the morning
by the Minister for Foreign Affairs, His Excellency
Mr. Marcel Amon-Tanoh, and by Vice-President
Daniel Kablan Duncan from 10 to 11. Speaking on
behalf of the Government of Cote d'lvoire, Minister
Marcel Amon-Tanoh outlined the strategy for ending
the crisis and consolidating peace in Cote d'lvoire,
based in particular on the triad of economic recovery,
national reconstruction and national reconciliation.
He stressed that the success of that approach was
primarily dependent upon strong national ownership
of the crisis-resolution process, the leadership of the
President of the Republic, His Excellency Mr. Alassane
Ouattara, and his Government's constant commitment
to implementing peacebuilding priorities. He cited as
an example the reform of the security sector and the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programme - 72 per cent of which is being financed
by their own funds - which allowed the Government
to establish security and stability in the country and
restore confidence among foreign investors.

Speaking on the national political situation, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs reassured our delegation
that Cote d'Ivoire was aware of the impatience on the
part of some actors in the international community, who
nevertheless recognize the remarkable progress made
since 2011. Consequently, he reassured the Council
delegation of the efforts made by the Government to
safeguard social peace, including the organization
in 2020 of transparent and credible presidential
elections, which he said constituted an additional step
in entrenching security, democracy and peace in Cote
d'Ivoire. The Minister also stressed that the period
from 2019 to 2020 would be devoted to stepping up the
efforts of the Government in the social domain, with a
view to a better distribution of the fruits of economic
growth, which averaged 8 to 9 per cent over the past
five years.

At the subregional level, while recalling the
leadership of President Ouattara, who headed up
the Economic Community of West African States in
the early hours of the Malian crisis - the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of C6te d'Ivoire reaffirmed his
country's commitment to playing a leading role in
finding solutions to current security challenges and
promoting peace and economic and social development.

In his audience with the Council delegation,
Vice-President Duncan reiterated national priorities
for strengthening security, peace and development in
Cote d'Ivoire. Aid for the return of refugees, DDR, the
fight against the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons, the promotion and protection of human rights,
the fight against corruption, the strengthening of the
gender dimension in conflict prevention and economic
and social development efforts were the main focus of
his address to Council members.

While stressing that Cote d'lvoire ranks among the
top 10 most reforming countries in the world according
to the Doing Business index, and the top four with

the strongest economic growth, according to the Mo
Ibrahim Foundation, the Vice-President confirmed
that the years 2019 and 2020 would see an increase in
the social offerings provided by the Government. The
Ivorian Government intends to devote 726 billion CFA
francs to social programmes, with education and health
as priority areas.

Following the audience with the Ivorian
Vice-President, the Council delegation took part in
a round table co-facilitated by Mr. Babacar Cisse'
and Mr. Yacoub El Hillo, respectively, the Resident
Coordinators of the United Nations Development
Programme in C6te d'Ivoire and Liberia. Mr. Cisse
stressed the quality of the links between the United
Nations system and the Ivorian Government in preparing
for the withdrawal of the United Nations Operation in
Cote d'Ivoire and in transferring residual activities to
the United Nations country team. Their joint efforts
focused on social cohesion and national reconciliation,
the strengthening of the rule of law, the fight against
gender-based violence, security institutions, including
DDR, and the improvement of civil-military relations.

Mr. Cisse' also recalled the pleas with bilateral and
multilateral partners to mobilize the necessary funding
for the implementation of the priorities of the national
peacebuilding strategy, while emphasizing the crucial
role of the United Nations Peacebuilding Fund. That
support, along with good coordination of the efforts of
the country team with the Ivorian Government, made
it possible to reinforce the momentum towards peace
established following the end ofthe post-electoral crisis.

For his part, Mr. El Hillo said that, after 25 years
of being on the agenda of the Security Council, Liberia
had committed itself to the path to peace, stability
and economic development. He acknowledged,
however, that, owing to structural fragilities linked
to its history and cycles of political instability and
community violence, unlike C6te d'Ivoire, Liberia
still faced enormous challenges in consolidating
peace. He emphasized that the drastic fall in economic
growth - from 8 per cent to 1 per cent - the persistence
of the root causes of the conflict, the difficulties in the
national reconciliation process and the weakness of
post-crisis accountability, the weaknesses in border
control and maritime security to prevent all sorts
of trafficking, were all vulnerabilities that must be
resolved in order to avoid a resurgence of the Liberian
conflict. With regard to the role of the United Nations
country team, Mr. El Hillo stated that this crucial
element of the United Nations presence in a post-crisis
country should be the subject of a prior assessment of
its capacity to fully carry out its responsibilities in the
context of peacebuilding assistance.
On the whole, we very much hope that the
exchanges that followed the presentations by the two
Resident Coordinators will serve to provide a better
understanding of the challenges and opportunities for
peacebuilding in Cote d'Ivoire and Liberia.

The Council visited the Republic of Guinea Bissau
during the latter part of its mission, with regard to
which, Mr. President, it falls to you to provide an outline
to the Council. For the moment, as the Permanent
Representative of C6te d'Ivoire, I would like to express
the sincere thanks of the Ivorian Government to the
Security Council for having chosen our country for its
visit to West Africa.

I cannot conclude my remarks without thanking
the United Nations staff, including those from the
Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs,
whose discretion and high sense of duty - and I think
members will agree - assuredly helped make the visit
a ringing success and fruitful exercise.

