Mr. Leon Gonzalez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba associates itself with the statement made by the
representative of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement. In my national capacity, I wish to underscore
some important aspects of the matter before us.

Time and again, such debates on the Middle East
region are held by Security Council without achieving
any progress on the issue. The main political problem
in the Middle East is Israel's systematic aggression
against Palestine. The Security Council must play its
role in maintaining international peace and security
and immediately adopt concrete practical measures
so that Israel stops its abuses and illegal policies and
practices against the Palestinian people.

Israel's behaviour deliberately contravenes United
Nations resolutions and international laws, is a threat
to regional and international peace and security, and
violates the human rights of an entire people through
flagrant, systematic and inhuman abuses that this body
should condemn.

The Israeli illegal occupation of Palestinian and
other Arab territories remains the primary obstacle to
achieving ajust, lasting and comprehensive solution in
the Middle East region. There will not be peace in the
Middle East as long as such aggressions continue and
the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people are not
taken into account.

The General Assembly adopted a historic decision
on 29 November 2012, when its members, by a majority
decision, accorded Palestine non-member observer
States status in the United Nations. Cuba co-sponsored
General Assembly resolution 67/ 19, consistent with
its long-standing position of support for the cause of
the Palestinian people to defend their rights. However,
that action must be an interim step towards Palestine's
eventual admission as a full State Member of the United
Nations, which Cuba fully supports. The Security
Council must consider and approve without further
delay Palestine's 2011 request for recognition as a
United Nations Member State.

The reprisals of the Israeli Government related to
the adoption of resolution 67/19 on 29 November 2012
are unacceptable. Its brutality against the Palestinian

people has resulted in the deaths of more innocent
civilians and in huge material damage that has
aggravated the already precarious living conditions of
the Palestinian people in that small, besieged territory.
Likewise, Israel's decision to withhold tax revenues due
to the Palestinian National Authority, in violation of
agreements between the two parties and of international
law, and the new settlement plans in the occupied
Palestinian territories are highly reprehensible actions.

Cuba will continue supporting the Palestinian
people in their legitimate and just struggle for self-
determination and the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
Cuba calls on Israel to end to its occupation of all Arab
territories, and reiterates again its position in favour of
ajust and lasting peace for all the peoples of the Middle
East region.
Cuba is closely following the situation in Syria. The
Security Council was not conceived as an instrument
to promote regime change. The intentions of some to
foment Security Council actions and pronouncements
aimed at increasing violence, undermining a sovereign
Government, generating insecurity and leading a nation
into a social and humanitarian crisis of unforeseeable
consequences are cause for concern. The obligation of
this organ is to promote peace, not violence; to prevent
destabilization, not to finance, arm and train those
intent on destabilization; and to protect innocent people,
not to use or manipulate them for geopolitical purposes.
That is also the responsibility of the Organization as a
whole.

A civil war in Syria or an intervention by foreign
forces will have serious consequences for international
peace and security, particularly the Middle East region.
Cuba shares the concern over the loss of innocent
lives in Syria and anywhere else in the world. It also
condemns violent acts taking place in that country
against the innocent civilian population, carried out
by all those involved in that or any other conflict. We
reject any attempt to make alleged efforts to protect
human lives a pretext for foreign intervention, whether
directly or with the support of irregular armed groups,
including mercenaries who only sow destruction and
death.

Cuba reaffirms the right of the Syrian people
to exercise full self-determination and sovereignty,
without foreign interference or intervention of any
kind. The role of the international community at this
difficult moment of a United Nations Member State is
to help safeguard peace and stability in the country. We
reiterate our confidence in the capacity of the Syrian
people and Government to solve their internal problems
without foreign interference. We demand full respect
for the self-determination and sovereignty of that Arab
country.

