Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): Mr. President,
we warmly welcome you to the Security Council and
congratulate you on your country's assumption of the
presidency of the Council.

I would like first of all to commend the Council
for its initiative to include the situation in the Middle
East on its agenda and for the constant interest it has
shown in that question. I would also like to thank the
Secretary- General for his briefing and the representative
ofIsrael and observer of the State of Palestine for their
statements. I would also like to welcome all delegations
that have joined the list to speak in the Council today.

When talking about the situation in the Middle
East, the Israeli-Palestinian conflict comes first to
mind despite the seriousness of the Syrian crisis
and its impact on its neighbouring countries such
as Lebanon. Regarding the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict - which, given its enduring nature, complexity
and regional implications, remains a major concern of
the international community - we, like many others,
believe that in the absence ofa final, just and equitable
solution that will guarantee security for Israel and
an independent and viable State for the Palestinians,
it would be difficult to claim that an effective and
lasting peace has been achieved in the Middle East. In
that regard, legal frameworks and possible potential
solutions to conflicts having disastrous consequences
that have lasted for far too long are already contained
in the relevant Security Council resolutions, the Madrid
principles, the Quartet road map, the Arab Peace
Initiative of 2002 and existing agreements between the
two parties.

Therefore, Palestinians and Israelis must make
greater efforts to continue negotiations to reach a
comprehensive resolution of all issues inherent in
final status that will put an end to the occupation and
conflict. These include the issues of territory, security,
the status ofJerusalem, refugees, settlements and water,
all of which should be based on the principle of two
States living side by side, where each party recognizes
the legitimate right of the other to live in peace and
security. In our humble opinion, only a negotiated, just
and lasting settlement is likely to enable the Palestinian
people to regain their basic rights and the Israeli people
to live in peace and security within the borders of 1967.

The option for peace is naturally incompatible with
the continued colonization of the occupied territories,
the continued blockade of Gaza, air strikes on civilians
and rocket attacks against innocent Israeli Citizens.
Those actions not only undermine the peace process
but also undermine the efforts of the international
community, which is working towards the two-State
solution.

For us, it is clear that the time has come to
recognize a State of Palestine alongside the State of
Israel. We must have the courage to take that step as
it is essential to advancing peace between the Israeli
and Palestinian peoples. In that regard, we welcome
the General Assembly decision in resolution 67/19 to
grant to Palestine non-member observer State status
in the Organization and UNESCO'S decision to admit
Palestine as a member. In any event, we welcome and
encourage the efforts of the international community
in general, and of the United States of America, in
particular, to revive direct negotiations between the two
parties to the conflict. Those efforts, however laudable,
are insufficient in and of themselves; both parties must
still demonstrate a genuine political will to overcome
the current impasse so that a new impetus can be given
to negotiations.

We therefore urgently call on the entire international
community, including the United Nations, the European
Union, the League of Arab States, as well as States
with influence on both parties, to further encourage
the State of Israel and the Palestinian Authority to take
steps to build mutual trust in order to resume direct
negotiations.

We are deeply troubled by the situation in Syria.
It calls on us all to act because the current situation is
particularly serious. We do not have the right to let an
entire population fall to its demise. The use of chemical
weapons, which speaks to a dramatic escalation of the
civil war in that country, is an affront to the human
conscience and the ideals that led to the founding of
our Organization. While we welcome the process to
destroy Syrian chemical weapons launched following
the agreement between the United States and Russia,
my country would like to see those who have used those
weapons identified and brought before an international
tribunal.

Moreover, we are horrified to see Syria deteriorate
to this point and to see Syrians kill each other with
such violence. The international community must
spare no effort in stopping that tragedy. The alleged
serious violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law, the bombing of civilians and
summary executions must be categorically condemned
and the perpetrators - whoever they may be - must be
prosecuted. We also express our dismay at the atrocities
committed by terrorist groups linked to Al-Qaida
and the Islamic State of Iraq and Levant, which are
exacerbating the situation with their fierce fighting,
leading to hundreds of deaths, not to mention the abuses
of which they are guilty.

Given that chaos, we hope that the second Geneva
Conference on Syria, scheduled to begin on 22 January,
will provide an appropriate solution to the Syrian crisis
by bringing together all segments of Syrian society and
meeting the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people.
Chad hopes that the Syrian National Coalition does not
backpedal on its courageous decision to take part in the
Conference.

We strongly hope that the Conference can stop the
cycle of violence and provide a lasting solution to the
Syrian crisis. If the negotiations at the second Geneva
Conference lead to a solution to the crisis, which we
dearly hope for, the international community must
immediately start thinking about support measures for
Syria in its reconstruction and peacebuilding efforts.

Finally, I want to talk about the situation in Lebanon,
which has borne the brunt of the consequences of the
Syrian crisis. Recently, Lebanon has become a stage for
car bombings and other deadly terrorist attacks, which
we firmly condemn. In that regard, allow me to welcome
the opening last Thursday in The Hague, before the
Special Tribunal for Lebanon, of the trial in absentia
of the alleged assassins of former Prime Minister of
Lebanon Rafik Hariri and 21 other individuals.

The cycle of attacks and reprisals committed
since the past summer in Lebanon could exacerbate
intercommunal tensions and threaten the already fragile
national unity. Besides the violence, the presence in
Lebanon of more than 1 million Syrian refugees is also
a source of tension, which could further complicate
the situation. Given the risk of the destabilization of
Lebanon, the international community must pay greater
attention to the situation of that country in order to help
it better withstand the consequences of the Syrian crisis
and preserve its unity, cohesion and stability.

