Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I would like to thank the Special Representative,
Mr. Farid Zarif, for the presentation of the quarterly
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
(S/2013/444).

Togo is pleased with the important work that
Mr. Zarifis doing together with the entire Mission team
to support the Kosovo authorities in the normalization
of relations with Serbia and, more generally, to ensure
the safety, stability and development of that country. I
would also like to thank the representatives of Serbia
and Kosovo for their statements.

On 19 April, Kosovo and Serbia finally reached
an agreement to normalize relations, demonstrating
that they are perfectly capable of finding peaceful
solutions to their disputes. Togo wishes to reiterate its
congratulations to both parties for agreeing to make
major concessions in order to reach that agreement.
Like any agreement, it is not necessarily ideal for all
segments ofthe populations concerned. Nevertheless, it
does have the merit of proposing a solution that makes
it possible to emerge from the crisis, which we hope
will enable the progressive resolution of the existing
differences between the two parties so that they can
respond to the challenges linked to the development
and well-being their populations.

In that regard, Togo welcomes the adoption, on
22 May, of the implementation plan of the agreement
of 19 April, which will, inter alia, make the necessary
adjustments to the existing legal framework so that they
can take into account the creation of the association
or community of Serbian municipalities in Kosovo,
aimed at carrying out the integration of the structures
ofjustice and Serbian police within the new entity and
initiating preparations for local elections. We also note
the concrete steps taken by each party to make the
implementation plan effective.

Moreover, we acknowledge the decision of the
Serbian Government to close the justice and police
structures still under its authority in northern Kosovo.
We also acknowledge the adoption by Kosovo of a
law granting amnesty to certain Kosovo Serbs and
modifying the budget so as to take into account the
financing of the association or community of Serbian
municipalities in Kosovo. Likewise, we acknowledge
other measures for a smooth implementation of the
19 April agreement, such as the decision of the Kosovo
authorities to organize the upcoming local elections
on 3 November, particularly in northern Kosovo, after
which the association or community will be created;
as well as the exchange, on 17 June, between the two
parties of liaison officers responsible for facilitating
communication and monitoring the implementation of
the agreements.

With regard to the situation in northern Kosovo,
which has always been a Security Council concern,
we note that the report indicates a decline in acts of
violence and the overall improvement in security as
political dialogue continues. We also welcome the
reports that Serbs in northern Kosovo have finally
made it known that they would not object to the
implementation of the 19 April agreement, indicating
that the parallel institutions of Serbia remain in place
until the new elections. We call on both parties to
pursue with determination the implementation of the
19 April agreement by adopting concrete measures
conducive to a genuine reconciliation between the
different communities living in Kosovo.

After the signing of an agreement, the
reconciliation work undertaken by Kosovo and Serbia
will take time. The reconciliation work will require
drawing on memories to research the disappeared and
educating the population concerned in order to root
out resentment and promote peaceful coexistence. It is
therefore crucial that the international community as
a whole, especially international organizations in the
field, continue supporting the efforts of Serbian and
Kosovo authorities so that the momentum of reforms
undertaken so far does not falter.
We welcome the efforts still being undertaken by
the European Union, UNMIK, the NATO-led Kosovo
Force, the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, which will play a particularly
important role in the preparation of local elections in
November, in which the local populations should take
part without exclusion.

