Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Special Envoy De Mistura, Under-Secretary-General
O'Brien and Mr. Cappelaere for their appropriately
grim briefings.

Like my British colleague, I would like to respond
to the question that Under-Secretary-General O'Brien
said is posed to him wherever he goes, whether in
Syria or in the region, or when meeting with citizens
or politicians. Why cannot the Security Council come
together to find a solution? I have to say that we grapple
with a lot of really difficult questions. That is not one of
them. It is a very straightforward and very unfortunate
fact that the Security Council does not come together
to answer the cries of the civilians we have heard about
again today because Russia, a permanent member, does
not want to. That is it. It is very straightforward.

The words we are hearing out of eastern Aleppo
now are as dark as any we have heard in our lifetimes.
A "death trip" - that is what civilians are calling
their journey to flee eastern Aleppo, according to a
teacher who as of yesterday had decided to stay there.
According to the Red Cross, 20,000 people have fled
eastern Aleppo just since Saturday - 20,000 people in
four days on a death trip. One fleeing woman was seen
pushing a wheelchair with her dead mother in it. She
told a reporter, "My mother died of hunger", and said
that they had almost nothing to eat for five months.

In another part of the city, amateur footage showed
stray body parts scattered among debris where an air
strike had reportedly just killed at least 20 people.
Survivors wept over the remains. Planes - Syrian
Government planes - take brief breaks from bombing
runs to blanket eastern Aleppo with leaflets. We have
talked about leaflets here before, but one of the leaflets
dropped a few days ago reportedly read:

"Do not be stupid. Think about yourselves and
your families. Victory is coming for the Syrian
Arab Army. Think quickly because time is passing
and it is not on your side."

We all know that time is not on the side of the
civilians trapped in eastern Aleppo. The longer the
bombing raids go on and the greater their intensity, the
higher the odds that they or someone they love will be
maimed or killed. But leaving carries extraordinary
risks, such as being detained or disappeared by regime
soldiers or killed on the death trip itself, where snipers
are having a field day, it seems.

I would ask Council members and all citizens
of the world to just force themselves to take a break
from their day and watch the images from eastern
Aleppo - parents cradling their children in agony;
civilians on foot mowed down while carrying their
suitcases, which lie beside their lifeless bodies. We will
likely hear from the representatives of Syria and the
Russian Federation today that these images are made
up; they are propaganda. That is an argument we have
been hearing in the past few meetings.

Now I have to acknowledge that both the Syrian
Government and the Russian Government have
significant expertise in making things up. They are great
authorities in general on propaganda, but we have to
recognize that they have an interest in trying to create a
post-truth world where all facts are contested and there
is no truth but just one person's claim or one country's
claim or one party's claim against another. Syria and
Russia, as they lie and kill civilians in Syria, count on
there being no referee who will adjudicate truths, on
the one hand, from lies, falsehoods and fictions, on the
other. That is their gamble.

But we have referees. The United Nations briefers
we have just heard from are our referees. They have
no interest in doing anything other than calling it as
it is. They are independent; they are humanitarians.
The carnage is a fact. It is a truth and it is now. The
14,000 terrified civilians, some completely hysterical,
who have been driven into Government-held territory
under gunfire and air strike attacks are also our
referees. Endless numbers of authenticated photos and
videos of human-caused slaughter are our referees.
There is no denying the truth and the facts, not even
in the upside-down land which the perpetrators of this
slaughter inhabit.

For months since the siege of eastern Aleppo began,
we have met in the Council to demand the basics. We
have called for the Al-Assad regime and Russia to
allow unfettered humanitarian access to the Syrians in
the city and to stop systematically bombing the city's
hospitals, schools and markets and the bases of the first
responders. Those are appeals that the Security Council
should not even have to request - should not ever have
to request. The Council should not have to demand
compliance with international humanitarian laws or
with our prior resolutions, yet here we are urging two
States Members of the United Nations, one of which
holds a permanent seat on the Council, to abide by
those basic standards and to stop ripping up the rule
books, which will have effects way beyond Syria for
our children and grandchildren.

When it seemed impossible to imagine a more
horrific situation, in fact the crisis got worse. The
past five days have witnessed one of the most extreme
bombardments of civilian areas in the entire life of the
conflict, ravaging what was left of the once majestic
eastern part of Aleppo. The objective is simple - to
take eastern Aleppo by force with no regard for the
consequences it may have for innocent civilians. We are
all in the broken-record club. We are all broken records
on the Council - including those who are actively
involved in carrying out the siege of Aleppo - in
saying that there is no military solution to this brutal
conflict and that the only way out is a political solution.

But that is pablum. The regime and Russia believe
the opposite. They are pursuing their approach; they
are strategic. They are following a blueprint. They
believe in a military solution. The choice they are
giving civilians is explicit. It is the same choice they
included in a previous leaflet: leave or be annihilated.

For those who choose to leave, the regime and
its Russian allies have promised residents of eastern
Aleppo passage through so-called safe routes. I am
sure we will hear more about these routes today. And
if Syrian and Russia propaganda is any predictor, we
may hear how civilians upon escaping are embracing
regime forces as liberators. Do they really expect us
to believe that civilians who have been starved - who
have not received a morsel of food since July - have
been barrel-bombed, mortared, pick-off by snipers
and threatened with annihilation are likely to meet the
people responsible for those horrors as their saviours?
Is that how it works? Is that how any of us would feel
or act?

The reason people are fleeing by the thousands is
not because they trust a regime that has killed hundreds
of thousands of its own people and systematically
tortured tens of thousands more Syrians in its gulags,
tagging the bodies of those it kills with serial numbers.
No, it is because they know that there is a good chance
they will be pulverized if they stay where they are.

As we all know, and as others have argued
persuasively here today, Egypt, Spain and New Zealand
have presented a draft resolution that would require
an immediate halt to military action in Aleppo for a
minimum of 10 days. If implemented, this halt would
give the civilians of eastern Aleppo a brief break from
the relentless bombardment. It would allow some aid
to reach people who are surviving by digging through
trash for scraps and by eating weeds. It would allow for
an orderly departure facilitated by the United Nations.
It would also get at least some medicine to doctors who
have been compelled to operate on patients without
anaesthetic, sometimes in the middle of the street
alongside their bombed-out hospitals and clinics. This
draft resolution should be brought to a vote without
delay, and it should be adopted with the Council's
unanimous support. This is a no-brainer. Anyone who
says otherwise does not have the survival of Syrian
civilians at heart.

But let us also be real. While any pause in the
butchery that we are witnessing in eastern Aleppo
would be welcome - and we are in favour of it - a
brief pause to get a bit of food and medicine in before
the savage bombing resumes is not a solution. It is
barely even a Band-Aid. It is a sign in some ways of
just how low our bar has become.

Russia may again use its veto to prevent the Security
Council from offering help to the desperate civilians
in eastern Aleppo, as it did in October. If it does so,
placing its military aims over the survival of Syrian
men, women and children, Member States must swiftly
consider the other tools we can employ at the United
Nations, including through the General Assembly, to
apply more effective pressure.

Let me conclude. Umm Leen is the mother of seven
kids in eastern Aleppo. She has already lost one child
during the war - her 12-year-old boy - who was
killed when his heart was pierced by shrapnel. In the
midst of the siege now, she worries that she will lose
more. Her daughter is beset with an awful cough, but
there is nowhere to take her since the children's hospital
was bombed. But her sickest is her youngest child, a
baby she had during the siege, who is now just three
months old. The baby has been dogged by serious health
problems since he was born prematurely. He is grossly
underweight and routinely has difficulty breathing.
Without access to baby formula, Umm Leen has taken
to feeding him ground-up rice. When parents in Aleppo
have a new baby, Umm Leen said,

"some believe they are making up for the children
they have lost. But for me in these conditions I
think it is a huge mistake. After I gave birth to him,
I felt so sad. Did I give birth to him to see a life
like this?"

This is what it is to be a parent in eastern Aleppo,
where mother and fathers live in perpetual fear that
their children will be taken from them, whether by the
flash of a barrel bomb or the slow, gnawing attrition
of illness - man-made illness 4 and starvation. The
Security Council must not stand by as more and more
children like Umm Leen's hang in the balance. A pause
is the absolute least we can do, but we can and must
do better than a pause. We must continue to work to
end this conflict - and end it not by the devastating
military means that the Al-Assad regime and Russia are
intent on pursuing, which will only prolong and deepen
the suffering we are now witnessing.

