Mr. Skinner-Klee Arenales (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to congratulate
Italy on having assumed the presidency of the Security
Council and, above all, for having convened this open
debate on such an important issue, as well as the clear
concept note (S/2017/972, annex), which you circulated,
Sir. On behalf of my delegation, I also thank the
Secretary-General, the Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Mr. Fedotov, and
Ms. Maria Grazia Giammarinaro, United Nations
Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially
women and children, for their briefings.

Experience has shown beyond any doubt that
armed conflicts and humanitarian crises increase
and exacerbate the risk faced especially by women
and children - but also by men - of falling prey
to traffickers. This vulnerability also leads to the
victimization of refugees, migrants and displaced
persons. Trafficking in human beings is both a cause
and a consequence of instability resulting from
conflicts. The evidence of the link between trafficking
and the activities of terrorist groups and transnational
organized crime is of increasing concern.

More so than any other international body, the
Security Council has witnessed the high cost in human
lives and tragedies caused by conflicts with their
devastating effects. The work carried out by this body
can have an impact concerning the issue at hand. In
fact, a year ago there was a positive impact on the
theme, which has brought us together today, when
the Council adopted resolution 2331 (2016), which
condemns all acts of trafficking, particularly the sale or
trade in persons undertaken by Da'esh. Similarly, that
important resolution focuses on the critical aspect of
recognizing the importance ofcollecting and preserving
evidence relating to such acts so as to ensure that those
responsible be held accountable for them. Moreover, it
represents an important step towards the possibility of
imposing targeted sanctions for individuals and entities
involved in trafficking in persons in areas affected by
armed conflict and in sexual violence in conflict.

We deplore the fact that in conflicts and
humanitarian crises, the majority of victims have
been disproportionately children. Our outrage is
even greater when we consider that there were more
than 24 million new cases worldwide for 2016, as the
Special Rapporteur notes in her report (A/HRC/32/41).
My delegation strongly condemns the fact that at the
regional and national levels, migrant children and
women on the move are more vulnerable to falling victim
to trafficking and other forms of exploitation, including
at the hands of transnational criminal networks, as well
as being exposed to xenophobia, discrimination, abuse
and indiscriminate violence.

We regret that, owing to the absence of established
and safe migratory channels and of permanent
mechanisms aimed at enabling children and their
families to obtain formal migration status or residency
permits, children are forced to seek precarious
alternatives that increase their risk of being sold,
trafficked or exposed to other forms of exploitation,
which in turn entails the sometimes arbitrary detention
of women and children at borders.

Addressing such a complex problem in this
open debate encourages us to continue our work in
ceaselessly confronting the scourge of trafficking in
persons because it degrades humans, and the Council
cannot refrain from acting while knowing that such
abominable, inhumane and atrocious acts are taking
place. We therefore call on the Security Council to make
a concerted effort so that it not become indifferent to
the horrors of the various forms of slavery, which we
are witnessing today to the shame of the entire civilized
international community.

Lastly, my delegation believes that this issue must
continue to be included on the Council's agenda for
further analysis, given the interdependent relationship
linking the pillars of peace and security, development
and human rights. Now is the time to consolidate
efforts and form synergies among the various
international instruments so as to establish concerted
mechanisms that will allow us to consolidate our work
to abolish the detestable practices that trafficking and
slavery engender.

