Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Let me begin by thanking Ambassador Oh Joon for
his briefing on the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). I also wish to
congratulate him on the dedicated and excellent work
that he and his predecessor, Ambassador Kim Sook,
whom we fondly recall, have done these past two
years, together with their team. Their excellent work
has been a faithful reflection of a national and personal
commitment to serving the Committee, and of those
who comply with resolution 1540 (2004), whom we
truly respect.

Argentina embraces two pillars of resolution
1540 (2004) as a State policy. The first is respect for
the sovereign right of States to the development and
peaceful use of advanced technologies; the second is
disarmament and the non-proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction. In that regard, I reaffirm once
again the sovereign right to develop and use sensitive,
dual-use technologies and industries, including the
nuclear, chemical, biological, pharmaceutical, outer
space, nanotechnology and other sectors. In Argentina,
such development and use of technologies is undertaken
through State and private interaction. That is the case
INVAP, which develop and exports nuclear facilities
and equipment and control systems related to nuclear
technology. In addition, on 16 October my country
launched the first geostationary satellite produced by a
country of our region, which has already been placed in
geostationary position 81° West.

At the same time, Argentina is actively participating
in the international community's initiatives to achieve a
world free of weapons of mass destruction of all kinds.
It upholds the principle of absolute prohibition of the
development, possession, acquisition, transfer or use of
such weapons by State and non-State actors alike. In
that vein, Argentina is a party to the legal instruments
that are the pillars of disarmament and non-proliferation
as a reflection of its commitment to disarmament
and non-proliferation. It is also a member of the five
control systems for sensitive exports. I note that the
International Convention for the Suppression of Acts
of Nuclear Terrorism has already been approved by the
Argentine Congress, and we are in process of ratifying
it. Similarly, as previously mentioned, Argentina has
been involved in the Nuclear Security Summit process
since the outset, and has actively participated in the
Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism since
2010.

As noted by the Chair of the Committee, presidential
statement S/PRST/2014/7, adopted on 7 May, highlights
the main areas in which the Committee should focus its
work in the coming years, in particular with regard to the
comprehensive review of the status of implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) to be undertaken by the end of
2016, and the goal of achieving its full implementation
by 2021. The statement also recognizes that many
Member States still need assistance in implementing
the resolution, which requires skilled human resources,
infrastructure, equipment, and the creation of a culture
of security.
Argentina recognizes the effective contribution
of international cooperation, given that the only
way to prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction to non-State actors is through a shared
effort and an equal level of implementation by all States.
In that regard, I recall that Argentina is developing
cooperation activities with countries in our region and
other interested countries in terms of training in the
identification of sensitive merchandise, with a focus
on South-South partnership, and is one of the suppliers
registered with the 1540 Committee.

On the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the
resolution, we believe it necessary to reaffirm that the
significant progress that the international community
has made in physical protection, export control and the
suppression of the illicit traffic in dual-use technologies
will have limited international success so long as
stockpiles of weapons of mass destruction continue to
exist.

We reiterate our watchword that we must prevent
weapons of mass destruction from falling into the
wrong hands. Truly, however, we do not know what
the right hands for such weapons would be. Argentina
therefore believes that no country should produce
weapons of mass destruction, and that those that posess
them should eliminate them. To be clear, Argentina is
convinced that the only way to ensure that weapons of
mass destruction do not fall into the wrong hands or
are used in any way is by eliminating them altogether.
Once again, I wish to express my delegation's thanks to
Ambassador Oh Joon and his marvellous team.

