Mr. Malok (South Sudan): Ithankyou, Mr. President,
for this opportunity to address the Security Council
once again on this vitally important issue for my
country. I would also like to thank, Mr. Lacroix, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, and
Mr. Haysom, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for the Sudan and South Sudan, for their kind briefings.

As I reported last month (see S/PV.7950), the
national dialogue has been officially launched and the
Steering Committee sworn in, and they have already
begun their work. The national dialogue is a positive
step in the right direction. The co-Chairs ofthe Steering
Committee have begun their efforts to reach out to the
stakeholders in South Sudan, as well as those outside
the country. The co-Chair of the Steering Committee
is currently leading a delegation to South Africa to
meet with Mr. Riek Machar, while the Deputy co-Chair
is leading another delegation to Khartoum and Addis
Ababa to meet with the other armed groups and political
parties. It is the hope of the Government that all
stakeholders will join the national dialogue initiative.

The national dialogue should not be in any way
seen as a replacement for the peace agreement signed
in 2015, but as a Viable mechanism to resolve the
political problems and end the war, which is causing
death and suffering for the people of South Sudan. The
Government assures the Council and the international
community that it will not interfere in the national
dialogue. The dialogue will be inclusive and its findings
will be respected and adhered to by the Government.

The Government is engaging other armed groups
in the country. In the recent weeks, other armed groups
from Yei River state, Raja, the Luo tribe in Wau state
and in the greater Jonglei have agreed to put down
their weapons and join the national dialogue. There
are also positive initiatives being conducted by His
Excellency President Museveni of Uganda to reunify
the factions of the Sudan People's Liberation Movement
and to encourage them to join the national dialogue.
We reiterate our commitment to the deployment of the
Regional Protection Force. Its deployment will also
address the concerns of those stakeholders who would
feel a sense of insecurity should they return to the
country now.

My delegation would like to emphasize that it is
not the policy of the Government to hinder the work of
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
and the humanitarian actors. UNMISS is in South
Sudan at the invitation of the Government and we have
every intention to support it. Most of the violations
reported are usually at lower levels. We urge UNMISS
to coordinate with the Government by immediately
reporting incidents of impediments as they happen,
so that perpetrators are brought to book. It is in that
light that the President issued a decree that gives strict
instructions for all roadblocks to be removed and for
all field commanders to grant unhindered access to
UNMISS and the humanitarian actors.

Since the President declared the unilateral ceasefire,
there has not been any active and direct confrontation
between the Government and rebel groups. The overall
security situation in the country is relatively calm.
However, the ceasefire still faces challenges as other
stakeholders are yet to declare their own ceasefire. The
Sudan People's Liberation Movement in Opposition
forces allied to Riek Machar resorted to conducting
attacks with the intention to cause instability and to
seek attention from the international community. The
Transitional Government of National Unity strongly
condemns the most recent attack by the former
Vice-President's group on a civilian bus being escorted
from Nimule to Juba.

In order for the unilateral ceasefire to hold, we
call upon the Security Council and the international
community to ask the other stakeholders to respect
the ceasefire so as to allow humanitarian actors to
deliver aid to those areas in need. From the side of the
Government, I wish to assure the Council that it is fully
committed to the unilateral ceasefire. We also call on
the Security Council and the international community
to discourage the moral equivalence approach, which
causes the other stakeholders to take advantage. There is
a need to pinpoint exactly who is in violation and when.

The general amnesty issued by the Government
to those who denounce violence is not intended to
obstruct accountability and justice, but to create an
environment that would allow people to come back and
join the national dialogue. It is the firm belief of the
Government that people should be held accountable for
their actions following due process.

The humanitarian situation in the country continues
to be of great concern. Climate change, which also
affects the region, and falling oil prices have had
adverse effects on the economic situation and prevented
the Government from being able to address the crisis.
The Government is working to put measures in place,
which include collecting non-oil revenues, reducing
expenditures and strengthening the banking and
monetary system. The results of those measures cannot
be seen overnight. We call on our friends and partners
to step in and help the Government avert a crisis.

We recognize our shared objective of bringing
sustainable and lasting peace, security and stability to
our country. The Transitional Government of National
Unity is grateful for the efforts and initiatives being
exerted by the leaders of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, the African Union and all
friends and partners of South Sudan. We thank the
men and women in police and military uniform and
the civilian components of UNMISS, as well as the
humanitarian actors, for their unwavering and tireless
efforts in helping the people of South Sudan

The Transitional Government of National Unity
remains committed to finding peace, stability and
prosperity for South Sudan and to working with
UNMISS and humanitarian actors. At this critical
juncture, when the Transitional Government of National
Unity is seeking to bring about peace, reconciliation
and healing through the national dialogue, we hope
that the Security Council, United Nations and the
international community will positively support those
efforts, instead of the scepticism, negative messages
and threats of sanctions being sent out by some.

