Mr. Martin Prada (European Union) (spoke in French): I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union and its member States. Turkey, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Serbia and Albania, as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.

The European Union and its member States thank
the Chinese presidency of the Security Council for
organizing this debate on strengthening peacekeeping
operations in Africa. Indeed, peacekeeping operations
remain a vital instrument for the promotion of
international peace and security on the African
continent. Peacekeeping remains a crucial tool for
promoting conditions conducive to political solutions.

In this regard, the European Union and its member
States support the Secretary-General's Action for
Peacekeeping initiative launched in March and
subscribe to the Declaration of Shared Commitments on
United Nations Peacekeeping Operations. By engaging
in discussions on the subject of African peacekeeping
operations, we are paving the way for the autonomy
and stability of the continent, which are two essential
preconditions for our collective security.

The issue of operations under Chapter VIII that
are conducted at the regional level warrants our full
attention. In 2015, the conclusions of the Independent
High-level Panel on Peacekeeping Operations (see S/2015/446) emphasized the importance of further
developing the strategic partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union. They also underscored
the need to be able to guarantee, on a case-by-case
basis, the financial resources allocated to operations
mandated by the African Union and authorized by the
Security Council.

The European Union and its member States reiterate
their support for the Joint United Nations-African Union
Framework for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and
Security adopted by the United Nations and the African
Union. We welcome the convening of the high-level
meeting held on the margins of the General Assembly,
which was attended by representatives of 150 countries.
This event demonstrated the desire to reinforce
regional partnerships and to support the capacity
development of the African Union in particular. This
crucial partnership has been strengthened in particular
by resolutions 2320 (2016) and 2378 (2017), which
advocate greater collaboration between the United
Nations and the African Union and the strengthening
of both the African Peace and Security Architecture
and peace support operations mandated by the African
Union Peace and Security Council.

The European Union and its member States
welcome the recognition of African responsibility in
managing the security challenges on their continent.
We are particularly attached to the primacy that African
States have granted to the African Union in this area.
This predominant responsibility of the African Union
must be valued, recognized and respected more than
ever. In addition, the growing participation of African
countries in peace operations on their continent is part
of the larger framework of the Silencing the Guns by
2020 initiative, while participating in the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and the African Union
Agenda 2063 - all initiatives taken and developed by
the African Union.

Africa is changing, as is peacekeeping. The
challenges involved in maintaining and implementing
peace in African theatres of operations are among the
most significant we face. Peace support operations
mandated by the African Union are generally
conducted in degraded security environments, without
the agreement of all actors party to the conflict and in
spaces where the principles that govern peacekeeping
operations deployed by the United Nations are
undermined. In this context, African peacekeepers are
increasingly called upon to act as mediators or follow
lengthy processes of disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and reconciliation.

Moreover, the constant evolution of
threats - especially terrorist threats - implies a
change in the content of mandates and in the way
missions are deployed on a daily basis. The control and
monitoring of ceasefire zones are no longer enough.
Troops must enjoy logistical support adapted to such
engagements and the means that will enhance their work.
Furthermore, peacekeeping missions led by the United
Nations are seeing an increase in the participation of
African contingents. All these constraints reinforce
the need for troops who are equipped, trained and
prepared for these purposes. It is also imperative that
they commit themselves to respecting human rights
and international humanitarian law. Any behaviour that
runs contrary to this would undermine their work and
thereby endanger the desired outcome.

Finally, the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda - the top priority of the strategic
partnership between the European Union and the United
Nations on peace operations and crisis management for
the period 2019-2021 - is fundamental. It also means
actively promoting the full and genuine participation of
women at all levels and positions of responsibility, on
an equal footing, by systematically taking into account
gender issues at all stages of peace processes. That is
the meaning of the work that our three organizations
carry out together.

The African Union Peace and Security Architecture
proposes that security issues be taken into account in
their entirety. The recent revitalization of the Peace
Fund is certainly one of the indispensable tools for
securing the resources needed for crisis management.
The decision to include the European Union and the
United Nations among the members responsible for
ensuring the governance of the Fund is testament to the
richness and mutual trust that nurture relations among
our three institutions.

The support of the European Union and its member
States for the Architecture - in its broader dimension
and in the spirit of the final communique released
following the AU Peace and Security Council meeting
held in November 2017 in Addis Ababa - has been in
effect for more than 15 years. It goes well beyond the
€l billion committed through the African Peace Facility,
both to support African peacekeeping operations
and for the development of Africa's own capabilities,
including the participation of our 28 member States,
bilaterally or through the voluntary contributions of the
United Nations.

Furthermore, the European missions deployed
with the agreement of the United Nations, within the
framework of the European Security and Defence Policy,
provide another form of support with their presence
on the ground, whether autonomous or together with
African or United Nations actors. The cases ofMali and
the Central African Republic are concrete examples of
that closeness and complementarity.

Moreover, the European Union and its member
States are already working on a daily basis to support
African contingents, be they in Somalia with the
African Union Military Observer Mission in Somalia,
in the Lake Chad basin with the Multinational Joint
Task Force against Boko Haram, or with the Joint Force
of the Group ofFive for the Sahel. Given the realities on
the ground, that support adopts new forms and involves
ever more flexible and creative actions. In the same
vein, the European Union and its member States are
preparing for the future. A new financial instrument
with a wider range of possibilities in relation to the
African Peace Facility is being redefined and will be
known as the European Peace Facility. We are also
following with interest the development of other trust
funds and their capabilities.

We hope to continue to make progress, both within
the framework of the relationship established with the
African Union, which was formalized by the signing
of a protocol of understanding on peace, security
and governance, and by harmonizing our political
approaches and initiatives on the ground beginning
with the prevention phase, and in assisting each other's
actions to support governance within the multilateral
framework of the United Nations.

The European Union and its member States insist on
the need to produce immediate and targeted responses
in anticipation of crises. Prevention and mediation
have a real added value in that respect, especially
when it comes to rectifying governance gaps. We
should collectively learn from the crises endured and
responses undertaken, whether in a United Nations or
African context. In the Great Lakes region, for example,
we need to collectively analyse the value added by
certain subregional organizations, operating within
a regional framework and under the political control
of the African Union Peace and Security Council,
by assessing their capacity to anticipate appropriate
economic or political responses, particularly in terms
of governance, where appropriate.

That is the spirit of partnership enshrined in the
communique' released following the trilateral meeting
held in September on the margins of the General
Assembly. On that occasion, the senior leaders of our
three organizations recognized the important role of
peacekeeping operations that are mandated or authorized
by the African Union, and confirmed the resolve of
the three organizations to strengthen collaboration,
coordination and planning between their respective
missions and operations, in a spirit of complementarity.
At the same time, they expressed their wish to continue
thinking about ensuring predictable, sustainable and
flexible financing for those operations. We hope that
today's debate will make it possible to capitalize on
what has already been accomplished and contribute to
the improvement of peacekeeping operations in Africa.

Allow me to conclude by paying tribute to all of
the Blue Helmets who have sacrificed their lives in the
course of their missions.

