Mr. Granovsky (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The delegation of the Russian Federation
highly commends your work, Madam President, and
sincerely congratulates you on the successful manner in
which you have discharged your responsibilities as
President of the Security Council for this month.

Madam President, you were faced with the very
difficult challenge of ensuring that the work of the
Council proceeded smoothly during a number of very
serious international events, which coincided with
ministerial week in the General Assembly. It is the
opinion of my delegation that you discharged the duties
entrusted to you with a high degree of professionalism
and fully achieved the goals set by Jamaica at the
beginning of its presidency.

We also commend the manner in which Security
Council made use of the presence in the General
Assembly of many foreign ministers and other
members of Government of various States. Suffice it to
mention the meeting of the Security Council at the
foreign minister level on the question of combating
terrorism; the participation by the foreign ministers of
many countries in the Council's meeting on
Afghanistan; the Council's meeting, with the
participation of members of the Political Committee for
the implementation of the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement, on the Democratic Republic of the Congo;
and the discussion of the situation in Burundi, with the
participation of members of the Government of
countries of the region.

We believe that this practice is extremely useful.
We deem it very important that in November, both in
the formal meetings and in the consultations of the
Security Council, top priority matters were touched on
that have a direct relationship to the main task of the
Council - the maintenance of international peace and
security. We take note in this connection of the regular
discussions of the situation in Afghanistan and in a
number of African States.

The meeting with President Nelson Mandela, at
which we discussed the situation in Burundi, was very
useful. We had a very open and very specific talk
between members of the Security Council and the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Ethiopia and Eritrea.
The Council also reacted in a timely manner to the
Kosovo elections and adopted an important resolution
that extended the humanitarian programme in Iraq.

Madam President, I am familiar with your
particular commitment to the question of protecting
civilians in conflict situations - particularly women
and children a and we were not disappointed by the
formal meetings of the Security Council held on these
questions. They once again made it possible for us to
consider those aspects of this very difficult set of
problems that fall within the purview of the Security
Council.

On the whole, the work of the Council in
November was purposeful in nature and geared towards
the attainment of practical results. A large number of
practical decisions were taken, and we were able to
consider the items on our agenda in a consistent and
thorough manner.

