Ms. Rodriguez Abascal (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I should like to endorse the statement that
will be made by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

Since the last quarterly open debate (see S/PV.8517),
far from taking steps to immediately and completely
end the illegal Israeli occupation of the Palestinian
territory, greater impetus has been given to the
expansion of settlements, which is troubling. Punitive
demolitions, seizures of Palestinian structures by the
Israeli authorities, the forced displacement of hundreds
ofPalestinian civilians and the increase in violence have
resulted in the continuing deterioration of the situation
on the ground. We condemn in the strongest terms the
Israeli occupation of the Palestinian territory, all illegal
and colonizing policies, practices and measures, as well
as the indiscriminate and disproportionate use of force
against Palestinian civilians in the occupied territories,
including East Jerusalem and the Gaza Strip, in
flagrant Violation of the Charter of the United Nations
and international humanitarian law.

In the light of those events, we once again call
on the Security Council to fulfil the responsibility
granted by the United Nations Charter to maintain
international peace and security. The Council must
demand the immediate end of the occupation of the
Palestinian territories and the aggressive policies and
colonizing practices. It must also demand compliance
with its resolutions on the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question, in particular
resolution 2334 (2016).

The complicit silence ofthe Council is unacceptable.
The Council has not even condemned the escalation of
violence or the tragic events that have been taking place
in the Gaza Strip since 30 March 2018, owing once
again to the repeated obstruction of the delegation of
the United States.

We express deep concern about Israel's decision not
to renew the mandate of the Temporary International
Presence in Hebron, in compliance with the relevant
Council resolutions, the Oslo II Accords and
international law, as well as the freezing of the revenue
of the Palestinian Authority.

We reaffirm our unstinting support for a
comprehensive, fair and lasting solution to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict that allows the Palestinian people
to exercise the right to self-determination and to have
an independent and sovereign State based on the pre-
1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, as well
as the right of return of refugees.

We express to the Palestinian Government and
people our unwavering solidarity and support for
Palestine's entry as a full member of the United Nations.
We reject the unilateral action of the United States
Government to recognize the city of Jerusalem as the
capital of Israel; the withdrawal of financial support
to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East; and all unilateral
measures and attempts to undermine the two-State
solution, which is the only Viable and realistic solution
to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

We also reject the so-called pact of the century,
drawn up by the current United States Government,
which ignores both the creation of a Palestinian State
and the two-State solution, which has had the historical
backing of the United Nations, the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries, the League of Arab States,
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and other
international actors.

We reiterate our strongest condemnation of the
decision of the United States Government to recognize
the occupied Golan as the territory of Israel, which
constitutes a serious and flagrant violation of the
Charter of the United Nations, international law and
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council, in
particular resolution 497 (1981). That latest manoeuvre
from Washington, which violates the legitimate interests
of the Syrian people and the Arab and Islamic nations,
will have a serious impact on stability and security in
the Middle East and will further increase tensions in
this volatile region. We will continue to support the
demand of the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
to recover the Golan Heights and we demand once again
the total and unconditional withdrawal of Israel from
the Syrian Golan and all occupied Arab territories.

We reject the fabrication of pretexts and concepts
attempting to legitimize in the Council the unilateral
use of force and aggression against sovereign States. We
demand respect for multilateralism, an end to double
standards, interference in the internal affairs of others,
foreign aggression and support for terrorist groups to
promote instability and conflicts in the Middle East.

