Mr. Seger (spoke in French): Please pardon,
Mr. President, the slight delay in my arrival. The Swiss
desire for punctuality stands in contrast to the slowness
for which we are sometimes known. This reminds me
of what Albert Einstein once said about dying. He said
that, on that day, he would like to return to
Switzerland, as everything there happened 10 years
after everywhere else. But we are not here to talk about
Switzerland or Albert Einstein, but instead of Burundi.

As Karin Landgren has just mentioned, the most
important development on Burundi since the Council's
last meeting (see S/PV.6439) on this issue at which I
participated was, without a doubt, the development of
the final document containing the conclusions of the
fourth biannual review of the implementation of the
Strategic Framework for Peacebuilding in Burundi. As
the Security Council is aware, that document was
adopted on 21 April. This is essentially the last
document of its kind. Henceforth, we will try to
combine the peacebuilding strategy with the strategy to
combat poverty, illustrating what I said during the last
11-34143
meeting, namely, that there can be no peace without
development or development without peace. I will
shortly return to the new strategic framework for
combating poverty that is being developed.

Allow me very briefly now to refer to the
document we adopted in April. It focuses on two
tracks, namely, the political-institutional and the socio-
economic. Those two tracks, which include the four
priorities we in the Peacebuilding Commission have
identified in close coordination with the Government
of Burundi, will henceforth serve to inform the
methodology and priorities of the Commission. We
have deliberately limited ourselves to certain important
strategic elements; the Peacebuilding Commission
cannot do everything. As the Council is aware, our role
is to support the United Nations and its Integrated
Office in Burundi, which is very ably led by Karin
Landgren. We are a supporting political body, not an
operational one.

With regard to those priorities, we focus on two
elements when it comes to the political-institutional
track, namely, consolidating a culture of democracy
and dialogue - as my colleague Karin Landgren has
mentioned - and, secondly, good governance, human
rights and the rule of law. Dialogue and democracy, as
we have heard on numerous occasions, are indeed
major challenges that we must address jointly with the
Government of Burundi, whom the Commission would
like to help to establish an environment and space
wherein all the parties, whether represented in the
Parliament or not, can find a way to discuss their
problems and issues in a peaceful, non-violent and
civilized manner. I think we are on the right track, but
there is still work to be done. With regard to good
governance, human rights and the rule of law, there are
three issues we want to address, that is, corruption,
human rights themselves and transitional justice.

On the socio-economic front, as Ms. Landgren
also has mentioned, the greatest challenges facing us
when it comes to combating poverty is how to integrate
the most vulnerable and those most affected by the
conflict into economic life so that they can have the
means to live dignified and productive lives. We must
also try to ensure that there is no temptation to return
to violence by providing a logical viable alternative.
We are currently awaiting the finalization of the
strategic framework being drawn up by the
Government of Burundi in order to know exactly how
the Peacebuilding Commission can assist the country.

ll-34l43
The second aspect of that track is regional
integration, especially within the East African
Community. When I visited the region and the country
in February, I also visited Arusha and met with the
Secretary-General of the Community. I personally
believe that investing in regional integration, and
especially in the East African Community, is to invest
in the future of Burundi. Personally, I was very
impressed by the work and momentum being
developed by the East African Community.

I will make a few detailed remarks on the various
aspects I have just mentioned. With regard to the
poverty reduction strategy paper, as I just said,
progress is being made, and we encourage the
Government and its partners not only to focus on
integrating these issues in their documents but also to
stress their importance by giving them a formal place
in the Partners Coordination Group, which is itself very
important. The Burundi configuration will continue to
actively support the Government in its efforts to
integrate peacebuilding aspects in its poverty reduction
strategy paper towards the shared goal of concluding a
single framework that will enjoy the committed
support of the international community to Burundi and
reflect peacebuilding considerations.

In the document adopted in April, which I
mentioned earlier, we defined the various commitments
of actors. In the area of poverty reduction, the
Commission is seeking to organize a donors conference
in autumn 2011. Perhaps here I can make an appeal to
all members of the Security Council and to the
international community as a whole to continue to
support Burundi. I believe the country needs and has a
right to what I would call a peace dividend. Without
socio-economic support for political efforts, we will
not succeed. I believe that this aspect cannot be
overemphasized.

Financial and economic support for Burundi is
very important. The Commission itself, as members
know, does not have resources. We do not have our
own funds. The only thing we can do is to support and
assist the country in its efforts to attain funds from
bilateral and multilateral donors.

I will be very brief in my remarks on the other
matters, as Karin Landgren has already covered the
most important aspects. With regard to the question of
dialogue, our aim should be, as I said, to establish a
framework that will allow all parties to express
themselves openly and freely, and to create conditions
for political actors currently abroad to return to the
country. There has been some progress in this area,
with, for example, the draft law on political parties and
a communique from the opposition reflecting some
forward movement, but unfortunately I believe that the
current draft does not yet adequately satisfy the views
and needs of the extra-parliamentary opposition.

With regard to transitional justice, the
Government recently held meetings in Geneva with the
High Commissioner for Human Rights. I believe the
processes are in place. My suggestion would be to
approach these topics with a clear vision of the
coherence needed to achieve peacebuilding and unity. I
believe that the way we address the past is also a way
to move into the present and the future. I believe it
would be useful and important to do this with a clear
vision that will strengthen unity in the country and not
create new divisions. Things are undoubtedly on the
right track, and we stand ready to support the country
in these efforts.

With regard to human rights, I believe
Ms. Landgren also covered the main points. I fully
confirm what she has just said. I believe that the
establishment of an independent national human rights
commission is important and hope that it will soon be
fully operational. We also welcome, as Ms. Landgren
noted, the recent visit of the independent expert on the
human rights situation in Burundi. That having been
said, we must continue to pay close attention to the
situation regarding investigations into torture and
extrajudicial killings. Here, we must encourage the
country to redouble its efforts to investigate such cases.

In conclusion, what are the next steps? We have
established a steering group within the Peacebuilding
Commission composed of a limited number of
countries and open to all members of the Commission.
I would like to thank several members of the Council
present today, and the permanent members in
particular, for their participation in the steering group.
That is very encouraging. We will closely monitor the
operational phase, which has now begun, fully aware
of the fact that the Peacebuilding Commission is not an
operational body and that the work on the ground is
being done primarily by the United Nations Office in
Burundi and other United Nations entities. But we
thought it would be valuable to establish a body that
could monitor developments in Burundi more closely
and continuously. All of this was done in light of our
common goal - and here again I come back to what
Ms. Landgren said - to ensure that, as the
Commission's work comes to an end, Burundi will be
able to live without the Commission in the near future.
Again, Burundi's integration into regional bodies is of
great importance in my View.

I would like to reaffirm our full support to the
Security Council, to Ms. Langren and to the
Government of Burundi. We are here to support them
and will continue to do so with the political and other
resources at our disposal. I hope that we will see these
efforts bear fruit in the near future.

