Mr. Ahmed (Bangladesh): Let me begin by
extending the warmest welcome to Mrs. Sadako Ogata,
who is in our midst, and paying a special tribute to her
for her outstanding contribution to the cause of the
protection of refugees worldwide. Over the past decade
Mrs. Ogata has led the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) with
exemplary commitment and determination. The global
community is indeed indebted to you, Mrs. Ogata.

Bangladesh believes that the root causes of
conflict need to be addressed in order to arrive at a
permanent solution to the refugee problems that result
from conflicts and that also contribute to the
continuation and aggravation of conflict situations. We
underline the need for taking into full account the
special needs of refugee women, children, the elderly
and the disabled. These groups constitute the
overwhelming majority of those who are innocent
victims of conflicts.

Bangladesh has always underscored the need for
a balanced and shared response in dealing with global
refugee situations. It is also important that equal
attention be paid to all refugee situations and that the
international response not be guided solely by the
media spotlight.

My delegation strongly believes in reaching an
international consensus on the need for burden-sharing
with countries hosting refugee populations. It is a fact
that developing countries continue to bear a lopsided
share of global refugee caseloads. Often the countries
hosting refugees are among the poorest. Many of them
are in the process of post-conflict rebuilding. It is
critical, therefore, that burden-sharing not be limited
solely to the provision of direct assistance to refugees.
It must also include assistance for host countries in
dealing with the negative impacts of refugee inflows on
the infrastructure, ecology and overall economy.

We would like to emphasize particularly that
protracted refugee situations should not be relegated to
the back burner. Such situations should continue to
receive the attention of the international community,
and UNHCR should remain fully engaged in dealing
with those situations as well.

Given the complex nature of humanitarian
situations, effective and coherent partnerships between
UNHCR and the relevant United Nations agencies,
intergovernmental organizations and civil society -
including non-governmental organizations - are
relevant to an integrated approach to achieving lasting
solutions. UNHCR, an agency that is largely dependent
of voluntary contributions, needs to be strengthened
with consistent and adequate financial flows so it can
meet the demands placed on it.

Finally, we would like to stress the need for
putting in place necessary safeguards to strengthen the
security and safety of humanitarian workers. The
recent incidents in Guinea and East Timor do not augur
well for our efforts to strengthen measures to accord
such protection. The Council is urged to address its
thoughts further on the matter.

