Mr. Jallow: Mr. President, may I thank you and
members of the Council for the honour you have
bestowed on me and on my colleagues in inviting us to
brief you on the state of our work.
When I last addressed the Security Council, in
October 2003 (S/PV.4838), I undertook to carry out a
review of the case load of the Tribunal with a View to
identifying what should be concentrated on and what,
in my View, could be accomplished within the time
frames set by the completion strategy. I also undertook
to consider what measures were to be applied to the
rest of the workload.

The Council now has before it a revised version
of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR) completion strategy with the assessment
required under Security Council resolution 1534 (2004)
(S/2004/341). That revised strategy and assessment is
an outcome of the review undertaken by the Office of
the Prosecutor and consultations among all organs of
the Tribunal.

I wish to report that the Office of the Prosecutor
has reviewed the caseload and has identified which
cases it considers can and should be proceeded with at
the Tribunal and which should be transferred to
national jurisdictions. We have reviewed and identified
strategies within the Office whose implementation, we
believe, will enhance our capacity to respond more
effectively to the challenge of completion. We have
also adopted a completion strategy action plan setting
out the critical measures that need to be taken
internally at the ICTR, in particular in the Office of the
Prosecutor, in order to implement the completion
strategy and the time frames for doing so. A
monitoring mechanism has also been put in place to
oversee the implementation of the action plan. The
strategy is not a static one. It will continue to be
reviewed and adjusted in the light of new and changing
circumstances. It is necessary that the strategy retain
some flexibility in that respect.

In our review we were guided by the Security
Council's call to concentrate on those persons holding
leadership positions: "the most senior leaders
suspected of being most responsible for crimes within
the jurisdiction of the Tribunal" (resolution 1534 (2004), para. 5). In this context, we have been guided
by a number of factors, which have been set out in the
completion strategy report before the Council.
President Mose has briefed the Council on the cases
that have been completed at the Tribunal.

With regard to the remaining 21 detainees
currently on trial at the ICTR, the prosecution expects
to close its case in the trial of 10 of them by the end of
2004: those accused in the Butare case and the
Military I case. We have just finished the prosecution
phase in the case of one accused and have completed
trial in two other cases. Judgement has been delivered
in one of them, and judgement is expected in respect of
the second. Early next year, we hope to be able to close
the prosecution's case in relation to at least four other
accused persons. The prosecution is ready to
commence the trials of six other accused this year.

Of the 16 accused persons remaining in detention,
we propose to transfer at least five of them to Rwanda
for trial within national jurisdiction, subject to the
provision of satisfactory arrangements and assurances.
We will then make trial-ready the cases of the
remaining detainees by the middle of 2005. So, by the
middle of 2005, the cases of all those who are currently
in detention will have commenced. Some will have
been transferred, the rest will be on trial.

With regard to transfers, we propose to transfer to
national jurisdictions the cases of at least four of the
indicted fugitives who continue to elude us.

On the basis of the criteria of our review, to
which I referred earlier, we have also reduced the
number of targets for investigation from the original 26
to 16. Investigations of those 16 targets will be
concluded by the end of the year.

With regard to the allegations against members of
the Rwandan Patriotic Front, my Office is now
evaluating the evidence that has been gathered so far
with a View to determining whether there is a sufficient
basis for prosecution, against whom and for what
offences.

I have also been engaged in discussions with the
Rwandan Government on this matter, specifically with
respect to what options are available for dealing with
any cases that may arise from any such evaluation. We
do so in the context of the concurrent jurisdiction
enjoyed by the Tribunal and Rwanda with respect to
those cases, while having due regard, of course, for the
primacy of the Tribunal, which is guaranteed by the
Statute of our court. I shall be reporting to the Council
on progress in that respect.

I expect that the number of accused to be tried by
the Tribunal, excluding those already in detention - in
other words our additional workload from now
onwards - will be a maximum of 29 persons. It may
well be - and I expect it will be - below that figure,
making allowances for difficulties in apprehension, the
death of some accused, and so on. As well, the
outcome will largely depend on the state of the
evidence after the conclusion of investigations and our
success in apprehending those at large.
There is another category of suspects who are at
large and not yet indicted or apprehended but whose
cases are under investigation and whom we propose to
transfer to national jurisdictions. That category has
only marginally increased, from 40 to 41 cases. Even
here, it is possible that in those cases in which the
evidence establishes a prima facie case by the end of
this year, we may simultaneously seek confirmation of
an indictment, have the Chambers issue an arrest
warrant and obtain an order for transfer of the file to a
national jurisdiction. Thus, when the suspect is
eventually apprehended, he can stand trial in the
national jurisdiction named in the transfer order.

Much work remains to be done. The number of
accused who remain to be prosecuted at the Tribunal
between now and the end of 2008 - which is the
deadline for the conclusion of trials at first instance -
is actually greater than the number of accused whose
cases have been disposed of since the inception of the
Tribunal.

Meeting the challenge requires new strategies. In
the Office of the Prosecutor and, generally, within the
Tribunal, we took time off to collectively review our
working methods and consider what new measures
need to be applied to deal with this workload.
Clarifying the target and determining our workload -
in other words, determining our completion strategy -
was the first of two critical issues to be addressed. The
second issue - the measures required to successfully
implement that strategy - also needed to be
addressed.

In that context, we have reviewed all the key
areas of our work. We have reviewed investigations,
indictments, the pre-trial process, the trial process and
the appeals process. We did so with a View to devising
a plan susceptible of action and to fostering teamwork
and collaboration among management, investigators,
the evidence and trial sections and other organs of the
Tribunal. We have looked for ways to streamline
processes, eliminate duplication, improve coordination
and generally improve our focus and efficiency in the
prosecution of cases.

As a result, our prosecution policy will focus on a
number of issues. First, single accused, rather than
multiple accused trials, will be the norm unless it is
absolutely necessary to do otherwise. Secondly, we
will draft indictments with fewer charges, charges that
can be proved. Thirdly, we will reduce the number of
witnesses, selecting them on the basis of the minimum
number required to prove the charges. Fourthly, we
will ensure that, upon confirmation of an indictment,
the Office of the Prosecutor is ready to proceed with
the case. As soon as we submit an indictment and have
it confirmed, we will be ready to proceed with the case
in order to avoid delay. We will also focus on improved
coordination among trial teams and improved support
to those teams with respect to witness management,
et cetera. We will continue to be open to plea
bargaining with accused persons. Finally, we will strive
to improve the capacity of the Office of the Prosecutor
for storage, retrieval, analysis, dissemination and use
of evidence. We are convinced that all those measures
will help us to meet the challenge of dealing
successfully with the existing and anticipated
workloads.

A number of items in the action plan require
specific reference. As required by the Council, we
expect to close investigations on new indictments by
the end of 2004. By the end of October 2005, it is
proposed that we complete the review of the evidence
and the filing and confirmation of any new
indictments, in accordance with the new indictment
policy. As I have already indicated, we plan to prepare
for trial the remaining detainees - with the exception
of those whose cases are to be transferred to national
jurisdictions for prosecution - by mid-2005.

The transfer of cases is an important component
of the completion strategy, and we remain firmly
committed to it. We plan to commence immediately the
preparation of those files that are scheduled for transfer
or transmission, and we hope to conclude that process
by the middle of 2005. An ad hoc committee on
transfer of cases, which had been set up internally at
the Tribunal to advise us on the strategy and conditions
for the transfer of cases, submitted its report and
recommendations in April and May 2004. As a follow-
up, a draft agreement on transfer of cases is now being
prepared by the Office of the Prosecutor as a basis for
negotiations with interested countries. A questionnaire
prepared by the committee has also been circulated to a
number of countries.

It is our intention that the second half of this year
should see discussions with Rwanda and with other
countries for the conclusion of agreements on the
transfer of cases. So far, we have identified Rwanda
and seven other national jurisdictions as potential
recipients of cases, subject to further negotiations with
the authorities concerned. In the case of Rwanda, a
mission fielded this year by the Registrar recently
concluded an inspection of prison facilities in that
country as a prelude to considering the negotiation and
conclusion of a prisoner transfer agreement. Accused
persons who are transferred to Rwanda for trial will,
upon conviction, have to serve their sentences in that
country.

At its last plenary meeting in Arusha, in April
2004, the Tribunal amended its rules of procedure in
order to empower it to transfer to a national
jurisdiction for trial an indictee who was not in its
custody. Previously, it could transfer only indictees
who were in its custody, thus leaving indictees at large
both unapprehended and not subject to transfer. The
rule change means, in effect, that the Tribunal cannot
make transfer orders with respect to fugitives that can
be implemented, even when the fugitive is
apprehended after the closure of the Tribunal.
Additionally, the rule change increases the range of
countries to which transfer can be effected to include
any country that is willing and able to accept and
prosecute the accused. That is so even if such a country
is neither the arresting State nor the State in which the
offence was committed.

In some instances, the prospects for transfer are
dependent on the capacity of the recipient State -
particularly the capacity of its judiciary. While we
remain optimistic about concluding a transfer
agreement with Rwanda and with other countries, in
the case of Rwanda there is a need to expeditiously
address resource issues to enhance the national judicial
capacity to deal with these cases. It is urgent that we
complete and equip a courtroom for the purpose of
holding trials in Kigali, Rwanda. At the Office of the

Prosecutor, we have proposed - as a way of
enhancing the capacity of the prosecuting authority in
Rwanda - accepting a number of such Rwandan

officials for attachment and training in our Office, in
anticipation of transfers to that jurisdiction. There may
well be other needs. In accordance with the relevant
resolutions of the Council, the international community
should provide the necessary resource support to
countries that agree to take cases from the ICTR. Many
of them, of course, will not conclude agreements to
take cases unless they receive assurances as to the
availability of such support.

Fifteen of the indicted fugitives remain at large.
Many of them are located in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of Congo, and efforts to
apprehend and transfer them to the seat of the Tribunal
have had little success so far. The likes of Felicien
Kabuga and others continue to elude our efforts, and
since October 2003 only two fugitives have been
arrested. With the cooperation of the Dutch authorities,
Ephrem Setako - who is indicted on charges of
genocide - was arrested in the Netherlands in
February 2004, and he is now facing judicial
proceedings there for his transfer to the Tribunal. In
May 2004, Yusuf Munyakazi - also indicted on
charges of genocide, as well as crimes against
humanity - was arrested in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo with the cooperation of the authorities,
the Government of the United States of America, the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) and the
ICTR's tracking team. He has already been transferred
to the Tribunal, where he has made his initial
appearance.

Those two successes are an indication of the
potential - and indeed the necessity - for
international support and cooperation and of the
positive results they can bring to the international
criminal justice system. We owe the authorities
concerned a debt of gratitude. We will continue to be
relentless in our pursuit of the accused persons,
wherever they may be, with the intention of their
apprehension and their transfer to the Tribunal or to a
national jurisdiction for prosecution. To let them
escape would be to encourage impunity to prevail;
neither the Tribunal nor the international community
can afford to do so. To that end, it is crucial that the
Tribunal be able to retain an effective and adequately
resourced tracking unit, even beyond 2004. The unit is
responsible for gathering intelligence on the
whereabouts and activities of those fugitives and on
their precise locations, and for providing support to
national law-enforcement authorities to effect their
arrests.

Over and above that, the Tribunal requires the
collaboration of the States in which the fugitives are
located in order to effect their apprehension. Without
such cooperation, the tracking programme will be at
great risk. I propose to hold consultations later in the
year with a number of Governments within whose
territories some of the fugitives are residing, according
to our indications.

As a consequence of the creation of a separate
Office of Prosecutor for the ICTR by the Security
Council in 2003, we have had to develop our own
Appeals Unit, since the one that had previously served
the two Tribunals has been split. The two Tribunals,
however, continue to share a common Appeals
Chamber. Of the 12 positions provided for the Appeals
Unit of the Office of the Prosecutor, six have been
filled so far, with the recruitment of a Senior Appeals
Counsel as head of the Unit. The recruitment of six
others is at an advanced stage.

However, the workload of the Unit - and
necessarily of the Appeals Chamber itself - will be
building up significantly as more cases come down the
line for trial or are concluded at trial. Hence, the
capacity of the Appeals Unit of the Office of the
Prosecutor will need to be enhanced beyond the current
level to deal effectively with that increased workload.
We expect to do so through a process of staff
redeployment, initially from the Investigation Section
in 2005 and subsequently from the Prosecution Section
as the number of cases on trial begins to decline,
perhaps by 2006.

With the anticipated increase in the number of
accused standing trial in the years ahead, it is
imperative that the capacity of the Office of the
Prosecutor - particularly with regard to recruiting
prosecuting staff - be improved significantly. Our
efforts have been concentrating on the recruitment of
staff with demonstrated practical experience in
criminal prosecution. The policy of recruitment is
being aggressively implemented, with many of the
posts in the immediate Office of the Prosecutor and in
the Prosecution Section having been filled. Many
others, however, remain to be recruited.

Although investigations into new indictments are
to be completed by the end of 2004 - and we are
committed to that deadline - it is necessary for me to
state that the Tribunal will require investigators in
ever-declining numbers until the conclusion of appeals
in 2010. The Investigation Section is not expected to
close down at the end of 2004; it was in any case
already under-resourced, with many vacancies in its
establishment. Already, the Section has been hit by a
number of departures of some experienced staff: in
anticipation of the completion deadlines, they have
departed to other opportunities which are perceived to
offer greater security.

From 2005, the Section will be concentrating on
non-conventional investigations. The preparation of
new cases for trial from 2005 onwards will require
investigative support in the selection and proofing of
witnesses, to be undertaken in conjunction with the
trial teams; trials that are in progress require
investigative support in response to unforeseeable
courtroom demands and the need to investigate specific
defences, such as alibis, which are raised by the
defence or to ascertain the antecedents of defence
witnesses, the particulars of whom are disclosed only
at the close of the case for the prosecution;
circumstances may require the production of or a
response to fresh evidence introduced at the appeal
stage; et cetera: all those factors confirm that some
level of investigative support of varying degrees will
need to be retained at the Tribunal until its closure in
2010.

The issue of resources - particularly manpower
and equipment - is crucial to a successful and proper
completion of our mandate. Although the General
Assembly has urged that the Tribunals should be
provided with the resources necessary to conclude their
mandates effectively within the completion strategy
time frame, there has been a freeze on new recruitment,
with approval being sought on a case-by-case basis, as
a result of delays in the payment of contributions by
Member States. It goes without saying that trials
cannot proceed optimally unless there is adequate
manpower to carry out the core activity of the
Tribunal: the prosecution of cases. That includes
prosecuting attorneys, appeals attorneys and staff in the
immediate Office of the Prosecutor. It is necessary for
the progress of the trials that there be no interruption in
the recruitment of such staff in the Office of the
Prosecutor. Budgetary constraints are now also
impeding the deployment of missions of trial attorneys
and investigators to support the ongoing trials and to
prepare new cases.

All our plans and benchmarks are premised on
having in place a full complement of prosecuting staff
in the Office of the Prosecutor with adequate budgetary
support to cover activities such as the fielding of
missions, the hiring of consultants and experts,
et cetera. In the absence of such capacity and support,
the attainment of the benchmarks of the completion
strategy will be in great jeopardy.

The discharge of the Tribunal's mandate depends
to a large extent on the level of international
cooperation it receives. The state and level of
cooperation with Rwanda generally, and with particular
reference to the availability of witnesses and other
evidence, continues to be satisfactory. I have been
going frequently to Rwanda for consultations with
Government officials and with non-governmental
organizations, such as victims and survivors
associations, and to oversee the Investigations Division
in Kigali. The Deputy Prosecutor and some other
senior prosecuting staff have similarly been Visiting the
office in Kigali. Also, a mechanism has been put in
place for liaison between the Office of the Prosecutor
and the Government of Rwanda in relation to all
requests for cooperation and assistance. It seems to be
working fairly well.

Beyond that, however, we will continue to require
assistance in respect of the tracking and apprehension
of suspects and accused persons, in the acceptance by
States of cases for prosecution within their national
jurisdictions and in the relocation and protection of
witnesses who face grave security risks as a result of
their collaboration with the Tribunal. Above all, we
require support in the provision by States of the
tools - that is, the resources, both human and
material - that are so necessary for the Tribunal to
finish its task properly and on time.

