Mr. Heinbecker (Canada) (spoke in French): I
welcome the opportunity to speak in this debate and to
endorse Security Council resolutions 1397 (2002) and
1402 (2002). Those instruments offer a way out of the
ever-worsening spiral of violence in the Middle East.
That spiral of violence is a threat to peace and stability
that goes well beyond the confines of the current
fighting, and it is having disastrous consequences for
people on both sides.

(spoke in English)

People's hopes, their dignity and their lives are
being progressively violated, denied, diminished and
destroyed. Canada calls on both parties to step back
from the brink. We call on the Council to help them
bring this catastrophe to an end.

To the Palestinians, we say that the use of suicide
bombers against innocents is intolerable, a perversion
of all religious faiths, an offence against humanity and
a tactic that is never acceptable, including in resistance
to occupation. Employing children as instruments of
war to target the innocent is a moral outrage, and it
must stop. Chairman Arafat and those in positions of
authority who fail to prevent such practices bear the
gravest personal and political responsibility. The world
sees condemnations after the fact for the empty
gestures they are.

To Israel, we say that Canada fully recognizes
Israel's right to exist within secure and recognized
borders and its right to self-defence against terrorist
acts. We nonetheless consider that continuing Israeli
incursions into Palestinian towns and cities feed the
spiral of violence. The physical destruction of civilian
infrastructure and the mounting toll of killed and
injured is putting peace and normal life progressively
further out of reach for ordinary people on both sides.
Impeding humanitarian access only adds to the
mounting bitterness. Canada calls for the prompt
withdrawal of Israeli troops from Ramallah and other
Palestinian-controlled areas, as called for by Security
Council resolution 1402 (2002).
Ongoing Israeli settlement construction
undermines any hope for re-establishing a peace
process and erodes trust. We call on Israel to end this
destabilizing action. In the interest of peace, it must
stop.

For the Israelis and for the Palestinians, neither
the status quo ante nor the status quo is acceptable. It
appears, nevertheless, that the Palestinians and the
Israelis are unable to end this conflict and to develop a
new modus Vivendi on their own. There is already
disturbing evidence that the violence is metastasizing
well beyond Israel and the West Bank and Gaza. The
international community must help the parties find an
exit strategy from the spiral of violence and a political
road map to peace. Grievances are deepening and will
poison relations for generations to come.

The tools are already in hand; they must be
applied without delay. The Tenet plan, the Mitchell
report and the Arab League's endorsement of Crown
Prince Abdullah's initiative together provide elements
of such a road map back from the abyss. The
international community must do all in its power to
bring the parties back to the negotiating table they left
14 months ago and to resume the quest for a political
solution.

We all know what the outcome must be.

How many innocent people must die or be
maimed physically and psychologically before reason
again prevails?

Let us all take to heart, though, the Secretary-
General's words spoken in Beirut: "In the desperate
search for peace, we should never lose hope" (Press release SG/T/2318).

Peace in the Middle East is everyone's business.
Let the members of the Council commit themselves to
work indefatigably to stop the spiral of violence. Let us
all, in our own ways, commit ourselves to supporting
the parties in decisively stemming the bloodshed and
definitively stilling this conflict.

