Mr. Denktas (Turkey): At the outset, I would like
to thank Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura for his
briefing. As his tenure comes to an end, I wish to express
our deep appreciation for his tireless and remarkable
efforts, as well as those ofhis team, towards achieving a
political solution to the crisis in Syria. We look forward
to working with his successor, Ambassador Pedersen,
in the period ahead.

Since the outbreak of the Syrian conflict, Turkey
has maintained that there can be no military solution
and that the only way to end the conflict is through a
United Nations-mediated political process in line with
the resolution 2254 (2015). In all our consultations with
the other Astana guarantors and the United Nations, we
have advocated the revitalization of the Geneva process
through the establishment of a credible, balanced,
inclusive and legitimate constitutional committee.
The Astana format is not an alternative to the Geneva
process but an effort to complement it. Through the
Astana process, Turkey, Russia and Iran built solid
cooperation on common denominators.

Looking back, I would say that our constructive
engagement has been a game-changer, yielding
concrete results both on the ground and on the political
track. Since last September, the Astana format has
demonstrated significant achievements. First, the
memorandum on the stabilization of the situation in
the Idlib de-escalation area (see S/2018/852, annex)
ensured relative calm in the province. Secondly, the
pilot project on the mutual release of detainees was
implemented, Last but not least, we reached a critical
stage towards the finalization of the formation of the
constitutional committee.

As explained by Mr. De Mistura and the
Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation,
on 18 December the Foreign Ministers of the Astana
guarantor States met with Mr. De Mistura in Geneva
to share the positive results of their consultations
with the Syrian parties on the constitution of the
committee. The representative of Iran explained some
of the developments. After months of hard work and
intense consultations, we believe that we have made
considerable progress and reached the final stretch in
our efforts to finalize the constitutional committee. The
guarantor States are working closely with the United
Nations to finalize the minor adjustments to the middle
third list, which, for the most part, enjoys the support of
all sides, including the United Nations, and is workable.

Together with the other guarantors, we will step
up our efforts in the days ahead to ensure that the
committee will convene its first meeting in January
2019. We appreciate the efforts and cooperation of
Russia and Iran towards the formation of the committee.
We call on all our partners to support us and the United
Nations as we work on initiating a new chapter in the
political process in Geneva. Our purpose is to bring
the Syrian parties together as soon as possible and to
prepare a suitable basis for negotiations.

In Geneva, the three Foreign Ministers and the
United Nations also discussed the rules of procedure
of the committee and related arrangements. We will
continue to work closely with the United Nations to
ensure the effective functioning of the committee in all
its aspects. A functioning committee will be the key
to achieving the ultimate goal of finding a negotiated
political solution in Syria, in line with resolution 2254
(2015), paving the way for free and fair elections in Syria.
That said, we are of course aware that the formation of
the committee is only the beginning. We therefore call
on the rest of the international community to support
those efforts towards expediting the political process.

In Geneva, we also took stock of our joint efforts
to maintain the ceasefire regime in Idlib. We continue
to work on the implementation of the memorandum that
I mentioned above. There is considerable progress in
the withdrawal of radical groups and heavy weapons
from the demilitarized zone. We are working hard to
ensure the separation of radical groups from civilians
and moderate opposition groups. Despite provocations,
we are determined to ensure that calm prevails in Idlib.

Ultimately, ensuring a stable ceasefire not
only prevents further bloodshed but also creates
an environment conducive to advancing on the
political track.

I listened carefully to the statements of all
representatives in the Chamber, including your
statement, Mr. President, in your national capacity. I
see value in putting on record the following few points.

Our collective efforts to fight terrorism also
contribute to the creation of viable conditions to
that end. Turkey will continue to combat all terrorist
groups, including the Kurdish Workers Party (PKK),
the Democratic Union Party (PYD) and the People's
Protection Units (YPG), which undermine the territorial
integrity of Syria. The ethnic cleansing that they carry
out was well documented by Amnesty International
three years ago. They have been implementing a ban on
teaching in the Arabic language, which is documented in
a recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/1041).

We will not stand idle in the face of any terrorist
threat that targets our national security and Syria's
territorial integrity. The number of incidents of
harassment fire and hostile actions by the PKK/PYD/
YPG has recently increased. That exacerbates the
security threat posed by those terrorists across our
borders. The PKK/PYD/YPG units to the east of the
Euphrates are opening harassment fire on our border
posts. They are digging trenches and tunnels to fortify
their positions. We will never allow the entrenchment
of terrorists along our borders. Protecting our borders
is our sovereign right. Turkey will take the necessary
steps to ensure its border security against the PKK/
PYD/YPG threat as and when it deems necessary.
Turkey will continue its efforts to achieve a viable committee will be a crucial instrument in kick-starting
political solution in Syria that is based on resolution that political process. We therefore call 0" the Security
2254 (2015) and owned and led by the Syrian people Council to put its weight behind the efforts to that end.
under United Nations supervision. The constitutional The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m.
