Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from French):
I thank you, Mr. President, for having taken the initiative
to organize this most timely debate.

I would like to thank Mrs. Ogata for having referred
to Mr. Cochetel at the very outset of her intervention.
Mr. Cochetel, a high-ranking official of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), is also our compatriot and has now been held
hostage for several months. It seems to me that this case
unfortunately illustrates the dangers which the staff of
UNHCR are actually subject to on a daily basis. This does
them honour, but at the same time it emphasizes the
seriousness of the problem of protection for humanitarian
assistance, which is a subject on which many members of
the Council have already spoken.

In that spirit, and bearing in mind situations in which
this problem of protecting humanitarian assistance and the
staff of UNHCR arises or has arisen or will arise, I would
like to recall two specific situations, namely, Kosovo and
the Great Lakes region.

With regard to Kosovo, I would like to ask
Mrs. Ogata whether, from her point of view, the
arrangements which have been contemplated or which are
being implemented for the protection of international staff
who will be active in Kosovo seem appropriate to her; in
other words, can UNHCR comment on the measures
taken to cope with situations such as that which led to
Mr. Cochetel's being taken hostage or that, fresh in our
memory, which took place recently in Bosnia?

That is what I wish to say regarding Kosovo. On the
other subjects, we are convinced that UNHCR will act
effectively to try to facilitate the return of refugees and
their re-establishment under the least awful conditions
possible.

With regard to the Great Lakes region, I also believe
that the problem of protecting humanitarian assistance is
a vital subject. I would like to know Mrs. Ogata's
View - even if only considering history, recent
history - of the fact that the Security Council, after
having planned for the protection of humanitarian
assistance in Kivu in November 1996, finally gave up
trying to assure the deployment of a multinational force.
I know that this is a somewhat political issue, but, in the
light of past experience and the information we
subsequently received, I would like to know whether Mrs.
Ogata believes that this was a good or, as we ourselves
believe, a bad decision on the part of the members of the
Security Council?

At the present stage, I would also like to know -
again with regard to the Great Lakes region and
particularly Kivu - what the High Commissioner's
feelings are regarding the humanitarian situation in the
Kivu area; the extent to which UNHCR believes it can
make its presence known once again in a region which is
clearly experiencing the problems associated with forced
displacement; and in what form and with what possible
protection can UNHCR play its necessary role in this
region of the world?

Other questions arise with regard to other regions
where the problem of protection is perhaps a bit less
pressing, for instance, in areas where there is a great
number of refugees. UNHCR is attempting to cope with
the problem of the survival of those refugees in a most
outstanding manner. However, given the lack of political
settlements, to what extent is the action of UNHCR not

 

in fact an excuse in the absence, or rather the inability of
the Security Council or the members of the international
community to try to settle underlying issues? I am thinking
here of the considerable number of refugees still in
Conakry, Guinea - I believe the figure is 350,000 - and
of those still in Tanzania.
The question is this: with all the practical knowledge
that you and your colleagues have about the problems
which exist in refugee camps and your knowledge of the
wishes and desires of the refugees, are you in a position to
share with the members of the Security Council, as well as
with the leaders of those regions, your concerns, or perhaps
outlines, for a solution to those problems? I am thinking
once again, for example, in terms of the Great Lakes region
and the refugees who are still there and the misgivings they
may still have which prevent them from returning to their
native lands. Are you in a position to make known to the
leaders of the countries of origin of these refugees what
proposals might allow for national reconciliation to
facilitate their return? Or do you believe that this is not the
role of UNHCR and that you can share your concerns with
the local leaders and with the Security Council but that you
need to cope with the daily survival problems of these
refugees as a matter of priority and cannot beyond that play
the political role which perhaps some would devolve upon
you?

Finally, my last question is really more of an
observation. I noted in your intervention that you also
foresee drawing up plans for future cases of humanitarian
tragedies. You mentioned the case of the Middle East. As
my last question I would like to know whether those plans
are still relevant; that is to say, whether you still have plans
regarding potential refugee flows if drastic crises were soon
to affect the region of the Middle East?

