Mr. Egeland (spoke in French): I should like to
thank members for this opportunity to brief the
Security Council with regard to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. The commitment of the
Algerian presidency to maintaining that critical priority
item on the Council's agenda - a commitment
underscored by your presence here among us today,
Mr. Minister - is appreciated by the humanitarian
community.

(spoke in English)

This time last year (see S/PV.4877), I presented
to the Council a 10-point platform, which outlined
critical areas in which we needed to focus our joint
efforts. I would now like to provide members with an
update on developments over the past six months and
to propose actions that we can take to strengthen
protection in several of those areas.

Humanitarian access to civilians in need lies at
the heart of the protection response. In order to ensure
a more secure environment for the victims of conflict,
access for those who can help must be consistently
secured. Progress has been made in ensuring better
access in some countries. Notably, there have been
incremental improvements in access to the 1.6 million
displaced civilians in northern Uganda. The
promulgation of the Government of Uganda's strategy
for the internally displaced and an improving security
environment have resulted in sustained access to
certain areas and in opportunities to better address the
protection needs of the civilian population.
Humanitarian agencies must now seize the
opportunities provided by that improved access by
increasing their activities and their support. In Liberia,
improved access to border regions has been facilitated
by the completion of the disarmament, demobilization,
rehabilitation and reintegration (DDRR) process.

By contrast, the events in the past six months in
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
perpetuate a pattern of intermittent and sporadic access
that leads to continued incapacity to deliver essential
services, such as health and education. That region has,
accordingly, suffered appalling mortality and
malnutrition rates. According to a recent survey by the
International Rescue Committee - which is among the
largest mortality surveys ever conducted in a conflict
zone - more than 1,000 Congolese civilians are dying
from war-related disease and malnutrition every day. In
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
mortality rate for children under 5 is 90 per cent higher
than the regional norm. The recent movements of
forces into the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo are worrying, as they further destabilize an
already volatile environment and can only lead to a
further decline in the quality of life for the civilian
population.

The outbreak of violence in Cote d'Ivoire in early
November and the subsequent evacuation of
international humanitarian staff have also constrained
our ability to provide humanitarian assistance and
protection. Although the situation appears to be
stabilizing and humanitarian staff are redeploying,
checkpoints remain in place both in the north and in
Government-held areas. Similarly, in Afghanistan,
insecurity continues to restrict humanitarian access to
areas in the south of the country. We cannot allow
ourselves to accept those situations. Peacekeeping
efforts that provide a sustained, secure environment in
which humanitarian access can be delivered have never
been more important.

Tragically, many parts of the Sudan's Darfur
provinces present us with some of the worst obstacles
to humanitarian access. The blatant breaches of the
ceasefire agreements by all parties and the escalation
of fighting - including rebel attacks and aerial
bombardments by Government forces - have led to
the evacuation of much-needed humanitarian staff.
That has dramatically reduced our ability to deliver
humanitarian assistance and protection for civilians.
Experience demonstrates that improvements in access
are brought about only when there is engagement and
common commitment on the part of all actors and
when there is consistency and coherence of approach. I
encourage the Security Council to use its authority
more energetically, where necessary, to address the
issue of access in order to facilitate the delivery of
humanitarian assistance and protection.

The security of humanitarian workers is my
second concern. Our ability to protect and deliver
humanitarian assistance to civilian populations in need
is undermined by blatant attacks and threats against our
unarmed humanitarian staff. Last Sunday,
12 December, two staff members of Save the Children
were deliberately attacked and killed in South Darfur.
Attacks by any armed group will only serve to paralyse
the large and effective humanitarian operations in the
Darfurs. The parties to the conflict - including the
political and military leaders - should be held
individually responsible for such attacks and for the
starvation, disease and deaths among civilians that will
undoubtedly result.

In Afghanistan, threats to staff continue to restrict
the provision of humanitarian assistance and
protection. In Iraq, the brutal execution of our
colleague Margaret Hassan starkly brought home the
vulnerability of humanitarian personnel and the
unacceptable risk to which international agencies
operating in Iraq are exposed. The worsening
insecurity in parts of Iraq has prompted several large
international non-governmental organizations -
renowned for their capacity to continue operating in
hostile environments - to withdraw their operations.
Such withdrawals have severe consequences for
civilians, particularly those who have been internally
displaced, as they lose access to independent and
impartial sources of assistance in a climate of growing
insecurity.

In Iraq and Afghanistan, we may be witnessing a
disturbing new development where recent hostage-
taking incidents indicate a merging of commercial and
political motives. Those are difficult and substantial
challenges, which require creative solutions that use
both humanitarian and political diplomacy. To that end,
my Office, together with our humanitarian partners,
has engaged in dialogue with religious and civil society
groups in regions where there is a perceived threat to
humanitarian personnel. More than ever, we rely on
cultural and religious leaders to join us in partnership
and to come to the defence of independent
humanitarian action in the face of such threats. I
therefore call upon religious and community leaders to
speak out strongly against those who attack unarmed
humanitarian workers in Afghanistan, Iraq, Somalia
and elsewhere, in blatant violation of religious and
cultural values.

Humanitarian organizations also feel that they
have been caught in the political crossfire and that the
space for humanitarian action is progressively
shrinking. Military and political leaders around the
world must do their utmost to maintain the distinction
between impartial, neutral humanitarian action and
political and military activities.

The third protection concern that I wish to
address is the need to better protect women and
children in armed conflict. A constant and insidious
characteristic of armed conflict is the barbaric and
indiscriminate use of sexual violence. In past reports
we have documented the atrocious use of rape and
sexual violence as a weapon of war. Victims of sexual
violence are stripped of dignity and are stigmatized.
They are victims many times over: victims of trauma,
victims of HIV/AIDS and victims of social and
economic distress, left destitute and outcast long after
the fighting is over.

The use of sexual violence has been widely
condemned by national Governments, by regional
organizations, by the General Assembly and by the
Security Council, most recently, in the review of the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) (see S/PRST/2004/40). Despite such condemnation,
however, sexual violence persists unchecked. In the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in Darfur,
sexual violence continues to intimidate and despoil
populations. If sexual violence is so intolerable, why is
it so pervasive? This is an issue where there can be no
impunity. I hope that the International Criminal Court
will use its jurisdiction to clearly demonstrate that
crimes of sexual violence will not be tolerated and that
perpetrators will be punished. And I hope the Security
Council will press for accountability. Surely, the
thousands of brutal rapes in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, in Darfur, in Uganda, in Liberia and
elsewhere should already have resulted in people being
brought to justice.

The use of children in armed conflict and child
abduction remain a key challenge to the United Nations
and its humanitarian partners. In Nepal, children
continue to be forcibly recruited into fighting forces.
Throughout the subregion of West Africa, children
have long been associated with fighting forces. It is
only now that we are beginning to comprehend the
extensive implications of years of conflict, in which
youth is used and expended as ammunition. That
pattern is being sustained in the north of Cote d'Ivoire,
where 100,000 children are unable to sit for their
exams and are therefore exposed to increased risk of
exploitation. Sustained attention must be given to the
needs of children through the delivery of humanitarian
support, DDRR programmes and longer-term
initiatives that address their special reintegration needs.

The plight of refugees and internally displaced
persons is my fourth concern. While large numbers of
refugees have, in recent months, been helped to return
home by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and its partners,
more than 25 million people remain displaced from
their homes by conflict. The largest internal
displacement crises remain in the Sudan, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Colombia and
Uganda. Those four have a population of displaced
persons totalling more than 10 million. Displaced
civilians continue to face intolerable hardships and
increasing challenges for their protection. During the
past six months, the world has been shocked by the
killing in Burundi of more than 150 Congolese
refugees within the confines of a camp protected by the
United Nations symbol. We have also been shocked by
the forced movement of hundreds of thousands of
civilians in Darfur. In Iraq, it is estimated that
approximately 220,000 inhabitants of Fallujah became
internally displaced over a 10-day period in early
November. Since then, access to civilians, both those
inside the city and those displaced around the city, has
been limited by military action and by insecurity on the
ground.

I also encourage Member States to fully
recognize the needs and rights of those who are
displaced. Over the past six months, the Governments
of Uganda, Liberia and Somalia have developed
national internal displacement policies and have
adopted, or made greater use of, the Guiding Principles
on Internal Displacement. Those are particularly
welcome developments. Similarly, I welcome the Dar
es Salaam Declaration on Peace, Security, Democracy
and Development in the Great Lakes Region, which
commits participating countries to a range of important
measures, including respect for and use of the Guiding
Principles. Those positive steps need to be reinforced,
however, by providing national Governments with the
appropriate capacity and support to fulfil their
obligations to protect.

Enhancing compliance with international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law and
combating impunity is the fifth challenge I wish to
address. Many protection concerns will remain
unresolved as long as impunity prevails, and it is
therefore critical that those who violate international
law be held accountable. The role of States in this
respect is paramount.

Violations of international humanitarian and
human rights law in the occupied Palestinian territories
have worsened the lives and welfare of civilians and
undermined the ability of the humanitarian community
to provide much-needed assistance and protection. The
widespread insecurity in Iraq - including
intimidation, hostage-taking, targeted and
indiscriminate attacks on civilians and brutal acts of
terror - creates major protection concerns. In such
volatile circumstances, compliance with international
humanitarian law by all sides is critical. Hate
propaganda, used to incite and fuel conflict, is a
concern in a number of countries, such as Cote
d'Ivoire, where the media have become a powerful
instrument in fuelling hatred and promoting
xenophobia. Targeted sanctions against those
individuals responsible for serious violations of
international humanitarian law or for inciting public
hatred and violence provide an appropriate and
necessary response. In general, I would encourage the
Security Council to consider making greater use of
such targeted sanctions.

In Darfur, the deployment of African Union
observers, the establishment of the International
Commission of Inquiry and the deployment of human
rights observers are important developments. It is
imperative that all parties to the conflict cooperate
fully with the Commission and provide it with the
information relevant to its mandate. Those who have
caused death and massive suffering among civilians in
the Darfurs should have no reason to sleep well at
night.

In terms of strengthening the legal framework
underpinning the protection of civilians, I am pleased
to report that 32 States took 114 treaty actions during
the Focus 2004 treaties event in September. Of
particular note was the participation of the National
Transitional Government of Liberia, which took action
in respect of 18 conventions and protocols and,
separately, adopted the Guiding Principles on Internal
Displacement.

With regard to the sixth challenge -
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
rehabilitation - I would like to focus on reintegration,
which I see as the single biggest challenge for DDRR
programming. Reintegration poses an enormous
challenge in West Africa, where the region is fearful of
youth who have learned that economic gain comes
from acts of violence. In northern Uganda, where
thousands of children have been brutalized and
alienated from their families and communities, the
challenge of reintegration is also immense. Uganda is
currently faced with a historic opportunity for peace
and reconciliation, related to which is an urgent need to
accelerate reintegration planning efforts to meet the
needs of increasing numbers of Lord's Resistance
Army fighters coming out of the bush.

Properly reintegrating children and youth requires
viable alternatives to violence and sustained support in
meeting their long-term needs. That, in turn, requires
integrated planning of DDRR programmes, longer-term
community-based recovery initiatives and consistent
and sustained funding. In Liberia and elsewhere,
reintegration programmes remain precariously
underfunded. Where a conflict has a regional
dimension, effective and sustained DDRR support is all
the more critical if we are to prevent the circulation of
fighters and small arms from one country to the next.
What use are effective disarmament and demobilization
efforts if we are not able to provide an alternative life
for the ex-fighters before they are drawn back to the
guns and the violence?

My seventh and final challenge is neglected
emergencies. We repeatedly see ongoing crises
eclipsed by the crises of the moment, highlighted
through the media lens. The Sudan and the ongoing
violence in Iraq currently command the most attention,
while dire situations persist in numerous other
countries struggling with conflict and violence. We
need to keep the spotlight on all crises and ensure that
there is a balanced and proportional response to all
situations of concern. The humanitarian crisis in
Somalia, for example, remains one of the most severe,
yet overlooked, crises in the world. With the formation
of the Transitional Federal Government, Somalia is
now at a crossroads as it faces its best chance in many
years of achieving political stability and peace. The
international community must seize this opportunity
and support efforts to consolidate peace and stability
and to alleviate the suffering of the Somali people.
Visiting Somalia last week, I was shocked to learn that
mortality rates in parts of Somalia were 2 per 10,000
per day: the same as in Darfur, but for the Somalis this
situation has been more protracted.

If we are serious about meeting humanitarian
needs and laying the foundations for future peace and
stability, we cannot afford to leave crises simmering,
devoid of an adequate political and humanitarian
response. Underfunding, premature withdrawal of
support and a failure to address the root causes of
conflict leave remnant discontent, creating conditions
ripe for insurgency and allowing countries to spiral
back into conflict. The case of Liberia in the late 1990s
or Haiti in recent years illustrates this all too clearly.
As a humanitarian community, we are, after all, asking
for much less than 1 per cent of world military
spending to cover all suffering in all conflicts.

I would now like to continue by outlining briefly
some key points which I believe will strengthen our
ability and greatly enhance our response to the
challenges I have just outlined.

My first area of action - an area of utmost
priority- is the need to strengthen the overall
response capacity of the humanitarian community to
provide both effective and timely humanitarian
assistance and protection. Efforts to improve our
response to the crisis in Darfur have underscored the
need to strengthen the collaborative approach to
protection. A comprehensive, coordinated approach to
the protection of civilians has now been put in place to
address the protection deficit in Darfur.
I have also, as Emergency Relief Coordinator,
initiated a system-wide humanitarian response review,
which will address the current gaps in our response to
humanitarian crises, in terms of both humanitarian
assistance and protection gaps. We have to fill those
gaps as an international community: Member States,
donors, United Nations agencies, non-governmental
organizations and civil society.

My second area of action is the development of a
better reporting mechanism. In his most recent report
on the protection of civilians (S/2004/431), the
Secretary-General called for a mechanism that would
provide better facts and statistics on protection in order
to inform and facilitate the Council's deliberations.
Examples of the key protection concerns that such a
mechanism would address include the number of
civilians killed, tortured, displaced or affected by
sexual violence, and the total number of those denied
access to humanitarian assistance and protection. Work
has commenced with agency colleagues to develop a
systematic methodology using set criteria and
empirical indicators which will allow better
comparative analysis and monitoring of protection
trends. That will provide the Security Council with
concrete and objective information that would enable
better assessment of, and appropriate response to, the
scale and urgency of key protection concerns. I will
provide the Council with a more detailed outline of the
reporting mechanism at my next briefing, in June.

My third area of focus is the need to ensure more
consistent response to crises and to highlight neglected
emergencies. We need to develop better mechanisms to
engage donors and engender the political will to
address all humanitarian needs and protection concerns
equitably. Engaging new donors and drawing on the
resources of different actors will be critical to ensuring
consistency of response. It is also Vital that we provide
sustained support in post-conflict situations. Through
my Office, I would like to further develop a more
systematic review of the impact of underfunding, so
that we can alert the Security Council to any potential
problems that may exacerbate instability and
jeopardize either national or regional security.

Fourthly, it is essential that we place greater
emphasis on the role of national actors and that we
develop approaches and tools that strengthen their
ability to provide protection. In September, my Office
initiated a systematic consultation with the
Government of Uganda and all national actors to
develop a nationally owned strategy for the protection
of civilians. This has already resulted in more effective
action to address key protection concerns. In January,
at the request of the Government of Indonesia, we will
undertake similar consultations to assist the
Government in developing their own strategy for the
protection of civilians. We are in discussions with the
Government of Egypt concerning the possibility of
convening a regional workshop on the protection of
civilians for the Middle East in 2005. Such initiatives
can be broadened to support all Members States that
face protection challenges.

My fifth point relates to the use of sanctions. If
we are to see more effective use of sanctions as a tool,
it will be essential to assess and mitigate any potential
humanitarian consequences in a more systematic
manner. Recognizing this need, my Office, in
collaboration with the Inter-Agency Standing
Committee, has developed a rigorous methodology to
assess the human impact of sanctions. Since it would
be essential for the Council to ensure that the
unintended consequences of sanctions are mitigated
and that the measures imposed do not cause civilian
suffering disproportionate to the ends served, I strongly
encourage Council members to use that methodology
during their deliberations to enhance the use of
sanctions as a tool.

My penultimate point underscores the importance
of regional organizations in providing protection in
armed conflict. The crucial role of the African Union
in Darfur is an obvious case in point. It is critical that
regional organizations be provided with the support
necessary to fulfil their role. As humanitarian
organizations, with 7,000 international and local staff
on the ground in Darfur, we are struck by the
importance and effectiveness of the African Union
forces and observers there, but we are also struck by
the fact that still, in December, only one third of the
promised African Union troops have been deployed,
while African Union police have not been deployed at
all. It should be possible for the international
community to help increase the capacity of the African
Union on the ground, and this should be done urgently.
Without this capacity, the civilian population in Darfur
cannot benefit from effective protection.

The regional dimension of armed conflict is well
understood and the need for a regional approach to
address and respond to the civilian consequences of
armed conflict is well recognized. We encourage
regional organizations to develop common approaches
and to incorporate internationally agreed standards for
protection in their activities. My Office is currently
working to develop stronger cooperation with regional
organizations on protection as part of the follow-up to
the Secretary-General's fifth high-level meeting with
regional organizations.

My final point relates to our own responsibility to
protect. Like all Council members, I have been deeply
disturbed at the unacceptable incidence of sexual
exploitation and abuse by peacekeeping and
humanitarian personnel over the past six months. The
Secretary-General has set clear standards of conduct to
which all staff must be held accountable in his Bulletin
on Special Measures for Protection from Sexual
Exploitation and Sexual Abuse. There is a pressing
need to ensure that this is now rigorously enforced. We
must commit ourselves to creating and maintaining an
environment that prevents such egregious behaviour.
The active engagement of personnel-contributing
countries is central to this process. I appeal to
contributing Member States to give this issue their
urgent attention and ensure that appropriate
accountability mechanisms are in place.

I have presented both an overview of key
protection concerns under the ten-point platform and
some practical measures aimed at addressing these
challenges in order to tangibly enhance the protection
of those in need. We are setting ourselves realistic
means by which, through collective action, we can seek
to improve every situation. We can no longer accept
the status quo. It is time to move to action if we are
truly to create a culture of protection that addresses the
real needs of civilians trapped in conflict. We must
show that the United Nations, its Member States and its
humanitarian and regional partners can safeguard the
well-being and rights of men, women and children
around the world whose lives are being shattered by
armed conflict. Our discussions with the Security
Council are invaluable; the Council's continued
commitment to this shared goal is vital.

