Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Mr. President, on behalf
of the delegation of Pakistan, I would like to
congratulate you on your initiative to hold this special
Security Council meeting in Africa to give impetus to
the Naivasha peace process, a process that is crucial for
ending the long-running conflict in south Sudan and
heralding a new, peaceful, democratic, prosperous and
united Sudan. This timely initiative has yielded an
important early harvest. We thank you, Mr. President,
and the hospitable Government and people of Kenya
for this.

It is auspicious that the parties to the north-south
talks have committed themselves, in the declaration
signed today, to conclude a comprehensive peace
agreement by 31 December 2004. In the Council's
meetings yesterday, it was evident from the statements
by Vice-President Taha and Mr. John Garang that the
two sides have the political will and vision to finalize
this comprehensive peace accord. It is also auspicious
that the Security Council has witnessed the signing of
the declaration and its enclosed commitments,
commitments that have been welcomed in resolution
1574 (2004), just unanimously adopted by the Council.

The resolution reflects the comprehensive and
balanced approach required to bring long-term peace
and stability to the Sudan. It upholds unequivocally the
principles of sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity with respect to the Sudan. It
welcomes the six protocols referred to in the Nairobi
Declaration as constituting the core peace agreement. It
seeks the inclusion of all the parties in a
comprehensive peace, which will encompass Darfur
and all other areas of the Sudan. The Council has also
declared its commitment to assist the Sudan upon the
conclusion of the comprehensive peace agreement.

Pakistan, together with other members, remains
concerned about the situation in Darfur. Despite the
Security Council's attention, the situation appears to
have deteriorated again. We must closely analyse the
reasons for this. Although accords on humanitarian and
security issues were recently accepted by the parties in
Abuja, there have been increased cease-fire violations
in Darfur and, reportedly, most of these violations were
initiated by the rebel groups, provoking reactions by
others. New insurgent movements have appeared.
Command and control over various militias is unclear,
and thus the danger of chaos looms. In this context, it
is essential that the international community give the
right messages, not only to the Government of the
Sudan, but especially to the rebel movements, which
have made demands that are, in some cases, unrealistic
and inflexible.

The approach taken by the Security Council, by
the Secretary-General and by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Pronk, is,
we believe, realistic and balanced. This approach
includes the following: first, enlarging an effective
African Union presence with international help;
secondly, pressing for compliance by the parties;
thirdly, ensuring humanitarian assistance; and fourthly,
working for balanced political solutions. The resolution
we have just adopted reflects such a balanced and
pragmatic approach, one that Pakistan has consistently
counselled and which is, based on cooperation and not
coercion, since coercion, we have learned, can be
counterproductive.

Pakistan enjoys close and fraternal relations with
the Sudan, which are the result of our common
heritage. Pakistan was closely involved, through the
United Nations, in the Sudan's emergence from
colonial occupation as a sovereign and independent
State. We therefore have a significant interest in
ensuring the unity and territorial integrity of this
largest State of Africa, a State with rich diversity and
great potential. We hope that prosperity will come to
the Sudan, a Sudan at peace with itself and with its
neighbours. History awaits the Sudan. The consensus
reached in Nairobi is surely a sign that the people of
the Sudan, from the north, from the south, east and
west, are ready to grasp the promise and potential that
history offers them today.
