Mr. Cabactulan (Philippines): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to
address the Council and to speak in this open debate on
children and armed conflict. The Philippine
Government attaches utmost importance to this subject
and gives high priority to the promotion and protection
of the rights of children, irrespective of what
circumstances they may find themselves in.

The Philippine Government has been actively
cooperating with the United Nations on this matter
since the beginning. As Council members may note,

the collaborative work between the United Nations and
my Government started off positively. This was clearly
manifested when the Philippine authorities facilitated
the December 2008 visit of Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, Under-Secretary-General and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, to the Philippines, where she met
with relevant officials, civil society actors and women
and children affected by armed conflict.

During her visit, Ms. Coomaraswamy also had a
meeting with the leaders of the Moro Islamic
Liberation Front (MILF) to discuss concerns about the
presence of children within the ranks of that rebel
group. As a result of these talks, an action plan was
signed between the United Nations and the MILF on
30 July 2009.

Notwithstanding these positive developments, let
me reiterate the position of my Government that
engaging non-State armed groups, including for the
purpose of securing the protection of children, should
be approached in the most careful manner, taking into
account the larger peace processes that the Philippine
Government is pursuing with non-State groups in the
country, particularly with the MILF and the group
comprising the Communist Party of the Philippines, the
New People's Army and the National Democratic
Front.

In addition, the Philippine Government has
actively pursued with great and sustained vigour the
Philippines' comprehensive programme on children
involved in armed conflict by directing relevant
agencies to work closely to implement the national
programmes and monitor compliance with the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of Child on
the involvement of children in armed conflict.

I wish to stress that the Philippine Constitution
itself guarantees the promotion and protection of the
rights of children and mandates the State to promote
and protect their physical, moral, spiritual, intellectual
and social well-being, defend their right to assistance
and provide them special protection from all forms of
neglect, abuse, exploitation, cruelty and other
conditions harmful to their development.

At this point let me briefly address the concerns
regarding alleged violations committed by the Armed
Forces of the Philippines. The Philippines regards such
allegations with seriousness and deep concern. It is in
this regard that we immediately requested Manila to
investigate the allegations to verify the accuracy of the
negative reports. The response of the Armed Forces of
the Philippines to the allegations was duly forwarded
to the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict. It
contains a point-by-point explanation regarding the
allegations contained in the report. With respect, for
instance, to alleged military operations mentioned in
the report, according to which children were adversely
affected, the point-by-point explanation stated that, in
fact, no military operation occurred on the dates sited.

Let me, however, assure the Council that the
Philippine Government will remain untiring and
vigilant in the investigation of the allegations and will
enforce the necessary measures to ensure the protection
of children wherever they may be and whatever
circumstances they may be in.

Challenges, of course, remain as we move
forward to address the difficult situation of children in
conflict areas. But cases of children in difficult
circumstances in armed conflict in the Philippines, we
would like to stress, are not really rampant.

The new Administration of President Benigno
Simeon C. Aquino III will take further steps and
measures to implement a long-lasting solution in
ensuring the protection of children in difficult
circumstances. With that, we hope that we will soon be
de-listed from annex II of resolution 1612 (2005) so
that the Council can devote more of its time to its core
competencies in accordance with the United Nations
Charter.

We await the conclusions and recommendations
of the Security Council's Working Group on Children
in Armed Conflict, to be released next month. We stand
ready to continue to work with the United Nations and
other stakeholders to uphold and carry out the
protection of the rights of children, including those in
the midst of armed conflict.

