Mr. Mansour (Palestine): On behalf of the State of
Palestine, I congratulate the friendly country of Chile
on its presidency of the Security Council and wish it
every success in steering the important agenda of work.
We are confident in its able leadership. We also welcome
you, Mr. Heraldo Munoz, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Chile, to preside over today's important debate.
I also express our appreciation to the delegation of
Chad for its honourable and capable stewardship of the
Council in December. Allow me also to thank Assistant
Secretary-General ad interim Toyberg-Frandzen for his
briefing this morning.

I also extend the warm congratulations of
the State of Palestine to the new members of the
Security Council - the friendly countries of Angola,
Malaysia, New Zealand, Spain and the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela - as they assume their solemn
responsibilities to uphold the Council's Charter duties,
its resolutions and international law. We pledge to
them, as to all the members of the Council, our full
support and cooperation, and express confidence in
their principled service on the Council.
We return to the Security Council after its failure,
once again, to uphold its duties vis-a-vis the Palestine
question and to genuinely contribute to the efforts
to resolve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and forge
a credible path for peace. We regret that the Council
as a whole was unable to rise to the occasion, even as
the situation is acknowledged by all to be completely
unsustainable and to constitute a threat to peace and
security in the Middle East and globally.

The draft resolution (S/2014/916) that was
presented to the Security Council by Jordan on behalf
of the Arab Group was in substance fully consistent
with the demands made in previous resolutions. Those
resolutions continue to be flagrantly violated by Israel,
the occupying Power, and the Council continues to allow
that to occur without consequence. While the draft
resolution met with strong resistance, the reality is that
the elements it contained are essential for achieving a
just peace and have been unanimously supported by the
international community for decades.

That includes, inter alia, the reaffirmation of
parameters based on the relevant Security Council
resolutions, the Madrid principles and the Arab Peace
Initiative; the calls for the withdrawal ofIsrael from the
Palestinian territory occupied since 1967, including East
Jerusalem, and for bringing an end to the occupation
in all manifestations, including the illegal settlement
enterprise, for the achievement of the two-State solution
on the basis of the pre-1967 borders; and the call for
a just solution to the Palestine refugee question based
on resolution 194 (III) and the Arab Peace Initiative.
The draft resolution also rightly set a deadline for an
end to the Israeli occupation, an objective that cannot
be logically rejected by anyone, and rightly called for
an international conference as the starting point and
framework for any negotiations forward, recognizing
the failure of the negotiations for more than 20 years
and also the need for clear responsibilities of major
stakeholders in shepherding the effort.

That initiative was intended to revitalize the
international consensus and efforts for a just solution
and to open doors for peace through such a new
mechanism and clarity on the parameters of a peaceful
solution and the end goals. Yet it was illogically
treated as a confrontational and irrational effort and,
regrettably, obstructed.

In spite of that setback, we will continue to
approach the Security Council. We are determined in
our pursuit of this peaceful, political, diplomatic and
legal path towards the realization of the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people and their legitimate
national aspirations and the achievement of a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace. Those goals are
shared by the international community. This principal
organ of the United Nations should not be absolved of
its responsibilities in that regard.

How could we cease our appeals to the Security
Council as long as the Israeli occupation of our land,
and the endless crises and human suffering it causes,
continues? How could we cease our calls for international
support and action while our people continue to be
denied their freedom and liberty - continue to be
brutally oppressed - and this historic injustice persists?
As we sit here in the Council Chamber, the situation is
deteriorating and becoming more fragile and volatile
by the day, while a peaceful solution remains elusive
due to a lack of political will and the intransigence of
Israel, which carries on with blatant impunity with zero
accountability.

In the Holy City of Jerusalem, tensions are raging
as Israeli violations and crimes push the situation to
a precipice. Every day we are witness to Israel's rapid
settlement colonization, altering the City's demography
and character and further surrounding and isolating it;
heavy-handed raids and repression of the Palestinian
civilian population; vicious "price tag" attacks by Israeli
settlers, who continue to harass and assault Palestinians
and seize Palestinian homes, with the full backing of the
Government; and ongoing provocations and incitement
by Israeli politicians and religious leaders, along with
other Jewish extremists who continue to raid and defile
holy sites, including the Al-Aqsa Mosque compound,
and to attack worshippers and other civilians in violent
rampages of hatred, discrimination and superiority.
The rising fury and despair in occupied East Jerusalem
constitutes an extremely toxic situation that could
erupt at any moment, including in the form of religious
conflict.

In the rest ofthe West Bank, Israel also continues its
illegal settlement activities - doing the exact opposite
of what is required to end this insidious occupation.
Israel has totally undermined the two-State solution
for peace by constructing settlements, expropriating
land, building the wall, demolishing homes and
displacing civilians, in grave breach of the Fourth
Geneva Convention and in flagrant contempt of the
global demands to stop that illegal campaign. Settlers
also continue to terrorize and torment Palestinian
civilians and to wreak havoc and destruction. Military
raids and arrests and detentions continue, day and
night, with more than 6,800 Palestinians, including
children, women and elected officials, now imprisoned
by Israel under dire conditions. Israel has yet to be held
accountable for all those grave crimes.

The humanitarian disaster wilfully and wantonly
inflicted by Israel, the occupying Power, in the Gaza
Strip last summer is worsening beyond comprehension.
The illegal Israeli blockade, delays in reconstruction,
a fuel and water crisis and fierce winter storms are
compounding the unimaginable suffering of the
Palestinian civilian population and further exposing
the lasting impact of the crimes perpetrated by the
Israeli occupying forces. Massive flooding has further
displaced civilians, in addition to the 110,000 people
displaced following Israel's destruction of their homes
and neighbourhoods. In the bitter cold, families
continue to shelter in United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) schools, in makeshift homes and even in the
ruins and rubble of what remains of their homes, where
they struggle to survive with minimal food, water,
sanitation and other human necessities.

Despite the obstruction and collective punishment
caused by the Israeli blockade, the Palestinian
Government of National Consensus, under the
leadership of President Mahmoud Abbas and Prime
Minister Rami Hamdallah, continues its efforts to
advance reconstruction and tend to the needs of our
people in Gaza. However, it must be recognized that
the massive scope and scale of this disaster, on both
the human and the physical levels, would present a
formidable challenge to even the strongest and most
capable Government.

We call on the international community to demand
that Israel immediately end its blockade of the Gaza
Strip and allow for unimpeded humanitarian access,
the movement of persons into and out of Gaza, the
entry of all necessary supplies, including construction
materials and exports, and that it honour pledges to
support reconstruction. Without that, it will be next
to impossible to address urgent humanitarian needs,
rebuild Gaza, ease the isolation and trauma of our
people there or revive any semblance of an economy.

In addition to the brutalization and collective
punishment of our people and the colonization of our
land, Israel, the occupying Power, is again withholding
Palestinian tax revenues, in a blatant act of reprisal and
theft of Palestinian funds. This kind of retribution has
been condemned by the international community before
and should be once again. The international community
should demand that Israel release our tax revenues,
which are vital to the functioning of Government
institutions, including for education, health, security,
sanitation and social welfare services. Such vulgar and
illegal behaviour by Israel should not be tolerated or
excused, for it can only encourage its contempt for the
law and impunity.

In that regard, it must be clearly stated: the recent
accessions by the State of Palestine to international
conventions and treaties, including the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court (ICC), are
legal, peaceful steps that should be welcomed by the
international community. There should be no doubt
about Palestine's commitment to international law and
peace. Palestine should not be punished for that proven
commitment. To do so is wrong and perverse, and no
rational, law-abiding and peaceful person or country
can condone it.

We are compelled to remind the international
community that there is no symmetry or balance in this
conflict. There is an occupier imposing and entrenching
a nearly half-century-long military occupation in the
most vicious, lethal and destructive ways. And there
is an occupied people seeking their liberty, rights and
justice through peaceful, political and legal means
despite the oppression and crimes they have been
mercilessly subjected to for decades.

It defies logic, and of course the law, to excuse
and absolve the violator - Israel, the occupying
Power - of any culpability, instead threatening and
punishing those - the Palestinian people - who are
merely seeking their human rights, foremost their right
to be free and independent.

We therefore express appreciation for the
statements issued by Governments, intergovernmental
organizations and human rights groups in support of
Palestine's accessions and against Israeli reprisals.
We are also grateful for the principled statement, on
7 January, by the President of the Assembly of States
Parties to the Rome Statute, Mr. Sidiki Kaba, who
welcomed the deposit by the State of Palestine of the
instruments of accession to the Rome Statute and
stressed that

"Each ratification of the Rome Statute constitutes
welcome progress towards its universality. I call
on all members of the United Nations to join this
permanent and independent system of international
justice to fight against impunity and prevent the
most serious crimes under international law."

The State of Palestine responded in a positive way to
that call, and I am proud to say that we will be the one
hundred and twenty-third member State of the Rome
Statute.

While recognizing the many serious threats and
problems in our world, we must conclude by asking how
the international community can allow the Security
Council to remain paralysed, while the Palestinian-
Israeli conflict continues to burn, inflaming tensions
and further destabilizing the situation in an already
volatile region? How long can the international
community stand aside while this injustice continues
and the Palestinian people continue to be denied their
rights and freedoms, the same rights and freedoms so
staunchly defended everywhere else around the world?

We can no longer wait. After nearly seven decades
of Al-Nakba and nearly five decades of occupation,
we can no longer accept being told to wait for the
fulfillment of our rights. The Palestinian people and
leadership have been more than patient, more than
reasonable and more than steadfast. History will clearly
attest to that resolve in the face of such grave injustice.

Neither can we continue to accept being told to
wait to seek accountability for Israeli violations against
our people. This is based on our firm conviction that
accountability and compelling respect for the law are
crucial to deterring further crimes against our people,
making the Israeli occupation too costly, hastening
an end to this tragic conflict and realizing justice and
peace.

The focus now must be on implementing the law
and ensuring responsibility for the gross human rights
violations, breaches of humanitarian law war crimes
that have been perpetrated, rather than on punitive
measures meant to exact retribution for a commitment
to international law. The focus must be on ending this
illegitimate, belligerent, colonial Israeli occupation in
all its manifestations and realizing the international
consensus for a peaceful solution.

We will thus continue to reject all of the irrational
arguments against our peaceful, nonviolent, political,
diplomatic and legal endeavours and will continue on
this path for justice and peace. At the same time, we
will persist in our appeals to all peace-loving countries
and peoples to continue their principled solidarity and
support in this effort to uphold international law and
to realize the rights of the Palestinian people. These
include self-determination in their independent State of
Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital, and just
solutions for all core issues, including the plight of the
Palestine refugees, based on the relevant resolutions
and international law.

Despite the recent setback in the Council, we are
hopeful and confident that this global support and
solidarity, as well as the needed political and moral
responsibility, will be forthcoming, extending the spirit
and momentum of the International Year of Solidarity
with the Palestinian People, towards the attainment of
the just, lasting and comprehensive peace we have so
long been seeking.

