Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation welcomes the resolution that we have just
adopted, reaffirming the Council's commitment to the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement and to peace and stability in the Sudan. But
that commitment also obliges us to raise another issue
that could have negative repercussions for initiatives to
promote peace and stability. I am referring specifically
to the decision of the Government of the Sudan to
expel and suspend humanitarian and development
assistance organizations. That decision has left the
Three Areas and eastern Sudan with very little support
for humanitarian recovery and reintegration activities.

The provision of humanitarian aid for
development in those areas is essential if the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement is to be successfully
implemented. That was the understanding of the
Council when it considered this issue in its
consultations on 6, 20 and 26 March, following
briefings by the Assistant Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, the Director of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. John Holmes.

That is why, in my delegation's View, it was only
natural that the resolution renewing the mandate of the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan should have
09-31939

included in its preambular and operative paragraphs the
Council's rejection of the measures taken by the
Government of the Sudan against humanitarian and
development assistance organizations, given the
negative implications that that decision could have for
humanitarian assistance and the implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement. We wanted that
reference to be retained in the resolution's tenth
preambular paragraph and in its operative
paragraph 13, as it was in all negotiated drafts until the
final one.

Nevertheless, we voted today for a text that no
longer contains those references. That is why we
understand that, when it refers in its ninth preambular
paragraph to "the events of March 4 and 5 2009", the
resolution adopted today is referring to the decision to
expel humanitarian and development assistance
organizations.

I conclude by reiterating that the issue of
humanitarian assistance should not be linked to others
of a political or judicial nature. The Government of the
Sudan continues to be duty-bound to comply with the
decisions adopted by the Council and with the
commitments it has undertaken under various
international agreements and instruments. Furthermore,
it is obliged to protect its population and to comply
with the norms of international law, in particular
international humanitarian law.

