Mr. Sparber (Liechtenstein): I would like to begin
by expressing Liechtenstein's deep sympathies to the
Russian delegation on the passing of Ambassador
Churkin. Our thoughts are with his wife and family
as well as his friends and his colleagues at the
Russian Mission.

Liechtenstein welcomes today's open debate
on conflicts in Europe and would like to thank
Foreign Minister Pavlo Klimkin for his presence here
earlier today.

After the Second World War, which originated
in Europe, our region underwent successful political
and economic integration and the European Union
continues to be an important element of stability and an
actor for peace. Unfortunately, since the 1990s we have
also witnessed a proliferation of conflicts in Europe,
and today we are facing an overall security situation
that is deteriorating. Armed conflict has re-emerged in
Europe with the crisis in and around Ukraine, while
situations of protracted conflict in Georgia, Moldova
and Nagorno Karabakh have been simmering for years
without approaching a solution. The inability to achieve
reconciliation in parts of the Balkans constitutes yet
another risk to sustainable peace in our region. At the
same time, important safeguards for peace and security,
such as the rule of law, human rights and democratic
standards, are under strain and long-standing security
arrangements are being undermined. Geopolitical
uncertainty is on the rise and has already contributed
to a new arms race, the hardening of national security
postures and escalating nationalist and populist rhetoric.

Liechtenstein is deeply concerned about the
escalating violence in eastern Ukraine, which is putting
the local population through yet more unacceptable
hardships in these merciless winter days. The levels
of violence we have recently witnessed are in stark
contravention of the obligations by the signatories to
the Minsk agreements. Ensuring full adherence to
the agreements must therefore be a priority for the
international community, starting with an immediate
and verifiable ceasefire, fully monitored by the OSCE's
Special Monitoring Mission in Ukraine. With the
Special Monitoring Mission and the Trilateral Contact
Group, the OSCE continues to lead efforts to foster
stability and mediate for a solution to the crisis.

At a time of declining commitment to a political
discourse based on facts, the OSCE also stands out for
its objective reporting and resistance to politicization.
Its work on the ground makes an important contribution
to promoting peace and security in the spirit of Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, and we
hope that the Security Council will acknowledge that
role by expressing strong political support for the
OSCE and insisting on full implementation of the
Minsk agreements when it engages tomorrow with
Mr. Sebastian Kurz, the OSCE's Chairperson-in-office
and Foreign Minister of Austria. I would also like to
take this opportunity to reiterate Liechtenstein's full
support for Austria's chairship of the OSCE in 2017.

The recent security crises in Europe have been
consistently accompanied by serious violations of
international law and the fundamental principles
enshrined in the United Nations Charter and the Helsinki
Final Act, including the violations of the territorial
integrity of Ukraine and Georgia. Those violations are
warning signs that the commitment to stability and
cooperation in Europe has lost its consensual basis.
They also point to the need for taking incremental
steps to rebuild security and confidence, above all in
the military field, while convergence around a common
vision for Europe's security remains out of reach.

More importantly, however, this is a time for Europe
to look back at the lessons ofits own conflict-ridden past,
the most fundamental of which remains the primacy of
the rule of law, democracy and economic integration
over authoritarianism, demagogy and isolationism.
The United Nations, with its Charter and the body of
international law that it represents, is itself a product
of that hard-learned lesson. The primacy of the law is
intimately linked to the importance of accountability,
in particular for the most serious crimes. Europe has
itself experienced the value ofjustice for reconciliation
and sustainable peace. Later this year, we are looking
at an important step forward in international criminal
justice with the upcoming activation of the crime of
aggression within the framework of the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court. On the basis of
its own history, Europe should be at the helm of the
international community in outlawing the crime of
aggression, and we are grateful that European States
have ratified the Kampala amendments on the crime of
aggression in significant numbers.

Conflicts in Europe, while prone to geopolitical
exploitation, often have an important internal
dimension, related to the insufficient protection of
minorities or grievances of communities under highly
centralized governance structures. Liechtenstein has
consistently advanced the right of peoples to self-
determination as a means to preventing and resolving
internal conflicts, when applied in conformity with
international law and without undermining the
principle of territorial integrity. In such a way, the right
to self-determination can result in appropriate levels of
self-administration for entities within existing borders
and based on consultation and negotiation processes,
with third-party assistance where necessary. Under
the Liechtenstein model, the appropriate level of self-
governance will always be the result of an agreement
between the concerned parties. The provisions
of the Minsk agreements on decentralization and
constitutional reform are compatible with those
basic tenets of the Liechtenstein model, and are thus
a case in point of the relevance of these discussions.
Liechtenstein will continue to engage on that issue with
all who are interested in the appropriate academic and
diplomatic forums.

