The President (interpretation from Spanish): I shall
now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Chile.

With the resolution we have adopted, we are
unanimously making an urgent and specific appeal for an
immediate cessation of the hostilities that are tragically
affecting Lebanon and for the implementation of
resolution 425 (1978).

Calm should be imposed on the tragedy. It is a
matter of the lives of human beings, most of whom are
civilians and who, in the final analysis, are the innocent
victims of this sad and deplorable episode. Today's events
in the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
camp are so horrible that there are no words with which
to condemn them. We urge Israel to put an immediate
end to its attacks in Lebanon.

Chile's main concern in this debate has been the
innocent victims in Lebanon and the humanitarian crisis
in a country that is a friend of Chile's. Our hearts are
now with that suffering people at another tragic moment
in its history.

This morning, as President of the Security Council,
I said that we could not let the day end without making
an appeal for the cessation of hostilities, and that is what
we have done this evening. However, we have not said
everything that could have been said in these
circumstances. The deaths of recent days and months in
the Middle East are excessive, as are the collective
punishment in Lebanon, the bombs in Israel and the
insecurity for everyone.

Chile rejects force as a means of political
solution - the anonymous force of terrorism and open
military force, as well as the constant threat of the use of
force.
We are all challenged to make the United Nations a
place where peoples of the world can place their trust and
where the rights of peoples are equally defended,
regardless of their power or their allies. I hope that some
day the Security Council will make its first priority the
security of people, the security of individuals, and that it
will be a true Council for the security of mankind. That
is not the current situation, and much remains to be done.

However, Chile hopes that the resolution we have
adopted will help promote an end to the violence, bring
peace to the souls of so many people of the region and be

 

of assistance in the political process leading towards peace.
We are thankful to everyone who is attempting to achieve
that peace.

I now resume my function as President of the Council.

The Council has concluded its voting procedure. I
shall now call on those speakers invited under rule 37.

I call on the representative of Lebanon.

