The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
France.

I would like to welcome, on behalf of France, the
Chairman-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), Mr. Miguel
Moratinos, and to thank him for his statement. We
believe that the priorities he set out would indeed allow
the organization to meet the challenges facing its
member States, and we fully share them.

France is deeply committed to the OSCE, which
is the only organization bringing together all European
and North American States, with a broad mandate. It
has contributed to enhancing international security and
stability, including by providing for the construction of
an underpinning of common values. It is often
perceived as a model regional organization. That is
why we feel it is crucial to preserve the conditions that
make for effective action. I would like to list a number
of those conditions.

The first is trust among members, which we must
be committed to maintaining and strengthening, despite
the differing approaches that are inevitable on a given
issue.

Secondly, it is particularly important to maintain
a balance among all the dimensions of the OSCE: the
human dimension, of course, as well as the economic
and security dimensions. It is in its comprehensive
concept of security and cooperation that the value of
the OSCE lies.

The third condition is that of impartiality. The
OSCE is known for its experience in dealing with
conflicts in its geographic area. This makes it a crucial
actor in resolving the conflict in the Caucasus. As
Mr. Moratinos stressed, the OSCE is also playing a
very positive role in Kosovo, which deserves support.
It is due to its universally recognized impartiality that
it is able to play the positive role that it does.

A further essential element concerns the OSCE's
capacity to adapt to a changing world. Today's
challenges are no longer those of the cold war, and the
OSCE too must be able to evolve. As noted, the reform
adopted in 2006, following the Brussels Ministerial
Council, has made it possible to improve the OSCE's
functioning by enhancing its transparency of and the
ability of member States to evaluate the organization's
work. France is prepared to work on specific projects
to revitalize OSCE activities in all spheres, in
particular the political-military component.

For France, support for democratization and the
promotion of human rights remain the OSCE's
essential activities. Not only are they among the
founding missions of the organization, but they
contribute, first and foremost, to ensuring security
within the European space. Here, we hail the key role
played by the OSCE office for Democratic Institutions
and Human Rights in monitoring elections in the
OSCE area. We encourage all member States to host
such missions during major electoral periods, as they
have been doing.

Finally, the OSCE must also work in close
coordination with other international and regional
organizations. In this regard, we welcome the
convening of this Security Council meeting, which
demonstrates the vitality of the cooperation between
the United Nations and the OSCE, to which we attach
great importance.

There is no doubt that the effectiveness of the
international community's action on the European
continent can be enhanced only by ever-closer
cooperation between the two organizations, in
particular in the areas of conflict prevention, crisis
resolution, the promotion of human rights and
democracy and the fight against terrorism. Those are
key elements of international peace and security, which
the Security Council is charged to maintain.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council. I give the floor to Mr. Miguel Angel
Moratinos to respond to comments and questions
raised.
