Ms. De] Ponte: It is a great honour to be here
again to provide an assessment of the progress made in
the implementation of the completion strategy. A
written assessment has already been distributed, and I
intend to concentrate now on the major concerns.

The completion strategy has two components: the
trial in The Hague of the most senior leaders
responsible for the most serious crimes, and the
referral of mid- and low-level perpetrators to domestic
courts. Although significant progress was achieved on
both fronts in the reporting period, it has to be stressed
that a number of obstacles which are outside of the
Tribunal's control may still derail the completion
strategy.

The first such obstacle is the lack of cooperation
on the part of States, mainly in the arrest and transfer
of persons indicted by the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY). There are
still 20 fugitives at large, and most of them should be
tried in The Hague. A few of them, however, could be
tried by domestic jurisdictions, and the relevant
motions for their transfer have already been filed, or
will soon be filed.

Among the fugitives are three individuals
mentioned repeatedly in Security Council resolutions,
unfortunately to no avail so far: Radovan Karadzic,
Ratko Mladic and Ante Gotovina. In addition to those
three key indictees, the other most senior fugitives are
Borovcanin, Pandurevic, Popovic and Nikolic, who
have been indicted for the Srebrenica genocide, and
also the four generals - Lukic, Lazarevic, Pavkovic
and Djordjevic - indicted for their direct individual
responsibility, as well as for their command
responsibility in the crimes committed in Kosovo in
1998 and 1999.

The objectives of the Tribunal, as established by
the Security Council, will not be fulfilled until those
accused are tried in The Hague. The Ministers of the
European Union made the same assessment when they
stated, on 12 July 2004, that

"the work of the ICTY would not be completed
without the arrest and transfer to The Hague of
key indictees such as Radovan Karadzic, Ratko
Mladic and Ante Gotovina".

Furthermore, delays in the arrest and transfer of
those fugitives make the planning of the trials more
complicated and undermine judicial efficiency, as it is
not possible to join similar cases in one trial. For
instance, Karadzic could have been tried together with
Momcilo Krajisnik, another former senior leader of
Republika Srpska within Bosnia and Herzegovina,
whose trial is ongoing. Lukic, Lazarevic, Pavkovic and
Djordjevic could still be tried together with
Milutinovic, Ojdanic and Sainovic, who are awaiting
trial in the Tribunal's detention unit.

The situation is similar for Gotovina. His two co-
accused, Cermak and Markac, are also awaiting trial.
Borovcanin, Pandurevic, Popovic and Nikolic should
be tried with Beara, who was arrested and transferred
recently. It is therefore of crucial importance for the
completion strategy timeline that those arrests be made
as soon as possible so as to avoid duplication of efforts
and waste of resources.

The Governments of Croatia, Serbia and
Montenegro, and Bosnia and Herzegovina bear the
main responsibility for bringing those fugitives to The
Hague. A vast majority of them, probably more than a
dozen, live freely in Serbia. Prime Minister Kostunica
has made it clear that he is not willing to arrest
fugitives - only to try to convince them to surrender
voluntarily. On 13 July, the sealed indictment against
Goran Hadzic, the former President of the so-called
Republika Srpska Krajina, in Croatia, was handed over
to the relevant authorities in Belgrade, which were also
provided with the precise whereabouts of Hadzic. Only
hours later, my investigators observed that he had been
informed and left immediately. He has since
disappeared.

On 8 October, detailed information about the
location of Ljubisa Beara, a close aide to Ratko Mladic
indicted in 2002, was forwarded to the Serbian Prime
Minister. Beara did not resist arrest, and he was
transferred to The Hague on the night of 9 October.
Obviously, that arrest happened only because my
Office provided full information on the fugitive's
location, and because Belgrade knew that we were
monitoring Beara's residence. Furthermore, I was due
to address the Ministers of the European Union two
days later. Only such immediate pressure seems to
produce results. However, my Office cannot be
expected to do the same for each and every fugitive.
Furthermore, for their own domestic political reasons,
the Serbian authorities presented that arrest as a
voluntary surrender. They underlined thereby their
official policy, which is that all fugitives should
voluntarily surrender. But that policy has not produced
any results so far, and it blatantly contradicts the
country's international obligations, namely under
article 29 of the ICTY Statute and numerous Security
Council resolutions.

The Serbian Government has deliberately chosen
to ignore its legal obligations. Serbia's consistent
failure to cooperate was once again brought to the
attention of the Council on 4 May 2004 in a report
forwarded by the President. In the meantime, the
Serbian Government's attitude of defiance towards the
Tribunal, which also challenges the Council, has not
changed.

There is, however, some progress to report in the
areas of cooperation that are within the competence of
the State Union of Serbia and Montenegro. Thanks to
the effective work of the National Cooperation
Council, the huge backlog of waivers authorizing
officials or former officials to be interviewed has been
dealt with. There is also a desire to resolve issues
related to access to documents, but many difficulties
remain, principally because the documents requested
are in the hands of authorities who are blocking
cooperation with the Tribunal. All in all, the lack of
cooperation on the part of Belgrade remains the single
most important obstacle faced by the Tribunal in the
implementation of the completion strategy.

Whereas most fugitives have found safe haven in
Serbia, some still reside in Bosnia and Herzegovina or
travel regularly to that country. They continue to enjoy
the protection of powerful networks. The High
Representative has taken energetic measures against
those networks that include the beginning of structural
reform at the State and entity level. But the fact
remains that, nine years after Dayton, the authorities of
Republika Srpska have not apprehended a single
individual indicted by the ICTY. That raises
fundamental questions about the willingness of
Republika Srpska leaders to fulfil their pledges to
cooperate with the ICTY by taking firm action.

It also now confirms, I believe, the fact that there
are fundamental, systemic weaknesses built into the
law enforcement and security structures in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and in particular the Republika Srpska.
They must be tackled so that the structures finally help,
not hinder, the country in cooperating with the
Tribunal. The Ministries of Defence and of the Interior
of Republika Srpska cannot by any reasonable
standards be judged to have helped in this regard. The
report of the Srebrenica Commission imposed upon the
Republika Srpska by the international community, once
published, should help raise awareness of the genocide
and of the necessity to punish those responsible.

The Stabilization Force (SFOR) has supported the
Tribunal over the years. It will soon have completed its
mandate, which should be taken over by the European
Union-led peacekeeping force (EUFOR) and NATO. It
is a great frustration for me that SFOR has to leave
while Radovan Karazdic is still at large, especially
since all SFOR commanders promised that they would
arrest him during their tenure.

In my View, success will come only when the
relevant authorities in Serbia and Republika Srpska
finally work together with international forces. That
type of transborder cooperation needs to be further
encouraged throughout the region. In this context, the
transfer of Miroslav Bralo on 12 November is a
positive development. The accused had been indicted
on a sealed arrest warrant in 1995. There were strong
indications that he was in Croatia, although this was
denied by the Croatian authorities. The seal was lifted
on 12 October 2004, and he was surrendered in Bosnia
and Herzegovina just one month later.

Whereas most of the fugitives are in Serbia or in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, there is one senior accused
who has been seen repeatedly in Croatia, as recently as
last summer. Ante Gotovina disappeared in June 2001,
just after he had been informed by the Croatian
authorities of a sealed indictment against him. This
spring, Croatia apparently stepped up its efforts to
locate and arrest Gotovina. However, doubts may be
raised concerning the effectiveness of those measures,
or even their seriousness, as they have not produced
any concrete results so far, not even relating to his
whereabouts inside or outside of Croatia. On the other
hand, there are strong indications that Gotovina, whose
public image as a national hero is not denied by
anyone, has enjoyed, and continues to benefit from, a
well-organized support network, including within State
structures. It is of paramount importance for the
completion strategy and for the overall achievements
of the ICTY that Gotovina be brought to justice in The
Hague. That is the only remaining obstacle to the
cooperation of Croatia with the ICTY. As soon as
Gotovina is in The Hague, it will be possible to say
that Croatia is indeed cooperating fully with the
Tribunal. The failure to locate Gotovina, either inside
or outside of Croatia, and to transfer him means that
the networks protecting war criminals are more
powerful than the part of the Government that
genuinely wants to cooperate fully with the Tribunal.
Should international pressure recede in this case, it will
be perceived as a signal that the international
community may not be interested anymore in having
the most senior leaders responsible for the most serious
crimes, including Karadzic and Mladic, appear in front
of the ICTY.

The arrest of all fugitives is also a measure of the
ability of States to proceed with domestic trials, as it is
indicative of their commitment to the rule of law. The
second key component of the completion strategy is the
deferral to the States of the former Yugoslavia of
indicted and non-indicted cases concerning medium-
and low-level indictees. However, the ICTY must be
cautious that the States to which cases are transferred
are able and willing to proceed with trials, and that
those trials are led in accordance with the highest
judicial standards. The ICTY has been actively
supporting the establishment of specialized war crimes
courts throughout the region. The Prosecutor's Office
has contributed its expertise to training seminars for
prosecutors and judges so as to enhance the capability
of national jurisdictions to try war crimes in fair and
credible trials. We continue to support the efforts of the
Office of the High Representative to establish a war
crimes chamber within the State Court of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to try accused of lower and intermediate
rank who were originally indicted by the Tribunal.
However, ultimately, the proper functioning of those
institutions is beyond our control.

There is a legitimate concern that a country like
Serbia, which is not willing to arrest indictees, will not
be either interested in or capable of trying alleged war
criminals domestically. The networks supporting
persons accused of war crimes are so powerful there
that they can interfere with the judicial proceedings,
including by intimidating witnesses and by exerting
political pressure on judges and prosecutors, or even by
threatening the stability of the country.

Both in Serbia proper and in Kosovo, aggressive
nationalist rhetoric is being used in smear campaigns
against the Tribunal and its Prosecutor. The message is
the same: if the authorities cooperate with the ICTY, it
will destabilize the country. The groups orchestrating
such propaganda are talented at threatening or causing
violence and at blaming the ICTY, incarnated by its
Prosecutor, for it. The international community and the
democratically elected authorities in the region should
taken further decisive measures against those networks.

When selecting the jurisdiction to which it
intends to refer cases back, the ICTY will have to
consider the general climate in the countries
concerned. It will also have to take into account the
interests of the victims. In accordance with the
principle that justice should be rendered as close as
possible to the victims and to the place where the
crimes were committed, the Prosecutor's policy is that,
where possible, a case should be referred to the
authorities of the State where the crimes took place. By
the end of the year, 11 indicted cases concerning 20
accused will have been proposed to the Chambers for
transfer to domestic jurisdictions in accordance with
rule 11 bis of the ICTY Rules of Procedure and
Evidence.

The third area of concern impacting on the
completion strategy which is beyond our control is the
provision of adequate resources to my Office. As
members are well aware, the Secretariat imposed a
freeze on new recruitment in May 2004. Moreover, the
2005 budget for the Investigations Division was not
approved. Those measures have been taken at a time
when other bodies, including United Nations bodies,
are offering very competitive packages to investigators
and prosecutors of my Office. Over the past year, the
Office of the Prosecutor has lost over 40 per cent of its
senior investigators and almost 50 per cent of its senior
legal staff. Due to the hiring freeze, they can be
replaced only through internal promotion, and that
creates additional problems, as it is becoming
increasingly difficult to continue to promote internally
to senior levels without compromising professional
standards. The vacancy rate in my Office is now close
to 25 per cent. That situation is already impeding the
work of the Office and could soon impact on the
efficiency of the trials.

The lack of cooperation of States, the state of
preparedness of domestic jurisdictions and the
financial crisis are the three major factors impacting
negatively on the completion strategy. I remain
committed, however, to the completion strategy and to
its time frame.

The first major milestone in the implementation
of the completion strategy will be the closure of all
investigations by the end of this year. All of the six
remaining investigations will be completed before
31 December, with a number of new indictments
issued. However, since two of those indictments could
be joined with two existing cases, that would result in a
maximum of only four additional trials to be carried
out in The Hague. On the prosecution side, efforts are
being made continuously to support the judges in their
efforts to streamline the procedures and increase the
efficiency of trials. My Office is currently ready to
begin five trials, and it is involved in five other
ongoing trials.

Those efforts will have no effect, however, unless
all accused are brought to The Hague in time to be
tried before the end of 2008. As we enter the second
phase of the completion strategy, 2005 will be crucial.
If some of the most important indictees, like Karadzic,
Mladic and Gotovina, are not arrested and transferred
in the months to come, it may be necessary to revise
the target dates of the completion strategy.

The year 2005 will also mark the tenth
anniversary of three key events: the Srebrenica
genocide, the Dayton Agreement, and the indictments
against Karadzic and Mladic. If the international
community could not prevent the genocide, it should at
least not allow that and other very serious crimes to be
left unpunished.

