The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.

I thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Kosovo, Mr. Farid Zarif, for his briefing
today, not least because it is now very late at night
for him, and for introducing the Secretary-General's
quarterly report (S/2014/558). I am delighted to welcome
Foreign Ministers Hoxhaj and Dacie to the Council.

The United Kingdom welcomes Kosovo's continued
progress both internally and on the international stage.
Kosovo is now recognized by well over half of the
States Members of the United Nations. We encourage
those countries that have not yet recognized it to do
so. The United Kingdom commends Kosovo on the
peaceful conduct of its elections on 8 June and the fact
that both Kosovo and Serbia encouraged the people to
vote. We hope that new leadership in Pristina will be
decided soon, and in accordance with the law.

We welcome the new Government of Serbia's
commitment to continuing the high-level dialogue
with Pristina facilitated by the European Union. The
normalization of relations between Kosovo and Serbia
is integral to both countries" European Union accession
paths. The full implementation of the dialogue
Agreement is necessary to unlock progress. We
encourage both sides to resume higher-level meetings
on further agreements once the new Government of
Kosovo is in place, and urge that continued progress be
made at the working level in this interim period. Both
sides must work to implement existing agreements. This
is a priority, especially for those elements that require
further unilateral work, such as telecommunications
and the adjustment of relevant legal frameworks.

We condemn the violence that arose during
the demonstrations in South Mitrovica on 22 June.
We join the Secretary-General in commending the
professionalism shown by the Kosovo police, the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX) and the Kosovo Force in responding to the
violence. It is important for the continued progress
of the dialogue that communities are consulted about
decisions that affect them, in order to lay the ground for
their peaceful and cooperative engagement with such
changes. The United Kingdom welcomes the extension
of EULEX's mandate for a further two years, especially
its work continuing the strengthening of Kosovo's
rule-of-law and justice institutions.

We welcome the recent Kosovo police operation
on 11 August to arrest 40 individuals alleged to have
been fighting in Syria and Iraq on charges of terrorism,
and the seven arrests that have been made since. We
applaud the Kosovo authorities' determination to tackle
extremism and foreign fighters, and encourage more
close cooperation between police and security services
in the region, and more widely, to deal with such risks.

Like others, we have taken careful note ofthe 29 July
report issued by the Chief Prosecutor of the European
Union Special Investigative Task Force, Mr. Clint
Williamson, following his team's two-and-a-half-year
investigation of the allegations in the 2010 report by
Council of Europe Rapporteur Marty. We welcome
Kosovo's renewed agreement on cooperating with
establishing judicial proceedings for the investigation
and the European Union's agreement to support a court
through EULEX.

Finally, given Kosovo's continued progress and the
improved relationship between Pristina and Belgrade,
the United Kingdom agrees with Lithuania that we
could meet less often in this format. We should not lose
our focus, but we should recognize progress when we
see it.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I now give the floor to Mr. Hoxhaj, who has asked
to make a further statement.

