Mr. O'Brien: I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, and all the Security Council members,
for inviting me to brief the Council on my visit in recent
days to countries facing, or at risk of, famine - Yemen,
South Sudan and Somalia. I will also briefly discuss
the outcome of the Oslo Humanitarian Conference on
Nigeria and the Lake Chad Region. Ihave also been to the
Somali region of Ethiopia and visited northern Kenya,
where pastoralists are the worst affected by the terrible
drought in that part of the African continent. More than
2.7 million Kenyans are now food-insecure, a number
likely to reach 4 million by April. In collaboration with
the Government of Kenya, the United Nations will soon
launch an appeal for $200 million to provide urgent
lifesaving assistance and protection. However, in the
following remarks I will focus on my other visits over
the past 16 days.

I turn first to Yemen. The humanitarian crisis there
is already the largest in the world, and the Yemeni
people now face the spectre of famine. Today, two
thirds of the population - 18.8 million people - need
assistance, while more than 7 million are hungry and do
not know where their next meal will come from. That
is 3 million more than in January. As the fighting in
Yemen continues and escalates, displacement increases.
With health facilities destroyed or damaged, diseases
are sweeping through the country.

I spoke with people in Aden, Ibb, Sana'a and from
Taiz. They told me horrific stories of displacement,
of escaping unspeakable violence and destruction
in Mokha and Taiz city in Taiz governorate. I
saw first-hand the effects of losing home and
livelihood - malnourishment, hunger and squalid
living conditions in destroyed schools, unfinished
apartments and wet concrete basements. In the past
two months alone, more than 48,000 people have fled
fighting, mines and improvised explosive devices in
Mokha town and the surrounding fields alone. I met
countless malnourished and sick children. My small
team met a girl who had been displaced to Ibb who still
had shrapnel wounds in her leg, while her brother was
deeply traumatized. I was introduced to a 13-year-old
girl who had fled Taiz city, left in charge of her seven
siblings. I spoke with families living in a ruined school
who had been displaced to Aden when their homes
were destroyed by air strikes. All of them told me three
things - they are hungry, they are sick and they need
peace so that they can return home.

I travelled to Aden on the first United Nations
humanitarian flight and met the President, Prime
Minister and Foreign Minister ofthe Republic onemen.
I also met with the senior leadership of the Houthi and
General People's Congress authorities in Sana'a. I
discussed the humanitarian situation and the importance
of preventing a famine, better respecting international
humanitarian law and protecting civilians. I demanded
full, safe and unimpeded humanitarian access. All my
counterparts promised to facilitate sustained access
and to respect international humanitarian law. Yet all
parties to the conflict are arbitrarily denying sustained
humanitarian access and are politicizing aid. Already,
the humanitarian suffering that we are seeing in Yemen
today is caused by the parties and proxies, and if they
do not change their behaviour immediately, they will
have to be held accountable for the inevitable famine,
unnecessary deaths and associated increase in suffering
that will follow.

Despite the almost impossible and terrifying
conditions, the United Nations and its humanitarian
partners are not deterred and are stepping up to meet
the humanitarian needs across the country. In February
alone, 4.9 million people received food assistance. We
continue to negotiate access and make modest gains.
For instance, despite assurances from all the parties of
safe passage to Taiz city, I and my team were denied
access and had to retreat a short distance to safety when
we came under gunfire. But we managed to use that
experience to enable us to clear the way to reach people
inside Taiz city with the first humanitarian truck
delivery, bringing eight tons of essential medicines on
the city road from Ibb to Taiz, since August 2016. We
will leave no stone unturned in order to find alternative
routes. We must prevail, because so many lives depend
on us, the full range of the humanitarian family.

For 2017, the humanitarian community requires
$2.1 billion in order to reach 12 million people in
Yemen with lifesaving assistance and protection.
Only 6 per cent of that funding has been received so
far. An international ministeria-level pledging event
is scheduled for 25 April, but the situation is so dire
that I ask donors to give urgently now. All contributions
and pledges made starting 1 January will be counted at
that event.

I continue to reiterate the same message to all:
it is only a political solution that will ultimately end
human suffering and bring stability to the region. And
at this stage, only a combined response with the private
sector can avert a famine. Commercial imports must be
allowed to resume through all entry points in Yemen,
including, and especially, Hudaydah port, which must
be kept open and expanded. With access and funding,
humanitarian workers will do more, but they are not the
long-term solution to the growing crisis.

As I just mentioned, a ministerial-level pledging
event for the humanitarian response in Yemen for 2017
will take place in Geneva on 25 April. The Secretary-
General will chair the event, co-hosted by the Foreign
Ministers of Sweden and Switzerland, to advocate
for more resources and access. For 2017, the Yemen
humanitarian response plan asks for $2.1 billion to assist
12 million people in need across all 22 governorates.

Turning to South Sudan, which I visited on 4 and
5 March, the situation is worse than it has ever been.
The famine in South Sudan is man-made. Parties to the
conflict are parties to the famine - as are those not
intervening to make the violence stop.

More than 7.5 million people need assistance, up
by 1.4 million from last year. About 3.4 million people
are displaced, ofwhich almost 200,000 have fled South
Sudan since January alone. A localized famine was
declared for Leer and Mayendit on 20 February, an
area where violence and insecurity have compromised
humanitarian access for years. More than 1 million
children are estimated to be acutely malnourished
across the country, including 270,000 children who face
the imminent risk of death should they not be reached in
time with assistance. Meanwhile, the cholera outbreak
that began in June 2016 has spread to more locations.

I travelled to GanyieI, in Unity state, where people
have fled from the horrors of famine and conflict. I
saw the impact humanitarians can have in alleviating
suffering. I met an elderly woman with her malnourished
grandson receiving treatment. I listened to women who
fled fighting, wading through waist-high swamps with
their children, to receive food and medicine. Some of
those women have experienced the most appalling acts
of sexual violence - which continues to be used as
a weapon of war. Their harrowing stories are only a
few among thousands who have suffered a similar fate
across the country.

Humanitarians are delivering. Last year, partners
reached more than 5.1 million people with assistance.
However, active hostilities, access denials and
bureaucratic impediments continue to curtail their
efforts to reach people who desperately need help. Aid
workers have been killed. Humanitarian compounds
and supplies have been attacked, looted and occupied
by armed actors. Recently, humanitarians had to
leave one of the famine-affected counties because of
fighting. Assurances by senior Government officials of
unconditional access and no bureaucratic impediments
now need to be turned into action on the ground.

InSomalia,morethanhalfthepopulation-6.2million
people - need humanitarian and protection assistance,
including 2.9 million who are at risk of famine and
require immediate assistance to save or sustain their
lives. Close to 1 million children under the age of 5
will be acutely malnourished this year. In the past
two months alone, nearly 160,000 people have been
displaced due to severe drought conditions, adding to
the already 1.1 million people who live in appalling
conditions around the country.

What I saw and heard during my visit to Somalia was
distressing - women and children walk for weeks in
search of food and water. They have lost their livestock,
water sources have dried up and they have nothing left
to survive on. With everything lost, women, boys, girls
and men now move to urban centres.

We visited Baidoa with the Secretary-General,
on his first field mission since he took office. We met
with displaced people going through ordeals none of us
could imagine. We visited the regional hospital where
children and adults are desperately fighting to survive
diarrhoea, cholera and malnutrition. Again, as if proof
were needed, it was clear that between malnutrition and
death there is always disease.
Large parts of southern and central Somalia remain
under the control or influence of Al-Shabaab, and
the security situation is volatile. Last year, some 165
violent incidents - an 18 per cent increase compared
to 2015 - directly impacted humanitarian work and
resulted in the deaths of 14 aid workers. Al-Shabaab,
Government forces and other militia also continue
to block major supply routes to towns in 29 of the
42 districts in southern and central Somalia. That
has restricted access to markets, basic commodities
and services, and is severely disrupting livelihoods.
Blockades and double taxation bar farmers from
transporting their grains. It is critical that Somali forces
and those of the African Union Mission in Somalia
secure vital road access to enable both lifesaving aid
and longer term recovery. A lot of hope is placed in the
new Government.

The current indicators mirror the tragic picture of
2011, when Somalia last suffered a famine. It should
be noted that by the time the famine was recognized
in 2011, half of the 260,000 people who died in the
famine had already died. That is important for points
I will make shortly. However, humanitarian partners
now have a larger footprint, mature cash programming,
better data through assessments, better controls on
resources and vetting of partners, as well as stronger
partnership with Government authorities. The
Government recently declared the drought a national
disaster and is taking steps to work with humanitarian
partners to ensure a coordinated response. To be clear,
we can avert a famine in Somalia. We have a committed
new President who has been clear, a humanitarian and
resilience track record and a detailed plan. We are
ready despite the incredible risks and dangers. We have
local and international leadership. We have a lot of
access. And now we need the international community,
gathered here, as well as donor agencies and nations, to
invest in Somalia. It is lifesaving but we do need those
huge funds now.

For all three of those situations, as well as for
north-east Nigeria, an immediate injection of funds,
plus safe and unimpeded access, are required to enable
partners to avert a catastrophe; otherwise, many people
will predictably die from hunger, livelihoods will be
lost and political gains, which have been hard-won over
the last few years, will be reversed. To be precise, we
need $4.4 billion by July - and that is a detailed cost,
not a negotiating number.

Before I visited all those countries, I was in
Oslo, where the Governments of Norway, Germany
and Nigeria, in partnership with the United Nations,
organized a humanitarian conference on Nigeria and
the Lake Chad region. Ten million seven hundred
thousand million people need humanitarian assistance
and protection, including 7.1 million people who are
severely food insecure. Humanitarian partners scaled
up their response to reach the most vulnerable groups
threatened by violence, food insecurity and famine,
particularly in north-east Nigeria - many Council
members saw that for themselves on their recent
mission to the region. Fourteen donors have pledged
a total of $672 million, of which $458 million is for
humanitarian action in 2017. That is very good news; I
commend those who made such generous pledges, and
I urge others to follow suit. More is needed, however, to
secure the $1.5 billion required to provide the assistance
needed across the Lake Chad region.

We stand at a critical point in our history. Already,
at the beginning of the year, we are facing the largest
humanitarian crisis since the establishment of the
United Nations. More than 20 million people across
four countries now face starvation and famine.
Without collective and coordinated global efforts,
people will simply starve to death. Many more will
suffer and die from disease. Children will be stunted
and out of school. Livelihoods, futures and hope will
be lost. Communities' resilience will rapidly wilt
away. Development gains will be reversed. Many will
be displaced and will continue to move in search for
survival, creating ever more instability across entire
regions. The warning call and appeal for action by the
Secretary-General can thus not be understated. It was
right to take the risk and sound the alarm early, not
wait for the pictures of emaciated, dying children on
the world's television screens to mobilize a reaction and
the funds.

The United Nations and humanitarian partners
are responding. We have strategic, coordinated and
prioritized plans in every country. We have the right
leadership and heroic, dedicated teams on the ground.
We are working hand-in-hand with development
partners to marry the immediate life-saving with
longer-term sustainable development. We are ready to
scale up. This is, frankly, not the time to ask for more
detail or use that postponing phrase, "What would you
prioritize?" Every life on the edge of famine and death
is equally worth saving.
Now we need the international community and the
Council to act.

First and foremost, it must act quickly to tackle
the precipitating factors of famine. Preserving and
restoring normal access to food and ensuring all
parties' compliance with international humanitarian
law are key.

Secondly, with sufficient and timely financial
support, humanitarians can still help to prevent the
worst-case scenario. To do this, humanitarians require
safe, full and unimpeded access to people in need.
Parties to the conflict must respect this fundamental
tenet of international humanitarian law, and those with
influence over the parties must exert that influence now.

Thirdly, the fighting must stop. To continue on the
path ofwar and military conquest is, I think we all know,
to guarantee failure, humiliation and moral turpitude,
and we will bear the responsibility for the millions who
face hunger and deprivation on an incalculable scale
because of it.

Allow me very briefly to sum up. The situation
for people in each country is dire, and without a
major international response, the situation will get
worse. All four countries have one thing in common:
conflict. This means that we - the Council - have
the possibility to prevent and end further misery and
suffering. The United Nations and its partners are ready
to scale up, but we need the access and the funds to do
more. It is all preventable. It is possible to avert this
crisis, to avert these famines, to avert these looming
human catastrophes.

