Mr. Aldouri (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation congratulates you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this
month. We are confident that your African wisdom will
be the best guarantor of the success of the Council's
work under these difficult circumstances. I should also
like to thank Germany for its presidency of the
Security Council last month and for all its efforts
towards the success of the Council's deliberations.

I would like to thank Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei
for their efforts and for their briefings. Let me
underline our pledge to continue proactive cooperation
with them.

Iraq's actions are based on a deep sense of
responsibility and on a clear vision of the nature of the
very difficult international situation, which is
inauspicious not only for Iraq and its people but for the
region and the entire world, including the United
Nations. The entire world, with the exception of a few
States, wishes to see the United Nations continue to
fulfil the tasks entrusted to it in the area of
international peace and security.

It seems that a possible war of aggression against
Iraq has become imminent, regardless of any decision
by the Security Council and despite the fact that
official and public international opinion strongly
rejects aggression and war and demands a peaceful
solution. The French, German, Russian and Chinese
position makes it clear that there is no need for a
second resolution to be adopted by the Security
Council. It demands that the work of the inspectors
continue and that they be given enough time to
complete their tasks by peaceful means.

The position of the Arab countries is also clear,
particularly the position taken at the latest Arab
Summit, which unanimously rejected an attack on Iraq
as a threat to Arab national security. The Summit called
for a peaceful resolution of the Iraqi crisis within the
framework of international legitimacy. The Summit
affirmed the Security Council's responsibility to
preserve the independence, security and territorial
integrity of Iraq. The Summit also declared that it is
time to lift the sanctions imposed on Iraq.

The latest summit of the 116-member Non-
Aligned Movement, held in Kuala Lumpur, condemned
the use or threat of military action, considering it to be
aggression and a flagrant violation of the principle of
non-interference.

The heads of State and Government and other
representatives of 57 Islamic countries, who recently
met at the Doha Summit, also declared their absolute
rejection of any aggression against Iraq, considering it
to be a threat to the security of all Islamic States.

Here, I would like to recall the position of the
African Union, which has clearly and categorically
rejected war and called for a peaceful solution. I should
like also to express my appreciation for the efforts
being made by churches throughout the world in
stressing the importance of peace, in particular the
efforts being made by His Holiness Pope John Paul II
in advocating peace and denouncing war, which he
considers to be lacking any moral basis or legitimacy.

On behalf of the people of Iraq, I salute all
peoples of the world, in particular the peoples of the
United States of America, the United Kingdom and
Spain, who took to the streets by the millions to
express their devotion to peace and their rejection of
war.

The United States Administration, together with
that of the United Kingdom, continues to fabricate
"facts" and "evidence" suggesting Iraq's possession of
weapons of mass destruction. However, they have not
managed to convince the international community. The
inspectors have proven that there are no such weapons
and that such allegations are false. Secretary of State
Powell spoke of the lack of a strategic political
decision by Iraq to demonstrate its commitment to
complying with the resolutions of international
legitimacy and to ridding Iraq of weapons of mass
destruction.
Let me affirm that in 1991 Iraq did indeed take
the strategic decision to rid itself of weapons of mass
destruction. Accordingly, the United Nations Special
Commission (UNSCOM) worked in Iraq for eight
years. Iraq handed over many of those weapons to
UNSCOM. for destruction in the period from 1991 to
1994. UNSCOM. did in fact undertake the destruction
of those weapons. That was in addition to the weapons
unilaterally destroyed by Iraq in the summer of 1991,
which included proscribed biological material. Those
are the basic facts of the matter. Since then, nothing
that contradicts those facts has been unearthed.

All weapons that have been proscribed fall into
one of two categories: they have been either declared
or unilaterally destroyed by Iraq. All the declarations
that Iraq has been repeatedly asked to present
concerned the details and verification of that unilateral
destruction and nothing - nothing - else. It is for the
accusers to prove otherwise, if they possess any
evidence.

With respect to what Secretary of State Powell
stated about Iraq's VX programme, the fact is that Iraq
had no VX weapons to declare. No VX agent remained
for Iraq to declare. Iraq has never produced stable VX
and has never weaponized VX. No one has any
evidence to prove the contrary. Mr. Powell should not
jump to hasty conclusions as he has done in the past on
the issue of the aluminium tubes and with his claims of
uranium imports. Today the Council heard exactly the
opposite directly from Mr. ElBaradei.

With respect to the statements on Iraq's
cooperation that I heard this morning from many
members of the Council, allow me to refer to the
statement by Mr. Blix, not today but two days ago in a
press conference. At that press conference, Mr. Blix
stated that Iraq is cooperating proactively - I stress
that he used the word "proactively". He stated that real
disarmament is taking place on the ground. He stated
that the efforts being undertaken by Iraq and the
inspectors represent steps towards the actual
verification of Iraq's unilateral destruction of its
previous proscribed programmes.

When asked whether Iraq represents a threat now,
he replied that all agree that Iraq possesses very limited
military capacities in comparison with 1991, and that
Iraq is being very closely monitored by the inspectors.

On the issue of interviews, Mr. Blix stated that
his experts have made it clear that those interviews are
yielding important and beneficial results in terms of
data. In this regard, he pointed out the importance of
Iraq's submitting the names of those who had
participated in the destruction of proscribed
programmes, which would surely facilitate the
verification of such destruction. He added that he did
not agree with those who say that resolution 1441
(2002) is a disarmament resolution and not an
inspection resolution.

The statements of the United States and the
United Kingdom, as well as those of some other
speakers today, show that there is a state of confusion.
Officials in the United States and the United Kingdom,
as well as those standing at their side, are unable to
provide any evidence proving the existence of weapons
of mass destruction in Iraq. Furthermore, they have
been unable to conceal their own private agenda in the
region and the rest of the world.

This all started with the issue of Iraq's possession
and development of weapons of mass destruction. Then
they demanded that Iraq accept the return of inspectors.
They then moved on to the issue of proactive
cooperation with the inspectors, followed by demands
for the submission of evidence proving that Iraq was
free from weapons of mass destruction. At the most
recent meeting, they concentrated on the need to
destroy Al Samoud 2 missiles. The discussion then
moved on to the claim that Iraq is destroying such
missiles on the one hand and manufacturing new ones
on the other. Talk then began about an alleged link with
terrorism and about regime change. Finally, here we
are hearing that Iraq is a threat to the national security
of the United States - that is the claim made by
President Bush - although earlier we had heard that
Iraq was a threat to its neighbours.

This is an attempt to confuse the issue. It is an
attempt to mask the real agenda of the United States of
America and the United Kingdom with regard to Iraq.
It is a very simple agenda. The objective is the
complete takeover of Iraq's oil and the political and
economic domination of the entire Arab region. It is
the implementation of what is being called a new
Sikes-Pico plan for the Middle East - the redrawing
of the region once more.

When Iraq accepted Security Council resolutions
it was hoping for justice from the Council, and it
continues to do so. The introduction of the new draft
resolution and the most recent amendment do not relate
to disarmament. The aim is to drag the Security
Council into taking actions that will have detrimental
consequences, not only for Iraq, but for the very
credibility of this international Organization.

I should like at this point to express Iraq's
gratitude to all those who oppose the draft resolution.
Let me repeat to them that Iraq will not waver in its
continuing proactive and rapid cooperation with the
United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission and the International Atomic Energy
Agency.

We call upon the Security Council to shoulder its
historical responsibility, especially today, by thwarting
aggression against Iraq and preventing a new crime
from being committed in its name - a crime whose
impact would far surpass that of any crime of the past
century.

In conclusion, let me add that war against Iraq
will wreak destruction, but it will not unearth any
weapons of mass destruction, for one very simple
reason: there are no such weapons, except in the
imagination of some. All those who assist in the
commission of such a war, without a direct interest in
it, will be sorry indeed.

