The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Ethiopia.

I would like to thank Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres for being here with us this afternoon and for
his important briefing on the security and humanitarian
situation in Myanmar, which is indeed deeply worrying.
We appreciate the initiative he has taken to draw the
attention of the Council to the latest developments in
Myanmar, which no doubt could easily have serious
implications for regional peace and security if not
handled both quickly and carefully.

We also look forward to listening to the views of
Bangladesh and Myanmar, the two countries that are
directly concerned with the discussion we are having
today. We certainly recognize, as the representatives
of Sweden and Italy said earlier, the complex nature of
the challenges in Rakhine State, which we believe can
be addressed only through a comprehensive approach
that combines political, development, security and
humanitarian concerns. In this regard, we encourage the
Government of Myanmar to address the root causes of
the violence. We wish to underline the need to address
all forms of hate speech that incite and fuel violence,
and stress the need to take the measures necessary to
defuse intercommunal tensions and protect the rights of
all communities. Of course, any acts of extreme violence
are unjustifiable, regardless of their motivation. That is
why we see the initial attack by the Arakan Rohingya
Salvation Army as very unfortunate and senseless. The
Secretary-General is right in condemning it. We believe
that has only worsened the humanitarian tragedy, not
helped to ease it. The way this tragedy is approached
from the outset will determine how soon those affected
will get sustainable relief through addressing the
root causes or how much the situation will be further
complicated, with the humanitarian situation getting
ever worse, with no end in sight to the human suffering.

Already the Government of Bangladesh is telling
us that the situation has become grave, with far-
reaching implications for regional peace and security.
We welcome and support the proposal by the Secretary-
General to address the tragic situation as a matter of
high priority. There is indeed an urgent need to end the
military operation. The cooperation of the Myanmar
Government in allowing unhindered humanitarian
access is critical to reach those in need of urgent
assistance.

The efforts made by the Bangladesh Government
and the United Nations agencies to cope with the influx
of refugees is to be commended. Here we wish to stress
one very critical matter: the need to do what we must
to ensure an acceptable level of mutual trust between
the Myanmar Government, the United Nations and the
international community at large. The role of diplomacy
should never be overlooked, including an even greater
role by the Secretary-General. We believe that the
implementation of the recommendations made by the
Advisory Commission will contribute to tackling the
long-standing obstacles to peace and development in
Rakhine state.

In this regard, we commend the initial step taken by
the Government of Myanmar to establish a ministerial
committee to ensure the effective implementation of
the Commission's recommendations. It is absolutely
necessary, we stress, to work closely with the Myanmar
Government in addressing the root causes ofthe conflict
in Rakhine state. Cooperation with Bangladesh and
members ofthe Association of Southeast Asian Nations
is also vital in addressing the issue of refugees and its
broader implications for regional peace and stability.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I now give the floor to Mr. Tun.

