Judge Pocar (spoke in French): It is both an
honour and a privilege to appear again before the
Security Council, for the purpose of presenting the
seventh report of the President of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) in
accordance with Security Council resolution 1534
(2004). In my presentation today, I will highlight the
most significant points made in my report on our
completion strategy, which was submitted to the
members of the Council on 15 May 2007. I will also
bring members up to date on new developments that
have occurred since the report's submission.

Before delving into the International Tribunal's
activities during the past six months, Mr. President, I
take this opportunity to convey my appreciation for the
unwavering support shown by your country for our
work, as well as for its leadership in combating
impunity for the commission of genocide, war crimes
and crimes against humanity. I note in particular, Sir,
that the International Tribunal has benefited greatly
from the sense of responsibility and dedicated service
of one of your compatriots, who first served as an ad
litem judge and now sits as a permanent trial judge.

Members will recall in my last report to the
Council I indicated that the International Tribunal had
experienced one of the most productive periods in its
history. Today, I begin by stating that we have not only
maintained our previous level of effectiveness, but
have in fact further increased the output of the
Tribunal's Chambers during this reporting period.

The three Trial Chambers of the Tribunal
continued to function at full capacity, hearing six trials
simultaneously in the International Tribunal's three
courtrooms, in the morning and the afternoon.
Additionally, a seventh trial started at the beginning of
January 2007, taking advantage of any openings that
might appear in the courtroom schedule. This marked
the first time in the International Tribunal's history that
seven cases were heard simultaneously in three Trial
Chambers.

Eight cases were tried in the Trial Chambers
during the reporting period, three of which are
multiple-accused cases, involving a total of 19 accused.
Judgement was rendered in the Martic case on 12 June
2007, and judgement in the Mrksic et al. case will be

issued in the coming weeks. By making use of gaps in
the courtroom schedule, judges also heard one
contempt case, and judgment was issued on 7 January
2007. Similarly, when trials were not in session, the
Referral Bench, consisting of judges from each of the
three Trial Chambers, conducted hearings in three
cases of referral to national jurisdictions in accordance
with rule 11 bis of the Rules of Procedure and
Evidence of the International Tribunal.

In addition, the Trial Chambers managed 12 cases
in the pre-trial stage, leading to the issuance of more
than 150 written and oral decisions. Following on the
recommendations of the working group on speeding up
trials, which were detailed to the Council in the
31 May 2006 completion strategy report (S/2006/353),
trial judges have used a strong hand to guide the
preparation of cases for trial and to ensure that the
International Tribunal can immediately start a new case
when another case is completed or is suspended for any
reason. This plan was put into action following
complications that arose at the start of the Seselj and
Gotovina et al. trials. The Trial Chamber filled the
resulting gaps in the trial schedule with the trial of
Dragomir Milosevic, which started in January, and that
of Rasim Delic, which is due to commence in July.
That proactive case management approach in pre-trial
proceedings has enabled the Tribunal to begin three
new trials during the reporting period.

As I explained to the Council in my previous
reports, the Tribunal has implemented a large number
of amendments to the Rules of Procedure and Evidence
to enhance the efficiency of pre-trial and trial
proceedings. I am pleased to report that the most recent
amendments to the Rules, presented in the last two
reports to the Council, have fulfilled their intended
purpose during the reporting period with great success.
Thus, rule 73 bis, introduced in May 2006, has been
used to request or order the Prosecution to reduce the
indictment in the Seselj, D. Milosevic, Milutinovic
et al., Gotovina et al. and Perisic cases. Rule 92 ter,
adopted in September 2006, has had similar success.
Recourse to the rule has saved a great deal of time in
the Milatinovic et al. and Popovic et al. trials.

Furthermore, in order to save time, the Trial
Chambers decided to hold additional hearings in those
cases during the brief summer and winter recesses.
Two Trial Chambers have already expressed their
intention to continue to conduct hearings during the
summer recess in order to expedite proceedings.

New approaches have also been devised to
streamline the process by which cases move from the
pre-trial stage to trial. The ongoing receipt of
information from judges regarding the progress of
pre-trial and trial proceedings has enabled the working
group responsible for trial scheduling to produce a
provisional calendar of current and future trials which
the Tribunal believes to be a reasonably accurate
forecast of the completion dates of trial proceedings.
That calendar indicates that four of the six remaining
cases are expected to finish during the first half of
2009 and the other two before the end of 2009.

Moving on to the activity of the Appeals
Chamber, I am pleased to inform the Council that the
Appeals Chamber has made even greater strides in
terms of productivity. It issued seven Judgements
during the reporting period - a record number in the
history of the International Tribunal. In addition, the
Appeals Chamber rendered one contempt Judgement;
three decisions on review or reconsideration; and more
than one hundred other written decisions on
interlocutory appeals and pre-appeal decisions. At
present, the Appeals Chamber has 10 pending appeals
and is scheduled to issue four judgements in the next
semester.

In its efforts to improve efficiency, the Appeals
Chamber has greatly benefited from amendments to the
Rules that have allowed for the expediting of
proceedings while upholding the due process rights of
the accused.

I wish to draw the attention of the Council to the
fundamental issue of the composition of the Appeals
Chamber. This should be considered over the next few
months, since the workload is increasingly shifting
from the Trial Chambers to the Appeals Chamber. In
fact, the workload of the Appeals Chamber has already
increased considerably during 2006-2007. That trend is
expected to continue during 2008-2009, particularly in
the light of the expected appeals from the
multi-accused cases with six or more accused. Each of
those cases could potentially generate up to eight
appeals. As a result, it will become necessary for the
Tribunal to identify ways of increasing the number of
permanent judges that sit in the Appeals Chamber. In
my opinion, all the trial judges of the ICTY and the
ICTR will be available to take on appellate work once
they are no longer engaged in trial work. That solution
will ensure the orderly and expeditious completion of
all appeals using existing resources.

By the same token, although cuts in Trial
Chamber staffing are expected once the trials end, a
significant redeployment of staff from trial support to
appeals support will be required in order to
successfully process the heavy workload of the
Appeals Chamber in the two-year period following the
end of all trial proceedings.

(spoke in English)

The achievements and new measures that I have
just described provide clear evidence that the judges of
the International Tribunal have, under my presidency,
been fully committed to the work of the Tribunal and
to the expeditious handling of legal proceedings, all the
while mindful of their duty to ensure the fairness of
proceedings and full respect for the rights of the
accused.

My gratitude and appreciation also extend to the
Tribunal's ad litem judges, without whose dedication
the impressive results that I am reporting today would
not have been possible. There are currently 11 ad litem
judges at the Tribunal, three of whom serve both as
ad litem judges for one trial and as reserve ad litem
judges for another. During the reporting period, other
ad litem judges have been willing to hear a new case
While drafting a judgement in another case, effectively
dealing with two cases full-time. Those ad litem judges
that have not been assigned an additional trial are fully
engaged in the preparation of new cases for trial. I can
say without hesitation that the contributions of our
ad litem judges are indispensable to the successful
completion of the mandate of the Tribunal within the
general time frame laid down by the completion
strategy.

I would also like to make special mention of the
International Tribunal's professional and skilled staff
who have demonstrated impressive dedication, with
drafting teams being shared by groups of judges and
legal assistants doubling up on trials, effectively
increasing what was already a heavy workload.

Let me now turn to another key element of our
completion strategy: the referral of cases involving
intermediate and lower-ranking accused to competent
jurisdictions by the Tribunal, as authorized by Security
Council resolution 1534 (2004). The impact of the
referrals already processed on the overall workload of
the Tribunal has been substantial. Ten accused have
been transferred to the Special War Crimes Chamber in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, two accused have been
transferred for trial before the domestic courts of
Croatia and one accused has been transferred to Serbia
for trial. Only two accused have yet to have their
transfer finalized.

Of the cases referred by the International
Tribunal, two trial proceedings have been completed
by the Sarajevo Special War Crimes Chamber. The
International Tribunal is satisfied that the trials of both
of those accused observed the international norms of
due process. Unfortunately, one of the accused,
Radovan Stankovic, who had been convicted and
sentenced to 20 years imprisonment, escaped from the
custody of the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities on
25 May 2007. The Tribunal is extremely concerned
about that escape and has requested a full report from
the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities. The Tribunal
is hopeful that those authorities and other States, will
do all in their power to return Stankovic to custody. A
failure to do so may impact upon the future integrity of
the 11 bis referral process. With respect to the Ademi
and Norac case referred to Croatia on 14 September
2005, the trial which has suffered some delays is
expected to commence today, 18 June, and I hope that
it will proceed expeditiously.

In order to ensure that international norms of due
process are consistently observed in cases referred
back to the former Yugoslavia, it is imperative that
domestic jurisdictions in the region are given the
fullest support by the Security Council and the
international community in strengthening their judicial
capacity, including adequate detention facilities. The
Tribunal is particularly appreciative of initiatives taken
by some Member States to provide resources and
training to support the rule of law in the States of the
former Yugoslavia, yet, much work remains to be done.
For lasting change to be achieved and the rule of law to
be entrenched in the region, the international
community must be prepared to renew and reinforce its
current commitments, in order to ensure that trials of
war criminals which respect due process norms
continue upon the close of the International Tribunal. It
is the courts in the region that have begun the next
chapter of the International Tribunal's work by
prosecuting war crimes cases at the domestic level. It is
those courts that will carry on the legacy of the
Tribunal long after it has completed its mission.

I turn now to a related issue: our efforts to
disseminate the results of our work in the region. The
raison d'etre of our outreach programme and field

offices in Belgrade, Sarajevo, Pristina and Zagreb is to
ensure that the International Tribunal is actively
engaged in efforts to restore and maintain peace in the
region. This means, in concrete terms, that the Tribunal
coordinates and participates in a number of public
events, such as conferences, lectures and training
programmes, with local judiciaries and legal
professionals. It also engages local media, victims'
associations and other sectors of civil society to
provide information on developments in the
International Tribunal's work. In short, the outreach
programme of the International Tribunal is working
diligently to demonstrate to the people of the region,
who suffered through the horrors of a decade of
conflict, that concrete results are being achieved in
holding accountable those who committed atrocities
and in reinforcing the development of the rule of law in
the region.

I now turn to an area that has for far too long
been a cause for great concern but that now offers an
atmosphere of guarded optimism. The success of the
International Tribunal has always been predicated upon
the willingness of States to cooperate in full
compliance with their obligation to do so under article
29 of the Statute. The imperative for States to
cooperate in the apprehension of each accused has
reached a critical stage. With that reality as a backdrop,
it is with satisfaction that I can report to the Council
that, on 31 May, General Zdravko Tolimir, a top aide to
General Ratko Mladic during the Bosnian war of 1992
to 1995, was apprehended by Bosnian authorities along
the border with the Bosnian Serb entity of Republika
Srpska, and that Vlastimir Djordjevic, an assistant
minister at the Serbian Ministry of Internal Affairs and
its Public Security Department Chief, accused of
participating in the campaign against Kosovo Albanian
civilians in 1999, was arrested in Montenegro on
17 June. Notwithstanding those arrests, the
international community must not waver in its
determination to see that the four remaining high-level
fugitives, namely, Karadzic, Mladic, Zupljanin and
Hadzic are brought to justice.

The Tribunal has repeatedly reported to the
Security Council that its mandate will not be fully
discharged until all of those accused have been arrested
and tried. Accordingly, I urge the Council to take
action now and to send a strong message to those
fugitives that they will not be allowed to wait out
international justice and that their trials do not hinge on
the International Tribunal's completion strategy dates.
The final point that I wish to raise with the
members of the Council relates to the legacy of the
Tribunal. The Tribunal has focused its attention for
more than a year on the creation of the kind of
mechanisms that will need to remain in place in order
to dispose of residual issues once it completes all trials
and appeals on its docket. As part of this process, the
Registrar of the Tribunal organized a working group of
key officials at the International Tribunal who focused
on that important issue, in collaboration with the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. In
September of last year, I convened the judges in a
plenary session to address legacy questions. That
discussion informed the report prepared by the
International Tribunal and submitted to the Office of
the Legal Counsel for the Council's consideration in
April of this year.

That report to the Council reflects the deep
commitment of the International Tribunal to doing
everything within its power to implement its
completion strategy. As a result of the Tribunal's
creative efforts and the measures that it has adopted, it
is anticipated that most trials will be completed by
2008, four additional trials by mid-2009 and the final
two currently on the docket by the end of 2009. In
addition, should any of the four remaining fugitives
from justice be arrested now, some of the trials will
most likely be heard before the end of 2009.
Furthermore, it is estimated that appeals will conclude
within two years of the close of the trials. It is my
undertaking to the Council that the Tribunal's judges
and its highly competent staff will continue to seek
new measures and work tirelessly to increase the
efficiency of the International Tribunal's work, all the
while mindful of the need to respect due process and
the fair trial rights of the accused.

In the light of the pressing need of the
International Tribunal to continue to seek new
measures to increase efficiency and to maintain the
levels of efficiency already achieved, it is of vital
importance that it retains its highly qualified and
experienced judges and staff.

In conclusion, while the picture that I am painting
for the Council today is one of tremendous progress, I
must emphasize that, ultimately, the success of the
International Tribunal is not exclusively measured by
the judgements issued or the number of trials and
appeals completed. The overall legacy of the
International Tribunal will be the precedent that it has
set for the enforcement of international humanitarian
law and the contribution that it has made to the
establishment of peace and stability in the former
Yugoslavia through the prosecution of those
responsible for the atrocities committed in the region.

The Tribunal is, undeniably, indebted to the
Security Council for the wisdom that it demonstrated
in establishing the Tribunal in 1993. The establishment
of the first international war crimes court since the
Nuremberg trials has served to put perpetrators and
would-be perpetrators on notice that war crimes,
crimes against humanity and genocide will not be
tolerated by the international community and will not
go unpunished. I urge Member States not to
underestimate the historical and precedent-setting
achievements of the International Tribunal and to
maintain their strong support as the International
Tribunal approaches the completion of its mandate.

I am grateful for the attention and time that the
Council has given to me today.

