Mr. Sparber (Liechtenstein): I thank you,
Mr. President, for giving us this opportunity to discuss
the situation in the Middle East. Developments in
different parts ofthe region have made this an important
and meaningful topic for discussion among the entire
membership, which should also be afforded the same
opportunity to express itself on other crises of which
the Council is seized.

We continue to be disappointed by the failure of the
Security Council to exert its leverage over the parties
to the conflict in Syria as the conflict appears to move
inexorably towards a negative conclusion for the Syrian
people. The conflict continues to be characterized by
systematic and egregious violations of international
human rights and international humanitarian law,
including the use of chemical weapons, mass
displacement, torture and forced disappearances. We
continue to value and support the important work of the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry on
the Syrian Arab Republic in investigating grave human
rights violations, and we thank the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) Fact-
finding Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic for its
continued efforts to bring to light details of chemical
weapons use in Syria.

Liechtenstein welcomes the decision of the special
session of the Conference of the States Parties to the
Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons
and on Their Destruction to task the OPCW with
identifying the perpetrators of the use of chemical
weapons in Syria, as an important contribution to the
efforts of the International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism for Syria to advance justice and individual
criminal responsibility for those acts.

Accountability must be part and parcel of any
political agreement to end the conflict in Syria. That has
long been a demand of the Syrian people and countless
Syrian civil society groups. Sustainable peace and the
effective rebuilding of the country will be possible only
if those who have perpetrated crimes against humanity
and large-scale war crimes are held to account and
excluded from the political leadership.

We are encouraged by the effective work being
carried out by the Independent Mechanism, whose
mandate encompasses crimes committed by all
perpetrators, irrespective of affiliation. The work of
the Mechanism is having a concrete impact, as we are
seeing criminal proceedings move forward on the basis
ofuniversaljurisdiction in several Europeanjudiciaries.
In addition, we reiterate our call on the Council to refer
the situation in Syria to the International Criminal
Court with a view to providing a comprehensive
justice perspective to the Syrian people, echoing the
clear call of the Secretary-General at the previous
Brussels conference.

We share the Council's cautious optimism
regarding recent developments in the efforts to end the
war in Yemen and hope that the new support mission
will ensure that the agreements reached in Stockholm
are fully implemented and can be further built upon.
Liechtenstein supports the efforts of the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Yemen and his team, and
hopes that the parties will be able to maintain the recent
positive momentum.

As the peace process moves forward, it is key that
the Council work to address atrocity crimes committed
during the conflict. We note that two-thirds of current
Council members are signatories to the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency Group code of conduct on
mass atrocity crimes, which includes the commitments
to not voting against a resolution in cases of mass
atrocity crimes and to taking action to prevent and
put an end to those crimes. Guided by the latter of
those commitments, the Council should also take
steps to ensure that accountability for atrocity crimes
is included in any final peace settlement in order to
prevent a return to conflict and to bring real, tangible
justice to the people of Yemen.

