Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
We would like at the very outset to thank Mr. Pascoe
for his update on the situation in Gaza.

This emergency meeting is necessary in view of
the very tense and worrisome situation prevailing in
Gaza, stemming, as we know, from a resumption of
hostilities between Israelis and Palestinians and
aggravated by the draconian coercive measures taken
by Israel against the inhabitants of Gaza.

It is not for us today to engage in a rhetorical
exercise, but to concretely consider, through a careful
review of the situation, what the Council and the
international community can do to put an end to the
blockade of Gaza. This blockade is unacceptable
because it holds hostage a whole population subject to
all types of privation.

At this stage, we are not discussing whether there
is justification for the present crisis - who is right and
who is wrong - even though it is clear that the Israeli
reprisals are a response to rocket fire from the Gaza
Strip against the Jewish State, something we condemn.
Let us consider only the facts, which could result in a
large-scale human tragedy. On the fifth day of the
clashes, we see continued desolation, concern and
dread among the Palestinians. The most important
issue is the fate of the civilian population, victims of a
war in which they are not the main protagonist. That is
why international humanitarian law must be applied
here - in this instance the Fourth Geneva Convention.

The humanitarian situation in Gaza is very
critical and poses problems of survival for more than a
million people, in particular defenceless women,
children, the elderly and the disabled. By depriving
these populations of electricity, running water, medical
care and other vital services, Israel is violating the
rules of international law, which state that in times of
conflict the rights of civilian populations should be
preserved and fully respected. Unfortunately, that is
not the case here. My delegation is especially
concerned because the blockade also impedes the
efforts of humanitarian organizations, whose activities
on the ground at this very moment are crucial.

In View of all that I have said, and in the face of
such suffering among the inhabitants of Gaza, Burkina
Faso cannot remain unmoved. We urge Israel to put an
end to the blockade, in particular by fully opening the
crossing points with Gaza in order to permit
international aid to reach the Palestinian population,
and by facilitating fuel deliveries for the resumption of
power plant operations. This should lead to the
resumption of full supplies for the people, as well as
for hospitals and other facilities. We also call on the
Palestinian side to scrupulously observe the ceasefire.

We believe that only on that condition can
Israelis and Palestinians continue, calmly and hopefully,
the bilateral negotiations launched in December 2007
in the framework of the Annapolis agreements with a
view to the establishment of two States - the State of
Israel and the State of Palestine - living side by side
in peace and security. My delegation calls upon both
sides to demonstrate restraint and to favour dialogue
over any military solution. Above all - and returning
to the issue that has brought us together today - we
urgently call upon Israel to avoid the risk of plunging
the Gaza Strip into a humanitarian catastrophe whose
consequences could certainly be incalculable.

