Mrs. Carrien (Uruguay): We appreciate your
presence at this open debate, Sir, and congratulate
the presidency of Senegal for having organized it. We
thank Mr. Wane, Mr. Antdnio, Mr. Menkerios and
Mr. Kaberuka for their respective briefings.

Uruguay believes that cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations is an invaluable tool to improve
collective security in a world that is increasingly in
turmoil and faces complex and multidimensional
threats. Cooperation among States is fundamental to
the prevention and peaceful settlement of conflicts.
Regional organizations are playing an increasingly
important role in international peacebuilding and
security, insomuch as they contribute to a deepened
understanding of their respective regions and wield
a greater sensitivity and comprehension of realities
on the ground, thereby paving the way to effectively
confront the problems and conflicts that affect their
respectivepositions on the map.

In the case of Africa, cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union is crucial and
imperative given the existence of conflict situations
in complex settings, in the context of which we
face asymmetrical threats and the spread of violent
extremism and terrorism, and where in many cases
we also must tackle humanitarian crises and mass
violations of human rights.

Against this backdrop, we very much welcome the
work carried out with determination and energy by the
African Union to achieve peace and development in
Africa. We also welcome the progress made in terms
of cooperation between that organization and the
United Nations, but we believe that this partnership
should be further strengthened through more frequent
interaction and consultations, paving the way for a
common understanding of conflicts and the elaboration
of common strategies. In that respect, we trust that the
draft resolution (S/2016/977) to be adopted today will
contribute to that process.

One of the major shortcomings of the system,
according to the Ramos-Horta report (see S/2015/446),
pertains to the financing of this strategic partnership.
It is for that reason that we deem it desirable that
the United Nations and the African Union pool their
efforts aimed at establishing predictable, flexible
and sustainable mechanisms aimed at bolstering
peace-support operations in the African region.
Furthermore, given that conflict prevention is a
major priority, I should like to stress also that the report
of the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of the
Peacebuilding Architecture (see S/2015/490) notes that
peacebuilding efforts must be backed by a predictable
and sustainable allocation of resources.

While acknowledging the leading role played by
the Security Council in matters relating to international
peace and security, we must nonetheless identify the
complementary functions that both organizations could
carry out, harnessing their capacities, influence and
experience to ensure a consistent, coherent response in
various contexts. For example, the efforts in the areas
of mediation, facilitation and good offices carried out
by the African Union in various countries, including
the Sudan, South Sudan, Burundi and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, must be harmonized with, and
complementary to, the efforts and actions undertaken
by the Security Council.

One area in which we believe the cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union
must continue to progress is that of human rights and
humanitarian law. In that respect, we express our
support for the United Nations Office to the African
Union and for the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights with respect to their
assistance in strengthening the operational capacity of
military, police and civilian peacekeeping staff, with an
emphasis on the central importance of human rights in
peacekeeping operations.

Our country attaches a great deal of importance to
the role played by peacekeeping operations, which we
believe are of particular importance in Africa, where
more than 60 per cent of peacekeeping operations and
more than 80 per cent of all United Nations uniformed
peacekeeping personnel are located, and given that
more than 80 per cent of the annual peacekeeping
budget is earmarked for missions in Africa.

I think it worth highlighting that over the past
decade, the partnership between the United Nations and
the African Union has achieved a great deal of progress,
having established various forms of cooperation,
including in the missions in Mali, the Central African
Republic, Somalia and the Sudan. The success of
peacekeeping operations requires ever more robust
cooperation between both organizations; for example,
in the process of drafting mandates, it is essential that
both organizations pull clearly in the same direction.

To conclude, we acknowledge that the strategic
partnership between the United Nations and the African
Union has made further headway in the development
of cooperation mechanisms, including, inter alia,
mechanisms for consultative decision-making, joint
analysis, planning and assessment; an integrated
response to the conflict cycle; andjoint efforts to prevent
conflict and promote accountability and transparency.
Such advances, which must continue to be fine-tuned
and adapted to new realities, could serve as a model
and a reference for the establishment and strengthening
of partnerships between the United Nations and other
regional organizations, thus bolstering synergies and
promoting complementarity, taking into account at all
times the unique features of each and respecting the
mandates of each organization.

This would allow us to benefit from and develop the
potential of regional organizations, which, in keeping
with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations,
represent vital pillars of United Nations actions aimed
at the maintenance of international peace and security.

