Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia)(spoke in Spanish): I
would also like to thank Mr. Guehenno for his briefing.
It is important that this public meeting follow through
on one of the United Nations' most worthy efforts,
specifically that of accompanying a process that
depends on the efforts, in this case, being promoted by
the Kosovars themselves, in order to achieve, as
several speakers have already said, a pluralistic,
democratic model that will guarantee multi-ethnic
integration. I think we need to say that things are
moving forward, amidst a great deal of tension, in a
positive direction.

I therefore feel it is important to highlight the
activities promoted by Mr. Steiner from Pristina to
overcome the crisis of last 23 May, when the Kosovo
Assembly declared null and void the border agreements
between the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and
Macedonia. We wish to reiterate our support for the
decisions taken by Mr. Steiner in declaring those
resolutions null and void. While the events of 23 May
did not affect the implementation of the provisional
constitutional framework, they do represent a political
event of major importance. We hope that these
episodes, these events, will not have any greater effect
on Kosovo's political future.

We believe also that the Kosovo Assembly must
focus on activities to promote institution-building. It is
also essential for the Kosovo Government to continue
to support the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo in pursuing the important objective
of restoring democracy and social stability.

Among the achievements made in recent months,
I would like to highlight the implementation of the
provisional constitutional framework for self-
government, which established new political
institutions and democratic electoral processes. We
know that many activities have already been
successfully undertaken. However, with regard to the
Office of the Inter-Ministerial Coordinator on Returns,
we urge the Kosovar community to make a particular
commitment to those who are returning to their places
of origin. We believe that the return of refugees and
their proper reintegration into society will require a
special effort. Experience shows that this is not a
mechanical process; they must be welcomed and
accepted by those in the region to which they are
returning - the region that they left specifically
because of the conflict.

I would like to comment on efforts to combat
organized crime and violence in the region. These are
matters of priority if appropriate conditions for
coexistence are to be ensured. The agreements drawn
up with the police force aimed at achieving greater
security in the region and in the border areas - such as
the agreement signed on 31 May in Belgrade - are
examples of cooperation between the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo and
Yugoslavia, and I would like once again to highlight
them.

Recent events also show that there are significant
weaknesses within the Department of Justice with
regard to combating organized and inter-ethnic crime. I
would like to refer to two matters that appear in the
magazine that was distributed to us. The first relates to
the need for the United Nations to speed up the
appointment of judges and auxiliary personnel, as
called for by the head of the UNMIK Department of
Justice. Better results will be achieved if justice can be
assured as soon as possible. The United Nations must
try to introduce a procedure that will speed up the
selection process.

Furthermore, there is a need for minorities to be
included in the judicial system. This requirement must
be taken into account, and a major effort must be made.
Above all, we must seek cooperation. I believe that it is
worth insisting on this point. Mechanisms should be
established that will allow the Yugoslavian
Government to play a greater role. We must hope that
Belgrade will cooperate so that such inclusion can be
achieved. A number of internal administrative
arguments might be put forward that would go against
facilitating such cooperation, but only a judicial system
that is as representative as possible will ensure greater
trust and security and enable positive results to be
achieved in the area of justice in this post-conflict
phase.

