Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): First, I
would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council and thank
you for having convened this meeting. Allow me also
to associate myself with all those who have welcomed
Mr. James Morris, Executive Director of the World
Food Programme (WFP). We congratulate him on his
comprehensive briefing to define a food security
strategy to meet the needs of the most vulnerable
people in Africa, which attests to the force of his
conviction. Bulgaria fully supports the global campaign
"Alert for famine in Africa", which the WFP initiated
to provide food to 30 million victims in Southern
Africa and West Africa and in the Horn of Africa.

The crisis we are facing is unprecedented in its
magnitude and depth, and we, the members of the
Security Council and members of the international
community, must make special efforts to provide
immediate and massive support. The major challenge
now is to put an end to this serious situation and to
prevent it from deteriorating or becoming catastrophic.

In addition to the urgent response of the United
Nations and humanitarian organizations, the Security
Council must act for the long term, learning lessons
from past experiences. In that regard, I wish to follow
up some of the points made by Mr. James Morris. The
international community must use its modern
information technologies and early warning systems in
order to prevent further famine of such magnitude from
happening in the future. We recall the appeals launched
by the WFP this year to draw the attention of the
international community to the urgent food situation
that has already developed in the six high-risk
countries in Africa because of the drought, flooding or
economic and political instability. That tendency has to
be reversed through decision-making, and we must
guarantee that the attention of donors is not diverted
from potential crises.

My second point relates to the need for better
synergy and strategies between emergency assistance
and the follow-up programmes leading to sustainable
development. The practice of past decades has shown
that, because of the limitations of international funding,
such funding in recent years has decreased
considerably once the crisis had been terminated. The
success of the WFP mission depends to a large extent
on getting food aid to the most devastated
populations - women, children, young girls, the
elderly and those who are furthest from food
distribution centres. The communications system and
the governmental structures in the region, as well as
access to the various regions in need are all critically
important. Here I wish to stress the responsibility of
recipient States to coordinate and use the assistance
provided by the international community. In many
cases, their political action aimed at promoting decisive
reforms in agriculture or education is crucial to avoid
renewed cyclical crises, such as those caused by
drought or flooding.

In conclusion, I would like to follow up the
question asked by the representative of the United
Kingdom concerning cooperation between the WFP
and organizations within the United Nations system,
stressing cooperation between the WFP and UNAIDS,
given the importance of problems that relate to the HIV
cr1s1s.

