Mr. Wang Donghua (China) (Spoke in Chinese):
I regret that I was not personally able to hear the
briefing given by Mr. Annabi. As usual, his briefing
was highly informative.

Since the Council last considered a report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Transitional
Administration Mission in East Timor (UNTAET), East
Timor has achieved further progress in the attainment
of independence in various aspects. In particular, we
must point out that "Timorization" is being accelerated
and that voter registration has begun. We appreciate the
efforts made in this regard by all parties, including the
people of East Timor and UNTAET.

The issue of refugees in West Timor continues to
be an outstanding problem. Many delegations have
stated this fact. We believe that with the gradual
improvement in the security situation, international aid
agencies should return to West Timor as soon as
possible in order to help refugees in dire need and to
accelerate their repatriation so that they may fully
participate in the independence process in East Timor
and be able to exercise the democratic rights to which
they are entitled. China appreciates the efforts made by
the Government of Indonesia to implement resolution
1319 (2000) and to facilitate the early return of
international relief workers to West Timor. We hope
that the United Nations and the Security Council will,
in the light of current realities, seriously consider the
request by the Government of Indonesia for the early
deployment of a security assessment mission to the
area.

To advance the independence process in East
Timor and ensure that the country will gradually
achieve self-reliance after independence, it is necessary
that UNTAET further step up "Timorization" and
ensure that more Timorese are involved in the power-
transfer process, and that power is transferred to them
in a proactive and steadfast manner. China hopes that
in this regard the United Nations will respect and
attentively heed the aspirations of the East Timorese
people and that, on that basis, it will submit to the
Council specific suggestions on the various aspects of
the transfer of power.

Finally, I wish to brief the Council about some
developments. As a friendly neighbour of East Timor,
China has been helping East Timor to the best of its
ability. A Chinese trade delegation recently visited East
Timor and signed an agreement with UNTAET on
economic and technical cooperation under which the
Chinese Government is to provide new and non-gratis
assistance to East Timor. In addition, China has
delivered promised assistance to East Timor in the
form of agricultural machinery, fishing gear, farm tools
and agricultural chemicals. We will continue to help
East Timor with training in agricultural techniques and
in the training of civil servants.

