Mr. Popolizio Bardales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We are grateful for the convening of this meeting and for
the insightful briefings given by Judge Carmel Agius,
President of the International Residual Mechanism
of the International Tribunals, and its Prosecutor,
Mr. Serge Brammertz.

I would like to underscore the importance that
the work of the Residual Mechanism has in the
strengthening and promotion of international justice,
which contribute not only to combating impunity and
deterring against the perpetration of the most heinous
crimes, but also to promoting reconciliation and
offering effective responses to victims.

We commend the positive, efficient and
transparent manner in which the Mechanism executed
its activities during the period covered by the report
(see S/2019/622), including on its judicial agenda such
functions designed to reinforce international criminal
law as responding to requests for assistance, preserving
historic archives, monitoring cases referred to national
courts and participating in commemorative ceremonies
and conferences on the application of universal justice.

The cooperation of States is essential to the
fulfilment of all of those functions, including the work
of the Prosecutor, as it is States that are responsible
for enforcing the sentences and orders issued and
responding to requests for assistance and prosecution.
We would therefore like to draw special attention to
the continued support offered by diverse African and
European Governments to ensure that convicted persons
can serve their sentences in their respective countries.
We also welcome the emphasis that has been placed
on standardizing work across the Residual Mechanism's
branches in The Hague and Arusha, particularly efforts
aimed at harmonizing work systems and applying best
practices, and on cooperation with the International
Committee of the Red Cross in relation to the
verification of detention centres.

Also commendable are those initiatives that the
Mechanism has put in place to strengthen capacities for
prosecuting war crimes in the former Yugoslavia and
Rwanda, which are based on generating synergies with
national authorities, transmitting lessons learned and
providing specific assistance.

We also welcome the efforts made to make the
work of the Mechanism more accessible to interested
members of the public by facilitating their participation
in public meetings and hosting study Visits and training
programmes for delegations of professionals from
various countries.

To fulfil and maintain these objectives, it will
be necessary to guarantee the provision of adequate
financing for the Mechanism, bearing in mind the time
periods foreseen in the report. It is also essential that
States lend it their political support in order to continue
strengthening the Mechanism's important work and
awareness thereof.

I wish to conclude by highlighting the invaluable
support provided by the Secretariat and the United
Nations Office ofLegal Affairs, both to the Mechanism
and to the Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals, which Peru has the honour to chair. At
the same time, I wish to underline the need for the
Council to remain united in its support for the Residual
Mechanism and its vital and historical work, as well as
the preservation of its legacy.

