Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): Most
important of all, the resolution we have unanimously
adopted today responds to a request from the Government
of Iraq, as set out by Prime Minister al-Jaafari in his
letter of 27 October. The resolution extends for 12
months the mandate of the Multinational Force (MNF)
on the terms set out in resolution 1546 (2004),
including the letters annexed to that resolution, as well
as the arrangements for the Development Fund for Iraq
and the International Advisory and Monitoring Board.

But as also set out by Prime Minister al-Jaafari,
the resolution comes with important guarantees. The
Iraqi Government will at any time be able to seek a
review of the arrangements or the termination of the
MNF mandate. The fact that we have been addressing
Iraqi needs through this negotiation has, in the view of
the United Kingdom, been quite crucial.

As a contributor to the Multinational Force, the
United Kingdom will continue to work in close
partnership with the Iraqi Government, assisting its
efforts to ensure that Iraqi forces assume full
responsibility for security and stability in Iraq as soon
as possible. Conditions permitting, we look forward to
notable progress in the next year. Terrorist efforts by
the insurgency, as well as spreading death, heartache
and misery, will only delay the completion of the
Multinational Force mandate. As the resolution
underlines, such terrorism must not be allowed to
disrupt Iraq's transition. We look to all United Nations
Member States, Iraq's neighbours in particular, to help
ensure that terrorists, their weapons and financing are
kept from entering Iraq.

The United Kingdom looks forward to the
elections to a constitutionally elected Assembly,
scheduled to take place on 15 December. Like other
Council members, we hope all Iraqis will participate in
those elections, ensuring that the next Assembly, which
will take vital decisions about Iraq's future, represents
the full diversity of Iraq.
The referendum in October showed just how
many Iraqi people thirst for democracy, rather than the
rule of the gun. The way in which this Council has so
constructively, unanimously and so rapidly adopted the
resolution underlines our determination - the
determination of the international community - to
help the Iraqi people realize the vision of a stable,
peaceful and democratic Iraq. With our continued
support, that vision will be realized.

