Mr. Mendoza-Garcia (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): Costa Rica would like to thank Spain
for convening this open debate on the Security
Council's working methods, and the President of the
General Assembly, Mr. Mogens Lykketoft, and the
Vice-President of the Economic and Social Council,
Mr. Sven Jiirgenson, for their opening statements.

Allow me to address two specific points. First, my
delegation recognizes the importance of deepening
communication between the Security Council and
other bodies and actors in order to allow the former
to effectively carry out its tasks. This communication
should be much more fluid and dynamic, not only with
the General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council
and the Secretariat, but also with the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Special Representatives and Envoys
of the Secretary-General, and especially with the
International Criminal Court and the International
Court of Justice.

This communication should also extend to regional
and subregional organizations, troop-contributing
countries and civil society organizations that, through
the Arria Formula format, have the opportunity to
directly influence the Council's work. The fact that
15 Arria Formula meetings have been held this year is
worth noting with appreciation.In that regard, we also
commend the work of the non-permanent members of
the Security Council and urge them to use all means
at their disposal to ensure that the Council increases

both its transparency and its effective engagement with
other relevant stakeholders.

This brings me to the second point that I should
like to highlight in this debate - the importance of the
role of the Secretary-General, whether through his good
offices in accordance with Article 99 of the Charter,
or through initiatives such as "Rights up front". The
election of the next Secretary-General will be a golden
opportunity to increase the equality, transparency,
predictability and inclusivity of this process and to
further strengthen the relationship between the General
Assembly and the Security Council, as it is a decision
taken not by the 15 members of the Council alone but
by the entire membership.

Costa Rica would urge us all to take advantage of
the momentum surrounding the adoption of General
Assembly resolution 69/321, on the revitalization of
the General Assembly's work, by launching as soon
as possible the process to determine who will occupy
the role of Secretary-General as of 1 January 2017.
It is urgent that the process of selection for the next
Secretary-General - whom Costa Rica hopes will be a
woman - begin as soon as possible with the dispatch
of a joint letter from the President of the General and
the President of the Security Council. The recently
adopted resolution maps the way forward ,and my
delegation will attach due importance and attention to
the implementation of the process.

My delegation is encouraged that from this point
on, and for the first time in history, we will have the
opportunity to know the names of the candidates and
their platforms and to interact with them. Nevertheless,
Costa Rica and other will continue to work to generate
the political momentum needed to ensure that the
Security Council presents not just one, but two or more
candidates to the General Assembly, and that the process
include an election, and not simply an appointment.

Rather than ask when we should begin to implement
resolution 69/321, the question we should be asking
ourselves is why we have taken so long. We ask the
same question every year when we find that the Security
Council's rules of procedure are still provisional and
that, despite the calls of the membership, a plan of
action for implementing presidential note S/2010/507
and its subsequent updates has yet to be adopted.

The Security Council is at a critical juncture in terms
of its transparency and working methods in general. It
can choose to refresh its collaborative energy, renew
the momentum to consolidate current achievements
and meet new challenges, or it can retreat to its familiar
protocol and close ranks around its own prerogatives,
which would negatively impact its effectiveness and
legitimacy. We all know that the first of these is the
only viable option.

