Mr. LeWicki (Poland): Let me join all other
delegations in commending Staffan de Mistura for his
outstanding work, his great personal commitment and
all his tireless efforts aimed at bringing peace to Syria
and in particular to the Syrian people, because, as he
has rightly stressed, this is a great tragedy not only for
the people of Syria but also for humankind as a whole.

Regrettably, at a time when the Syrian conflict
has entered its eighth year, continual and widespread
violence is still rampant, including serious and
systematic violations and abuses of human rights and
international human rights law.

Now, at the end of 2018, we are at a critical juncture.
We strongly believe that the Idlib ceasefire agreement
introduced some positive dynamics. However, questions
persist as to, first, the sustainability of the arrangement
in future, secondly, the degree of compliance by the
parties to the conflict in Syria, as well as, thirdly,
the ongoing difficult situation of internally displaced
persons and other civilians present in Idlib and its
surroundings. As we heard recently from Under-
Secretary-General Lowcock, the situation is especially
worrying in the north-western part of the country.
Taking into consideration the recent events in Idlib
province, we emphasize once again the need to prevent
military hostilities and their attendant disastrous
humanitarian consequences.

We are also concerned by the situation in north-
eastern Syria, which continues to be tense, including
between Turkey and the People's Protection Units,
part of the United States-allied Syrian Democratic
Forces. We therefore expect all parties to refrain from
any unilateral actions likely to undermine the efforts
of the Global Coalition against Daesh or risk further
instability in Syria.

Owing to the current situation in Syria, cross-
border deliveries of humanitarian aid continue to
provide an indispensable lifeline for hundreds of
thousands of people across Syria. That is why Poland
welcomed the recently renewed authorization for cross-
border humanitarian access.

It must be emphasized that the political process
has continued to fail to gain traction. This includes the
establishment of a constitutional committee, the first
step towards a genuine political process under United
Nations supervision. Let me underline something that
has already been mentioned by many around this table:
the fact there is no military solution to the conflict
that could bring sustainable peace to the Syrians. We
should aim at reaching an intra-Syrian framework
political agreement, and here we could not agree more
with Staffan's statement that sustainable peace requires
a real political process. This applies also to addressing
the root causes of the conflict, because we are talking
about sustainable peace for the Syrian people.

A cessation of hostilities may give a chance for
the peace talks to succeed under the auspices of the
United Nations in Geneva to gain momentum, so that
a political solution might finally be reached. We also
call on the Astana guarantors to follow through on
their commitment and protect civilians as a matter of
priority.

Let me also underline the fact that any political
solution must be brokered in accordance with resolution
2254 (2015) and the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex). The United Nations, and particularly its Special
Envoy for Syria, has a special role in this process. That
is why we express our full support for all efforts made
by the Envoy to establish a constitutional committee as

soon as possible and wish to congratulate him on the
progress already achieved. We ask all actors involved,
in particular the Astana guarantors, to provide support
for this process.

The constitutional committee should be established
now, as a priority, and further steps should swiftly follow
to enable a negotiated political transition process. This
requires the full and constructive engagement of all the
parties to the conflict. A special role has to be played
by the Syrian authorities, which should participate
in the negotiations in good faith and without any
preconditions.

In conclusion, let me once again thank Staffan for
his service, not only to the United Nations but also to
the Syrian people and to humankind as a whole, and let
me assure his successor, Mr. Pedersen, of our full and
continued support for his work.

