Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to congratulate you,
Madam President, on the assumption of your country to
the presidency of the Security Council for the current
month. Our delegation has reviewed the concept note
(S/2019/643, annex) that you circulated in preparation
for this debate, and we thank you for your initiative to
convene this meeting.

As usual, and as we have witnessed in many
previous meetings, some Member States of the Security
Council have intentionally derailed the debate from
its objective, namely, the diagnosis and treatment
of the root causes of the challenges that impede the
achievement of peace and security in the Middle East.
They obstruct identifying the causes of occupation,
aggression and the destructive external intervention
in the affairs of the countries of the region in various
forms, including by aiming to forcibly overthrow
systems of Government and investing in terrorism over
peace, as my friend the Permanent Representative of
Indonesia rightly mentioned.

Such causes include the fabrication of crises, their
prolongation and dragging the entire region into bloody
artificial wars to the detriment ofthe welfare, prosperity
and security of the people. From the beginning of the
twentieth century to this day, the Middle East has
borne witness to tragic events as some colonial States
have preferred to serve their own narrow interests and
ambitions over the principles of law, justice, ethics
and peace. Successfully meeting the challenges facing
the region therefore requires upholding principles of
international law and the Charter of the United Nations,
which is the common denominator to all. Those
countries must stop attempting to distort the Charter
and manipulating its provisions.

Ever since the founding of the United Nations, the
challenges facing the Middle East have taken up a major
part of the Security Council's agenda and that of the
United Nations. Although those challenges are regional
in nature, they are of concern to everyone in the world.
Dealing with them seriously and in accordance with the
law is not merely a regional matter, but rather in the
interests of the entire world. In that regard, my country's
delegation would like to stress the following points.

First, any objective perspective concerning the
reason for tensions in Middle East must admit that the
main reason for this conflict and the absence of peace
and stability in the region has, and always will be, the
Israeli occupation of Arab territories, including the
occupied Syrian Golan. That is not owing to any racial,
religious or sectarian factors, which are fabricated
reasons being propagated in order to fragment the
countries ofthe region, redraw their borders and weaken
the resilience of our peoples faced by Israeli bullying.

The lack of the necessary mechanisms for
enforcing the implementation of the Security Council's
own resolutions on the Arab-Israeli conflict has led
to the continuation of the occupation and enabled
it to continue its crimes against our people in the
occupied Arab territories. It has encouraged the United
States Administration to shirk its obligations under
the relevant Security Council resolutions, which was
apparent in the United States President's recognition of
Jerusalem as the capital ofIsraeI and Israeli sovereignty
over the occupied Syrian Golan, and the attempt to pass
off a suspicious deal, which is tantamount to the crime
of the century.

Moreover, as we have repeatedly underscored, that
has encouraged the Special Coordinator for the Middle
East, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, to not perform his
mandated duties. Anyone who questions the existence
of an organic link between what is happening in our
region, on the one hand, and the quest to entrench
and prolong the Israeli occupation of Arab territories,
including the Syrian Golan, on the other, is delusional,
misinformed or naive.

Secondly, the United Nations was founded on
the principles of the sovereign equality of States and
non-intervention in their internal affairs. Moreover,
it was founded on the principle of refraining from the
threat or use of force. Respecting those lofty principles
calls for, inter alia, compelling the United States and
its allies, including the Turkish occupation forces, to
cease their illegal military presence on my country's
territories and their pro-terrorism aggression and
crimes against Syrians and civilian infrastructure.

We have seen how the Erdogan regime has brought
Uzbek, Tajik, Caucasian, Turk, Uighur, European and
Arab mercenaries and terrorists across the border
between Syria and Turkey into Idlib to support the
terrorist Jabhat Al-Nusra and other terrorist entities
affiliated with it. It has also brought in weapons and
ammunition to support those terrorists. Furthermore,
some have demonstrated the degree to which they
have colluded by calling those foreign terrorists the
"moderate armed Syrian opposition".

Thirdly, we call for the immediate and unconditional
lifting of the coercive unilateral measures, which the
United Nations has consistently declared illegitimate
and which have had a devastating impact on the people
of the region and their ability to achieve development,
while leading them to leave their homes as refugees
and migrants. Those coercive measures are also
a form of economic terrorism complementing the
terrorism of terrorist groups. They are an expression of
hypocrisy when seen against the backdrop of starving
people, while depriving them of their basic needs and
proclaiming concern about the welfare of the Syrian
people and achieving the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development so that no one is left behind.

Fourthly, we must deal firmly with the threat posed
by Israel's arsenal of weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs) to the security and safety of the people in
our region and compel Israel to join the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, as a non-nuclear
State, and place all its activities and facilities under the
safeguards of the International Atomic Energy Agency
in accordance with resolution 487 (1981). In that regard,
we renew our call for adopting the Syrian initiative
aimed at establishing a zone free of all WMDs and,
above all, nuclear weapons in the Middle East. Draft
resolution S/2003/1208 on that initiative was submitted
by my country during its membership on the Security
Council in 2003 and continues to be held prisoner in the
Council's filing cabinets.

Concerning the situation in the Gulf region, my
country condemns policies that fabricate crises and
ignite new wars in the region the goal of which is to
distract the peoples of the region from pursuing their
main cause, which is ending the Israeli occupation, and
countering attempts to impose hegemony and plunder
the region's wealth. If we fail to do that, we will witness
new wars in which the people of our region will be the
primary victims. The repercussions will not be limited
to the Middle East but will go well beyond.

In conclusion, the time has come for the peoples of
our region to live as others throughout the world - in
prosperity, safety and stability - reclaim their role in
enriching human civilization, the cradle of which is in
the Middle East, and establish the values of peace and
coexistence among peoples, civilizations and cultures.
That requires the Security Council to adopt a serious
and effective approach to dealing with the reasons
underlying the instability that I just mentioned and
to move away from a policy of selectivity and double
standards, which has been the salient characteristic
of the Council's way of dealing with the issues of our
region, mistakenly called the Middle East.

