Mr. Ekua Avomo (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): As I am taking the floor for the first time in
this prestigious organ of the United Nations, I wish
first to thank Ambassador Gaspar Martins - a worthy
son and Permanent Representative of the brotherly
country of Angola, with which my country maintains
and continues to develop excellent relations of
friendship and cooperation - for presiding over this
meeting dedicated to the Central African subregion, at
a time of concern and uncertainty due to the multiple
and difficult events that today afflict the international
community.

Nevertheless, your perspicacity and your many
personal attributes can only inspire optimism on our
part that positive results will be achieved in the course
of your presidency of the Security Council, particularly
on the items being considered at this meeting. I wish to
extend our congratulations to all the other members of
the Security Council, to whom I pay tribute, and to the
Secretary-General and the entire United Nations system
for their great work and efforts in support of security,
peace and stability in the world.

Furthermore, I fully subscribe to the statement
made by the representative of the Republic of the
Congo, who spoke on behalf of the member States of
the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS).

The statement issued a year ago on 31 October
2002 by the presidency of the Security Council, which,
at the time, was occupied by another son of Africa, the
representative of Cameroon, was an initiative that
Equatorial Guinea and the countries of Central Africa
welcomed. It was aimed at examining and addressing
in a comprehensive, resolute and integrated way the
problems of peace and security and related problems of
development in Central Africa. A year after that event,
we can only feel reassured at the holding of this
meeting devoted to an analysis of the report of the
multi-disciplinary assessment mission, which the
Secretary-General had decided at that time to send to
the area. I wish to express thanks to Mr. Kalomoh and
all the members of the assessment mission for the high
calibre of their report. I therefore endorse the
comments that were made by the representative of
Cameroon with regard to this report. We would request
that those suggestions and comments be duly
considered.

Indeed, that report, which substantially identifies
and brings together the problems of the subregion
regarding peace and security as well as strategies for
economic integration, humanitarian issues, and
combating HIV/AIDS, constitutes a diagnosis of the
causes of the spiral of violence that has beset virtually
every country of the subregion during the last decade.
Endowed with immense and important natural
resources and with considerable potential in human
resources, Central Africa, despite the efforts made by
its leaders, paradoxically still remains far from
attaining its aspirations of peace and security. This is
due to the many internal wars, unjustified wars, which
are often not in the interests of the populations of their
countries and thus hamper the economic integration of
the subregion.

Accordingly, let me stress that, for the Republic
of Equatorial Guinea, whose Government devotes all
efforts to the maintenance of peace and security in the
subregion, this meeting reaffirms and concretely and
clearly reasserts the great responsibility and
preponderant role that the United Nations Charter
identifies and confers upon the Security Council. This
role is assigned to it in view of the fact that it is the
organ entrusted with protecting and guaranteeing
international peace and security, wherever they may be
threatened. We wish to centre and maintain this
engagement and focus given the alarming situation that
prevails in Central Africa. This is an area besieged by a
proliferation of persistent crises, conflicts and focal
points of presumed or declared tension that
undoubtedly collectively represent a real threat to
peace and constitute a serious obstacle to the colossal
and unceasing efforts of the States of the subregion to
face various challenges. These challenges must be
faced in order to achieve the goals of political,
economic and social development of the peoples of
these countries.

Therefore, as the country currently presiding over
the Advisory Committee, we would express our
appreciation for the excellent work carried out in the
last 11 years by the United Nations Standing Advisory
Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa, in
keeping with the resolutions of the General Assembly.
Let me indicate in this connection that various organs
established, such as the early warning mechanism for
Central Africa and the Council for Peace and Security
in Central Africa (COPAX), will soon be operational,
once member States have completed the necessary
procedures. Both by conviction and vocation,
Equatorial Guinea has fully associated itself with this
effort, in order to make its modest contribution in the
search for and consolidation of peace and stability in
Central Africa.

After a long bleak period characterized by wars
and political instability, we can fortunately now
glimpse a ray of light and a sense of hope among the
countries that have been victims of this Violence, as can
be seen in recent events in Angola, Burundi, Congo,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Central
African Republic. This hope is due to the effort and
awareness of these countries, supported by the United
Nations system in general and other initiatives of
different countries, to whom we express our sincere
appreciation and gratitude. However, it is premature to
have any illusions, given the continuing fragility of the
situation, which calls for the adoption of various
actions and mechanisms of support in order to ensure
the stabilization of the constitutional order as these
countries democratize.

Conscious of and without prejudice towards the
presence and role of the United Nations in each of the
countries fallen victim to the wave of violence, we
reiterate that the need for creating a permanent United
Nations political office with subregional scope is more
than desirable and justified. Its presence would make it
possible to experience the reality of the situation on
site and to adopt timely preventive policies and
measures. In addition to this, it would play the role of
coordinating the efforts and initiatives of the countries
of the subregion and the United Nations institutions
already present in the area. The establishment of such a
subregional United Nations structure is one of the
recommendations of the twentieth ministerial meeting
of the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on
Security Questions in Central Africa, held in Malabo,
Equatorial Guinea, from 27 to 31 October 2003.

