Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I should like to express our
most sincere condolences over the thousands of
martyrs who have fallen under the repression of the
Libyan regime since 15 February and before, especially
those who died at Abu Salim prison 1996. I would also

like to thank you, Madame President, and all the
members of the Council for having unanimously
adopted resolution 1970 (2011).

The Tripoli regime no longer has any legitimacy.
It goes without saying that this resolution represents
strong moral support for our steadfast people, who are
resisting the onslaught of firepower launched against
them by the butcher of Tripoli. This is a crucial,
landmark decision by the international community
against the backdrop of the carnage we are witnessing
today in Libya. It is a sincere attempt to protect
civilians.

This resolution will send a signal for a definitive
end to the fascist regime that is still in place in Tripoli.
I would like to take this opportunity to launch a sincere
fraternal appeal to all the officers in the armed forces
in Libya to side with their own people and immediately
renounce their support for Al-Qadhafi - that criminal
leader - and no longer participate in these crimes and
murders. This is a leader who loves no one but himself
and who is prepared to take all necessary steps to
continue this repression against his own people. I
would also like to appeal to my brothers, the Libyan
officers: the leader is himself soon going to
abandon you - unless you first take the right decision
now.

The Libyan people are known for their tolerance.
The most important thing for the people at this stage is
to put an end to this regime. Our people are not
seeking, and will not seek, vengeance. Our people are
aware of the very difficult repression they have to face.
We know how people's money is used to kill people. I
launch an appeal to the sons of Libya to help our youth
to restore Libya to the Libyans. It is our duty to work
to restore our State to our people, and there is no doubt
that this will happen very soon.

I am pleased that the Security Council will refer
this matter to the International Criminal Court to
investigate the crimes committed in Libya since
15 February. I am also pleased with regard to the
positive interaction of the members of the Council and
their response to these incidents. I am pleased that
sanctions are not being imposed against those who
ultimately decided to abandon the regime of Colonel
Al-Qadhafi. Here, I would like to thank the officer
Ahmad Qadhdhaf al-Damm. I ask other officers like
him to take the same decision so that they will one day
not be tried by the International Criminal Court.

I would like to thank the Council once again. I
hope that my people will soon be able to realize their
dream of liberty and an end to this dictatorial regime.

