Mr. Listre (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, we want to thank you, Sir, for having organized
this debate and to wish you every success during your
presidency. We are all aware of your ability and
diplomatic skill and have no doubt that you will
succeed.

Today, possibly more than ever before, it is clear
that there is no alternative to peace in the Middle East
and that there is no military solution to the conflict. It
is also clear that the parties need the assistance of a
third party to find a way out of the current situation.
That is why we welcome the announcement made by
Secretary of State Colin Powell yesterday in
Washington, DC, during the meeting of the "quartet"
with regard to holding an international peace
conference next June. We share Secretary Powell's
view that the conference should discuss political,
security, economic and humanitarian assistance issues
in an integrated manner. In that context, we, along with
most other members of the international community,
have hope for the Saudi peace initiative adopted at the
recent summit of the Arab League in Beirut and for the
diplomatic efforts being carried out by the United
States and the members of the "quartet".

We also welcome the recent agreement on
Ramallah, which, with the cooperation of the United
States and the United Kingdom, allowed President
Arafat to regain his freedom of movement. We believe
that there is now a new window of opportunity to
relaunch an indispensable political dialogue. It is
therefore essential that the parties renounce violence
and adopt measures conducive to creating an
atmosphere of confidence.

Argentina strongly condemns all acts of violence,
terrorism, provocation, incitement and destruction, in
particular indiscriminate attacks against a civilian
population. In that context, we reiterate the concerns
expressed by the heads of State of the Rio Group at its
recent summit in San Jose, Costa Rica, concerning the
military operations around the Church of the Nativity
in Bethlehem, and we ask both parties to respect the
integrity and immunity of and free access to the holy
sites.

The past few weeks have demonstrated that
violence only engenders more violence and resentment.
We call on both parties to comply fully with Security
Council resolutions 1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002). The
Palestinian Authority must unequivocally condemn and
punish all acts of terrorism. Israel, on its part, must
withdraw from the occupied territories. Argentina
supports resolution 1405 (2002), adopted unanimously
by the Security Council on 19 April, and the Secretary-
General's intense efforts since then to deploy a fact-
finding team to the Jenin refugee camp. We regret that
the investigation could not take place. We believe that
the team would have conducted its assignment in the
field in a professional and objective manner.

Finally, Argentina once again reaffirms its
support for resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and
1397 (2002), for the inalienable right of the Palestinian
people to establish their own independent and viable
State, and for the inalienable right of Israel to live in
peace within secure borders recognized by the
international community, in particular by the States of
the region. We call on parties to act with a true sense of
compromise and make the necessary mutual
concessions so that the vision of two States, Israel and
Palestine, living peacefully side by side, can become
one of the first achievements of the new millennium.

