Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): May I begin
by thanking the Secretary-General and, in particular,
his Special Envoy, Mr. Gambari, for their very full and
informative reports that we have just heard.

The world has been both inspired and appalled by
images from Burma in recent weeks. We have been
inspired by the sight of people risking their very lives
to make their voices heard for peaceful change and for
democracy. And we have been appalled by the callous
brutality of a regime willing to beat and kill peaceful
demonstrators, including Buddhist monks, who are so
revered in Burmese society - a regime that has carried
out, and is continuing to carry out, mass arbitrary
detentions across the country.

I was very concerned by the Special Envoy's
comments about the continued human rights abuses
being committed by the regime. It is essential that
these come to an end.

Despite the censorship imposed by the regime,
the entire world has witnessed these events on the
ground in Burma. A sense of outrage and disgust at
what has happened has spread around the world. The
United Kingdom condemns once again today in the
strongest terms the violence that continues to be
perpetrated against the people of Burma.

The regime cannot turn the clock back. The world
has seen the real desire of the Burmese people for
change, and they have the support of my Government,
and of many other Governments. The situation in
Burma is not just an affront to the world; it is a threat
to stability beyond Burma's borders. It is right that the
United Nations and the Security Council should be
involved. Despite the violence of recent weeks, the
international community stands ready to help Burma
achieve national reconciliation.

What needs to be done to bring about the change
that is so clearly needed? First of all, we should set out
common demands of the regime. These include the
immediate end to the use of force against peaceful
demonstrations, the immediate release of Daw Aung
San Suu Kyi and all other detainees and political
prisoners, and the start of a new and genuinely
inclusive process of national reconciliation to allow
Burma to transition to democracy.

We have heard recent statements from the regime,
including one last night from General Than Shwe. The
test for them is whether they are now prepared to work
with opposition leaders and with ethnic groups. They
will be judged by results.

We believe that the Security Council should
remain actively engaged. A presidential statement
capturing the common concerns of the Council would
be appropriate. Among other things, the Council should
unanimously support the Secretary-General and his
Special Envoy in continuing their efforts to set in train
this inclusive dialogue leading to real democratic
change in Burma. We thank them for their efforts so
far. We believe that Mr. Gambari should return to
Burma very soon to maintain the momentum. And we
welcome the personal engagement and commitment of
the Secretary-General.

Now is the time for all those with influence on
the regime in Burma to play their part as well. We
welcome the unequivocal message sent by members of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
who see themselves directly affected by the crisis in
their region. We recognize and appreciate the helpful
role played by China in supporting Mr. Gambari's visit.
The authorities in Burma need to know that they have
no support whatsoever in pursuing their present
policies.

Burma is a country of vast natural resources and
immense human talent. But for some 45 years, those
resources have been squandered and those talents have
been suppressed by a callous and misguided regime.
The world stands ready to help rebuild Burma and see
it integrated into the global community, where it
belongs. The sooner that an inclusive reconciliation
process takes place, the sooner this can be achieved.

