Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I too would like
to thank the Secretary-General, for his comprehensive
report on the situation in Mali (S/2017/1105), and
Mr. Lacroix, for so clearly setting out the report's
findings during his briefing. Iwould also like to welcome
Foreign Minister Coulibaly to the Council today.

Let me start by echoing the words of my Ethiopian
colleague and welcoming the absence of Violence
between the signatory parties in Mali during this
reporting period. Such conditions represent the best
chance for the successful implementation of the
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. We
commend all the parties for their continued commitment
to a definitive cessation of hostilities and urge them to
remain committed.

The United Kingdom strongly supports the
Agreement and the ongoing dialogue between the
parties. We welcome the adoption of a revised timetable
at the meeting of the Agreement Monitoring Committee
last week. We strongly encourage all parties to reaffirm
their commitment to the Agreement and to work together
to implement the outstanding actions, as outlined by

them in the latest timetable, as soon as possible. It
has now been more than two and a half years since
the Agreement was signed. Like many other Council
members, we are frustrated by the lack of meaningful
substantive progress made in implementing it, and we
urge all parties to speed that up. The Malian people's
patience is not infinite and it is incumbent on all parties
to deliver in good faith on the commitments they made
in the Agreement. We welcome the appointment and
participation of the Carter Center as an independent
observer on the Agreement Monitoring Committee and
hope it will lead to greater accountability for the delays
in implementation. We will work with the international
community to identify those who seek to block or
prevent full implementation of the Peace Agreement,
which now constitutes a basis for sanctions designations.

Elections are crucial to delivering on the promise
of decentralization in Mali and are central to the Peace
Agreement. It is disappointing that the local elections
have been delayed, and it will be crucial to ensure that
credible and fair local, presidential and parliamentary
elections are delivered in 2018.

While we recognize that the best route to long-
term stability in Mali is through implementation of the
Peace Agreement, the security situation today remains
poor and stabilizing the region is urgent. The United
Kingdom is taking action in three ways to contribute to
that. First, as our Prime Minister announced last week,
we will be deploying three British Chinook helicopters
to the Sahel and we will continue the support we offer
through our heavy-lift transport aircraft, increasing
the ability of French troops to manoeuvre efficiently
in their battle against extremists. Secondly, the United
Kingdom will provide an additional $17 million in
aid to the region, including lifesaving humanitarian
support for the hundreds of thousands of people
affected by epidemics, natural disasters and conflict.
Thirdly, we will continue to support the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) and its mandate to support the
implementation of the Peace Agreement, including
the redeployment of reformed and reconstituted
Malian defence and security forces and the protection
of civilians.

We look forward to the upcoming strategic review

of MINUSMA, which will be crucial to establishing the
future direction of peacekeeping support to Mali. We
also reiterate our support for the Joint Force ofthe Group
of Five for the Sahel (G-S Sahel) and its objectives of
tackling terrorism, organized crime, people-smuggling
and human trafficking in the region. We welcome the
support of the international community in pledging
funding for that initiative. We recognize the importance
of MINUSMA's technical and logistical support to the
G-5 Joint Force in helping it get up to full capacity, and
we encourage the swift implementation of a technical
agreement to enable this. We also reiterate the calls of
the Security Council for the implementation of a robust
human rights compliance framework by the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force. We recall, however, that the Joint Force was
not created solely as a military force and that there is
no exclusive military solution to insecurity in the cross-
border regions. G-S cooperation with MINUSMA on
development and humanitarian efforts will be crucial.
In conclusion, we welcome the positive steps made
since the last Council meeting on this subject (see S/PV.8062), including the reduction in violence, but
now is the time to see meaningful progress and action
to implement the Peace Agreement. That is the only
way to achieve lasting peace and security in Mali and
the region.

