Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): This is indeed a
sad day for the Security Council. Once again, it was
unable to act to send a forceful and united message to
the Syrian authorities to stop killing and torturing their

people, even though in the recent hours hundreds more
have been killed.

How long will this Council allow the Syrian
killing machine to continue to push the country into a
bloody sectarian conflict? How many more dead and
maimed will it take to finally force this Council into
action? It is indeed regrettable and particularly
worrying that the Security Council was unable to
unanimously support the decision of the League of
Arab States of 22 January to facilitate a political
transition to a democratic, pluralistic political system
in which all Syrians are equal, regardless of their
affiliations or ethnicity or beliefs, and are de facto
citizens of their country.

A Syrian-led political transition based on a
serious political dialogue between the Syrian
Government and the whole spectrum of the Syrian
opposition: that is exactly what those who did not
support this resolution today had been demanding.

The Security Council was unable to respond to
the plea of the League of Arab States that it support the
Arab world's attempt to end the killing and reach a
peaceful political solution to the Syrian crisis - two
goals that are, I believe, shared by all on this Council.
Yet again the Council has failed to meet its
responsibilities towards the Syrian people and to fulfil
its role as the primary body entrusted with the
maintenance of international peace and security. Not
only is this extremely disappointing; it is simply
unacceptable.
6

As was made perfectly clear in this Council last
Tuesday, the situation in Syria is untenable and is
rapidly spiraling towards civil war. Clear and
unanimous support by this Council for the efforts of
the Arab League is essential if we are to counter such a
dangerous development. It was made abundantly clear
in this Chamber that this draft resolution was not about
regime change, nor did it seek to impose changes on
Syria from outside, much less to allow for the use of
force or impose sanctions. The sole objective of this
resolution was to put an immediate end to the violence
and enable a Syrian-owned political dialogue that
would allow the Syrian people to determine their own
future peacefully.

As my minister stated here earlier this week (see S/PV.6710), we fully support the efforts of the League
of Arab States regarding Syria, including its decision of
22 January 2012 and the political road map therein.
They represent the only viable way to solve this crisis
peacefully, through political means.

Portugal remains fully committed to the
sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and
national unity of Syria. We urge all parties in Syria to
immediately halt all violence and engage in a serious
political dialogue under the auspices of the League of
Arab States. Portugal will continue to work actively
with the Arab League towards the fulfilment of these
objectives.

