Mr. Manongi (United Republic of Tanzania): I
am addressing the Council with respect to the work of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1132
(1997) concerning Sierra Leone on behalf of its
Chairman, Ambassador Mahiga.

Council members will recall that since the
expiration of the diamond sanctions in June 2003, the
mandate of the Committee has been wholly contained
in resolution 1171 (1998), which refers to the
requirement of notifications to the Security Council for
the export and import of arms and related materiel, and
to the tasks of the Committee in relation to the arms
embargo and the travel ban, both of which are still in
force.

As of today, the travel ban list includes the names
of 30 individuals designated as leading members of the
former military junta in Sierra Leone, the Armed
Forces Revolutionary Council (AFRC), or as leading
members of the Revolutionary United Front (RUF).

During 2006, the Committee considered two
notifications submitted by States with respect to the
arms embargo. Also during 2006, no violations or
alleged violations of the sanctions regime were brought
to the attention of the Sanctions Committee.

Following consultations in July 2006, the
Chairman, Ambassador Mahiga, wrote, on behalf of the
Committee, to the Permanent Representative of Sierra
Leone to inform him that the members of the
Committee had agreed that the time might be ripe to
review the travel ban list to ensure that it accurately
reflected the changing security situation in Sierra
Leone and the ongoing judicial process in the Special
Court, and that the Committee would welcome
14
receiving the views of the Government in that
connection.

In the light of Sierra Leone's continued progress
in its peacebuilding efforts, I would encourage
members of the Committee and the Security Council to
continue consultations to determine the appropriate
time to streamline the legal basis for sanctions in Sierra
Leone. While recognizing that any revision of the
sanctions measures would fall under the purview of the
Security Council, I would note that one contribution
that the Committee could make towards having an
up-to-date sanctions regime is to ensure that the travel
ban list reflects as closely as possible the current
situation in Sierra Leone. In this connection, the
Committee awaits the views of the Government of
Sierra Leone.

As we conclude our mandate, we are pleased to
note that the transition in Sierra Leone is progressing
well. Having been designated as one of the countries
on the Peacebuilding Commission, Sierra Leone stands
to benefit from its work. In addition, the opening of the
integrated office in Sierra Leone will provide a good
basis for that country's smooth graduation from
conflict to the consolidation of peace and development.
It is the Chair's hope that as Sierra Leone makes
progress in its transition, the Sanctions Committee on
Sierra Leone will become unnecessary sooner rather
than later.

Finally, the Chair wishes to thank the members of
the Secretariat for their support to the Committee,
especially the leadership provided by James Sutterlin
in that regard.

