Mr. Holkeri: Before I start my presentation, may
I say that I was profoundly shocked and dismayed by
the news of the terrorist attack this morning in
Moscow. Having had experience in Northern Ireland
and now in Kosovo, I am not new to the issue of
extremism. I would like to express my deepest
sympathies to my Russian colleague.

The week before last, I met with a delegation of
families of missing Kosovo Albanians as many more
stood Vigil in the snow in front of the headquarters of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). They told me of their frustration at
the slow progress on the return of the mortal remains of
their loved ones from Serbia proper.

Similarly, I constantly hear about the grievances
of the family members of missing Serbs who also want
to know about the fate of their loved ones. Five years
after the conflict, more than three quarters of the 3,566
people still missing are Kosovo Albanians, and nearly
18 per cent are Kosovo Serbs and Montenegrins. The
remaining 4 per cent belong to other communities.
Each side believes the authorities on the other side
have information on the whereabouts of their loved
ones. Both Kosovo Serbs and Kosovo Albanians
demand that all those whose crimes resulted in the
disappearance of their loved ones, regardless of
ethnicity, be brought to justice.

There must be faster progress to resolve this
painful issue. One area where progress can be made is
in the dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina. The
issue of the missing is one of the four main practical
issues that are supposed to be covered initially in the
dialogue. The dialogue got off to a fitful start, due as
much to disunity in the Kosovo Albanian camp as to
the general preference of politicians in both Pristina
and Belgrade to give precedence to domestic political
issues. Four months after the launching of the dialogue
at a plenary session in Vienna last October, the initial
meetings of dialogue working groups might take place
as early as February.

It is the responsibility of the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government, in cooperation with
UNMIK, to actively and seriously engage without
further delay in the direct dialogue with Belgrade.
Dialogue constitutes a confidence-building measure as
well as a demonstration of good will. The participants
representing Pristina understand that the dialogue is a
standard that must be fulfilled before Kosovo's future
status can be resolved.

Through the dialogue, as well as through other
channels, including possibly the High-Ranking
Working Group, we also hope to be able to resolve
long-standing disputes with Belgrade over parallel
structures in Kosovo. Unfortunately, over the past few
months, Belgrade has moved to extend and strengthen
the presence of its parallel structures in Kosovo. Little
is likely to change unless we respond to the challenge.

Another dialogue topic is the issue of returns, an
issue about which the Council has regularly been
informed. Suffice it to say that building on the gradual
progress made in 2003 and on the substantial
improvements in both the political climate and the
operational framework for returns, prospects for
returns in the coming year are encouraging. But as
2003 also demonstrated, the situation in Kosovo
remains fragile, and those prospects must be nurtured
in order to flourish.

Real movement on returns in 2004 will depend
both on continuing improvement in the security and
freedom of movement situation in Kosovo and on the
extent to which the people and leaders of Kosovo
dedicate themselves to working with the displaced to
support sustainable returns. It will also depend upon
the constructive position of the Belgrade authorities
and the continuing commitment of the international
community.

I want to mention another issue that is Vital for
progress in Kosovo. Privatization is moving forward in
line with the guidance provided by the United Nations
Office of Legal Affairs last November. I continue to
discuss this crucial issue intensively with the Prime
Minister and the Provisional Government. I intend that
the procedures for the Kosovo Trust Agency should be
improved. The privatization process is essential for
economic growth in Kosovo; I am determined that it
should continue.

With regard to financial irregularity and
corruption, which emerge from time to time, I wish to
assure the Council that UNMIK gives very serious
attention to these matters. The recently promulgated
Criminal Code, Criminal Procedure Code and Customs
Code, as well as legislation being promulgated on the
prevention of money-laundering and related criminal
offences, will provide new tools for tackling economic
and financial crime.

Various tools and mechanisms have been set up to
conduct administrative inspections and financial
investigations to identify fraud and corruption. The
Auditor-General's Office is in place and is about to
become operational. It will promote transparency and
accountability in the management and performance of
governance in Kosovo. An Investigation Task Force
has recently been established, composed of
representatives of the Financial Investigation Unit, the
United Nations Office of Internal Oversight Services
and the European Anti-Fraud Office. The European
Union has provided valuable financial and other
support for these important initiatives. I have
repeatedly emphasized that there will be a policy of
zero tolerance with regard to fraud, corruption and
financial irregularities. With the new legislation and
mechanisms, UNMIK is now well equipped to address
the challenges that it faces in this field.

Significant progress has been made in the area of
civil aviation, which will allow for a smooth transition
to civilian control. With the assistance of the
International Civil Aviation Organization, a Civil
Aviation Regulatory Office has been established and a
comprehensive legislative framework is being finalized
to assure compliance with international civil aviation
standards and practices. Iceland has graciously agreed
to support the United Nations by assuming, on
UNMIK's behalf, certain essential civil aviation
functions necessary for operations at Pristina airport. I
signed an agreement in principle on this subject with
Iceland last week.

I should like to refer briefly to the forthcoming
Kosovo-wide elections. It is envisaged that they will be
held in October this year. Preparations are well under
way, with the help and under the leadership of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.

The implementation of standards is the core
political project for UNMIK. I am determined that
Kosovo should make progress on the standards, and I
am confident that it will. We now have a clear political
target, set out in the document "Standards for Kosovo",
which I launched with the Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government in Pristina on 10 December last year
and which was subsequently endorsed by the Security
Council. What we now need to do is to reach that
target.

When I arrived in Kosovo in August, it was clear
to me that UNMIK needed to turn over a new leaf in its
relationship with the Provisional Institutions. There
needed to be partnership, rather than imposition.
Partnership is very much the philosophy of my
approach with the Government on standards. The
standards are for all of Kosovo. The Provisional
Institutions should be in the lead, with UNMIK
supporting them and ensuring that the process stays on
track. Our most urgent task is to produce an
implementation work plan, setting out clearly the
actions necessary to reach the standards. In the
working groups, where the Government and UNMIK
are sitting side by side, we are working intensively to
produce this work plan. It will set out in clear detail
what actions need to be taken to reach the eight
standards, who will take them and when these actions
should take place.

This task is demanding and complex for UNMIK,
and even more so for the Provisional Institutions.
Production of the work plan requires consultations with
many actors, both inside and outside Kosovo. This is
the first time that a project like this has been
undertaken in Kosovo, and it is a learning process for
many of the ministers and officials involved. But it is
well on its way. I hope that we shall very soon have a
draft plan to present to the Council. I am sure that the
Council would agree that it is more important to have a
high-quality and effective work plan than to rush this
crucial task.

I want to say an important word about Kosovo
Serbs and their non-participation in this process. I am
personally very disappointed that there continue to be
no Serb representatives in the implementation working
groups. My officials and I have met the coalition of
Serb parties in Kosovo - the Coalition Return - on
many occasions, including in the past few weeks and
days. The purpose of our meetings was to underline to
them that the best way for them to protect and promote
their interests in Kosovo is to take part in the
implementation process. The starting point is to take
part in the production of the work plan.

Their principal concern - that the standards
process is undermining resolution 1244 (1999) and
prejudging future status - is wholly unfounded. Nor
are they right to fear that their concerns and interests
will be sidelined in the implementation process.
UNMIK is there to ensure that the interests of all
communities are fairly and fully represented. The
Prime Minister has issued a clear invitation to them to
participate in all the working groups.

It is clear that some representatives of the Serbs
in Kosovo understand and accept these arguments and
are willing to participate in the working groups. But
they are looking to Belgrade to endorse that View. It
does not help that there is still no government in
Belgrade. I hope that the Council will strongly support
my View that the best way forward for all communities
in Kosovo is participation by all communities in the
standards process.

The standards implementation process will go
ahead as the Council has asked. Even as the
implementation plan is under preparation, the real
work - to turn the standards into reality - is already
under way. UNMIK's focus on this task is intense. We
are working with the Provisional Institutions to ensure
that they too are similarly committed. For it is the
commitment of Kosovo's leaders, in the Government
and down to the municipalities, that is crucial to
making progress.

In Kosovo, the President and the Prime Minister
and his Government are working hard to implement the
standards. But I am sorry to report that some
politicians in Pristina are not demonstrating the
wholehearted commitment that the Council and the
international community are hoping for. I call on them
today to show that commitment, for those who are not
part of the standards process are letting down the
people of Kosovo and will play no part in Kosovo's
march towards a better future, including in paving the
way for the determination of future status.

The Council has now endorsed the mechanism for
a review of progress on standards in mid-2005. That
was the right decision. "Standards before status"
needed a timetable. Kosovo's undetermined status
helps no one in Kosovo, and it needs to be resolved
sooner rather than later. It is my job to make sure that
the Provisional Institutions make real progress on the
implementation of the tough standards that have been
set in the document, "Standards for Kosovo". The
leaders of the Kosovo Institutions are determined to do
so, and can count on my full support.

Members of the Council have received the report
of the Secretary-General on UNMIK for the last quarter
of 2003 (S/2004/7l). It is a comprehensive account of
the developments in Kosovo and the progress of the
Mission in implementing its mandate under Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999). It covers all major
aspects of UNMIK's activities.

I should like to emphasize only one thing. Neither
the Provisional Institutions nor UNMIK will be able to
achieve the high goals that we have set out for Kosovo
without the Council's robust and consistent political
and material support. Only through such support will
we be able to attain our common objective of a
democratic, tolerant, multi-ethnic Kosovo that will be
at peace with itself and with the rest of the region. To
achieve that objective, progress on standards is
essential. And that will require, above all, the hard
work, leadership and commitment of the leaders and
the people of Kosovo.

