Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): First, I
would like to congratulate you, Sir, and the delegation of
Ukraine on your country's assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of February. I also
thank the Permanent Representative of Sweden and his
entire team for their outstanding management of the
work of the Council in January - Ambassador Skoog
and his staff have indeed set the bar very high. I also
wish to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Jan Kubis for his briefing.

It is clear that Iraq still faces several major
humanitarian, political, economic and security
challenges, but the main one, without a doubt, is the
fight against terrorism. Uruguay recognizes the arduous
work of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Iraq and the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq, which, in close coordination with
the Iraqi Government, have been carrying out very
important and effective work to address the various
crises affecting the country.

We reiterate that combating the terrorist scourge
should take place in the framework of international
humanitarian law and human rights law, and must be
coordinated within the United Nations. We also support
the efforts made by the Iraqi Government, with the
support of the global coalition to counter the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham, in the fight against the grave
threat posed by the Islamic State to Iraq's sovereignty,
territorial integrity and its civilian population.

We need to underscore the fact that Iraqi authorities
have placed the highest priority on the protection of
civilians and on achieving an immediate response to the
humanitarian emergency in the context of their military
offensive in Mosul. We are obviously concerned about
the situation of civilians who are trapped in Mosul, in
particular the most vulnerable groups, and the fact that
Da'esh is using civilians as human shields, which is one
more example of their utter cowardice.

We urge the parties to the conflict to respect
and protect civilians, in particular women, children,
disabled persons and older persons, and to respect
human rights and allow access to emergency assistance,
in accordance with international humanitarian law. It
is of particular concern that there are now more than
160,000 persons who have been displaced as a result of
the fighting, and there could soon be even more.

Repairing civilian infrastructure, the normal
provision of services and the gradual return of the
internally displaced to their homes must be priorities
following the liberation of Mosul. It continues to be
clear that military operations alone will not eliminate
the threat of terrorism in Iraq. Iraqi political leaders
must overcome their divisions and mistrust and reach an
agreement on a single vision for national reconciliation.
Without such a vision it will be very difficult in the
future to heal the wounds that continue to drain the life
out of the Iraqi people.

