Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): Thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate on the
promotion and strengthening of the rule of law in the
maintenance of international peace and security. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing, as well as all those who spoke before me for
their valuable contributions.

Chad welcomes the growing number of Security
Council initiatives to hold such important debates as the
meeting this morning, with the adoption of important
presidential statements as well. The work done in this
field by the Secretary-General and the increasing
efforts of the Secretary-General in implementing and
following up on the conclusions of those initiatives
demonstrates the relevance of the subjects addressed
and the convergence of views within the international
community with regard to the need for continued
deliberations in order to reach the goals we have set out.

One of the consequences of war, as we know, is
the obliteration of the rule of law, because, during war
or following war, State institutions and laws are sorely
tested. The judiciary no longer plays its traditional
role as arbiter, adjuster or controller of the law. In the
wake of that situation, impunity and disorder take root
at all levels. Security can no longer be guaranteed,
because the forces usually responsible for maintaining
public order are inoperative. Violence against women,
children and other vulnerable persons assumes an
extraordinary scale. In sum, the State in all its forms
is shattered. There are ample examples throughout
the world, particularly in Africa and the Middle East,
where public opinion is dominated by the quest for
peace and security, the restoration of State authority,
the fight against impunity and the reorganization of the
army and security service and so on.

The widespread United Nations missions and
offices and deployments of regional forces - African
and European - in Mali, the Central African Republic,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Somalia,
Darfur, South Sudan and Yemen, for example, all show
the concern of the international community to address
the gravity of those situations. Commendable efforts
continue to be made to address them. In that context,
the rule of law remains a long-standing quest, because
the very foundations of the State must be rebuilt. Some
countries, although they may not have experienced war,
may still be fragile States, owing to social, cultural and
historical legacies, but above all, perhaps, because of
poor governance, which explains the poor performance
of their institutions.

The solutions advocated to promote and bolster
the rule of law, including reinforcing or re-establishing
national legislation and institutions, and the training
and establishment of transitional justice, are, of
course, effective. However, they must be supported by
commensurate efforts to combat poverty and illiteracy.
Establishing democracy and good governance in States
can be the best way to ensure the strengthening or
restoration of the rule of law, because in a democratic
State there is no place for injustice, corruption and
human rights Violations. Impunity is the primary
source of crime in most countries, and countries must
mercilessly combat crime with the appropriate means.
At the national level, the involvement of civil society
and religious and traditional leaders in prevention and
conflict-resolution mechanisms is increasingly being
encouraged, as is the case in Chad and, more recently,
in the Central African Republic and Mali.

The Declaration of the High-Level Meeting of the
General Assembly on the Rule of Law at the National
and International Levels (General Assembly resolution 67/1) established a close linkage between the rule of
law and the three pillars of the United Nations, namely,
peace and security, human rights and development.
That makes it possible for United Nations efforts to take
concrete form, not only in the area of human rights but
also with respect to women and children, international
justice, the limitation of small arms and light weapons
and other actions, such as combating corruption and
international crime and access to genetic resources.
Those are all aspects of the rule of law.

It is important to underscore that the question of
international justice is rightfully within the framework
of international law issues. Combating impunity
at the national level should be supplemented by
increased efforts to combat that phenomenon at the
international level. That requires reaffirming the role
of international criminal justice by guaranteeing that
it has the necessary resources to discharge its duty.
Terrorism and international crime must be combated
by the United Nations in close cooperation with States
and international organizations.

The efforts being made by the States of the Sahel
to pool their resources to combat terrorism, as part of
the Nouakchott process, with the recent establishment
by the group of five of the Sahel - Burkina Faso,
Mali, Mauritania, the Niger and Chad - deserves to
be welcomed and supported by the entire international
community, given the scale of the threats to which
our people are exposed as a result of the terrorists and
narcotraffickers who are pillaging the region.

In conclusion, strengthening the rule of law at
the international level should be based on a holistic
strategy that is clear and precise, involving regional
and subregional entities. That strategy must include
conflict-prevention mechanisms, a prohibition on small
arms, the strengthening of the fight against impunity
through legal cooperation, and the strengthening of
national and international tribunals.

