Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Let me begin my second speech of the day with an important observation following our deliberations this morning concerning the humanitarian situation (see S/PV.8707). My country's Government sent an_ official communication a while ago to the Regional Director of the Eastern Mediterranean Office of the World Health Organization (WHO) informing him that the Syrian Government had authorized a WHO convoy of medical assistance and medicine that had been waiting in Iraq to promptly enter the Syrian territories through the Al-Qaim/Abu Kamal crossing at the Syrian-Iraqi border, which is under control of the Syrian State, so as to avoid the expiration of its products. The Syrian Government, in cooperation with WHO and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent Society, will distribute the assistance to hospitals, health clinics and civilians in need. The Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs met with Special Envoy Geir Pedersen in Damascus this morning to discuss the political process in Syria and the importance of making every effort possible to achieve the desired progress and ensure the success of that process, which serves the interests of the Syrian people. The outcome of the process should be Syrian-led, while emphasizing respect for the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of Syria. Both sides have stressed the importance of upholding the rules of procedure of the Constitutional Committee so as to ensure independent Syrian decisions without any external interference from any party. Nine long years have elapsed, during which four successive Special Envoys of the Secretary-General have tried to find the magic formula to resolve the so-called Syrian crisis. Unfortunately, they were not successful in their noble task because some in the Council and beyond prioritize the rule of force rather than the rule of law, disregarding the provisions of theCharter of the United Nations and the principles of international law and good-neighbourly relations. All of that has been at the expense of Syria's stability, its regional role and at the cost of its people's blood. Yesterday we saw a pathetic attempt by the current United States Administration to present a new colonial project in our region, thereby repeating the same major crime committed by Britain over 100 years ago with the fateful Balfour Declaration, which served Israel and its aggressive expansionist schemes. It did so in spite of Syrian, Palestinian and Arab rights and interests and in flagrant violation of international law, the Charter of the United Nations and its benchmark resolutions, especially resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 497 (1981) and 2334 (2016), all of which stress the need to end the Israeli occupation of the occupied Arab territories, including the occupied Syrian Golan, a withdrawal to 4 June 1967 borders and ceasing illegitimate settlement activity, which hampers the peace process. Those are Council's resolutions. The surreal scene in Washington, D.C., yesterday was that of a unilateral action and an act of aggression against the United Nations itself - one of unparalleled contempt for the relevant United Nations resolutions on the Palestinian question and the occupied Syrian Golan. In 2003, President George Bush announced the road map for peace. At the time, the United States proposal contained 2,218 words. He said that the proposal had been inspired by the Holy Spirit. Following the visit of Mr. Netanyahu yesterday, President Donald Trump launched a road map for peace and prosperity. It contains 49,402 words. Neither the Bush nor the Trump proposal makes any mention of international law - or of human rights, international humanitarian law or the United Nations. Neither proposal included any of those words. Should Council members doubt me, I would ask them to read the proposals for themselves. That is the United States policy. Council members waste their time here, while the United States takes unilateral measures the way it likes. In circumstances such as these, how can we trust United States policy related to any matter concerning the maintenance of international peace and security? We will leave it to Council members to answer that question. Nine bitter years have elapsed. Some Council members and others have insisted on _ using internationally prohibited weapons of massive lies to sow instability in our countries and the Middle East region, rather than reflecting on their own actions and positions and reforming their policies. What is even worse is that some are convinced of their actions and positions. They try to convince us with arguments that lack wisdom and law, while demonstrating their superiority and near-sighted policies that result only in destruction and ruin our countries and peoples. They try to justify themselves and project their anger on others. In the words of Jean-Paul Sartre, "Hell is other people". The absolute reality that cannot be denied is that the accumulated old and new big sins of some have brought our region and peoples bitter disasters, bloody conflicts, instability and lack of development. We have assured the Council many times that we cannot base our actions on false pretexts and expect good outcomes. That is a philosophy thousands of year old. Einstein conveyed the same idea when he said, "The definition of insanity is doing the same thing over and over again, but expecting different results." We have reiterated that the full restoration of security and stability in my country requires addressing the challenges related to terrorism and stopping the wasting of the Council's time, efforts and budget with fabricated issues - like determining the gender of angels, demons and everything in between. Some colleagues try to promote fabricated accusations to obstruct us in our war against terrorism and boost the morale ofarmed terrorist organizations that are overrunning Idlib and Aleppo under the leadership of Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham/Jabhat Al-Nusra - meaning Al-Qaida, Da'esh and other terrorist groups of different names and loyalties. My Government reiterates that it has remained very patient - as patient as Job. We have chosen political solutions and given them ample time. We have always dealt seriously with every initiative calling for calm, including through the Astana and Sochi processes, as we are committed to safeguarding the Syrian people and ending the pain and bloodshed throughout the country.Before concluding, I will underscore two points. First, Idlib and the surrounding areas are Syrian territories that currently are under the control of Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham, which is the Syrian branch of Al-Qaida, and its affiliated terrorist groups. It counts among its ranks tens of thousands of foreign terrorist fighters. Some are trying to genetically modify them by calling them the "moderate armed Syrian opposition". In the near future, with the collusion of the Turkish regime, they will also call them the "moderate armed Libyan opposition", which will also be genetically modified. Surviving foreign terrorist fighters will be called "moderate armed opposition" of a third or fourth country - because their masters invest in terrorism. They will progressively continue in that manner in other countries in Africa, such as Mali, Nigeria, the Niger and Kenya, as well as countries of the Sahel and others, in order to spread destruction and the displacement and exodus of their peoples. Secondly, I once again ask delegations the question I posed before: What would Council members' Governments do if they saw a terrorist organization occupying a certain region in their country, target civilians and fire rockets? Would they just watch them with their arms folded and provide them with humanitarian assistance while calling them 'moderate armed opposition?" I leave it to delegations to answer those questions. Our message is a message of peace, based on strength not weakness. We strongly believe in the principle of the sovereign equality of States - a principle that was enshrined by the founding fathers of our Organization and on which we rely on in our policies. We also say to all those who entertain repeating what was done in our region after the First and Second World Wars that their plans will not succeed. They will fail by virtue of the will of the Syrian people. The meeting rose at 4.40 p.m.
