Mr. Minton (United States of America): My
delegation too welcomes the recent parliamentary elections,
which were held in Tajikistan in a violence-free
environment. We think this is a significant step towards the
realization of democracy in that country. These elections
were, of course, the first-ever multi-party parliamentary
elections in the country, and we recognize that, as such,
they constitute a milestone in the implementation of the
1997 Moscow accords that ended Tajikistan's civil war. As
has been noted by Mr. Annabi, however, there were some
significant shortcomings in the way the process was
implemented.

A Joint Electoral Observation Mission of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and
the United Nations reported on these problems during the
election period, and I think all observers are aware of them.
However, we believe that with serious work by the
Government these irregularities can certainly be overcome
in future elections as this process proceeds.

Consequently we wish to encourage the Government
of Tajikistan to correct these flaws during the 23 March
elections to the upper house. At the same time, we believe
that the implementation of the election process, as I said, is
highly significant, and a good start has been made with this
process. We believe that implementation so far should
allow Tajikistan to move forward in the future towards a
fuller realization of the democratic processes to which its
Government has committed the country. We hope that the
Government in particular, as this process proceeds, will
ensure that all groups within the country feel that they have
a voice, as well as a stake, in the political system of the
country.

Since the period of transition stipulated in the peace
accords will come to an end with these parliamentary
elections, we agree with the Secretary-General's assessment
that the process which the United Nations Mission of
Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT) was created to support
is now over. Therefore, my delegation believes that
UNMOT should be terminated when its mandate expires on
15 May.

At the same time, however, we look forward to
hearing from the Secretary-General about follow-on
measures that will enable Tajikistan to embark upon
post-conflict peace-building. We are fully ready to be
supportive of those measures.

As during previous mid-mandate reviews for UNMOT,
my delegation could support, as I said, a presidential
statement along the lines proposed by the Russian
delegation.

