Ms. Coleman (United States of America): The
United States extends its sincere appreciation to
President Agius, President Meron and Prosecutor
Brammertz for their briefings today to the Security
Council as well as for their leadership and contributions
to advancing justice for victims of the worst atrocities
committed in the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda.
Without the diligence and determination of jurists
and staff at their tribunals, perpetrators of the worst
crimes known to humankind - genocide, war crimes
and crimes against humanity - could continue to live
freely in impunity, which is an unacceptable outcome.

The persistent efforts ofthese international criminal
tribunals resulted this year in reaching significant
milestones that serve to warn would-be perpetrators
everywhere that there will be no escape from justice.
Earlier this year, former Republika Srpska President
Radovan Karadzie was found guilty and sentenced to 40
years in prison for genocide, crimes against humanity
and Violations of the laws and customs of war - a
historic conviction that once seemed impossible. Just
this week, the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) commenced closing arguments in
the case of Bosnian Serb military commander Ratko
Mladic', who stands accused of genocide of Bosniaks
from Srebrenica, terrorizing the population of Sarajevo
and taking United Nations peacekeepers hostage.

The United States supports the work of the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals to conclude expeditiously the retrial of the case
in Prosecutor v. Jovica Stanisie and Fran/co Simatovic'
and the appeals proceeding in the cases of Prosecutor
v. Radovan Karadeic' and Prosecutor v. Vojislav Seselj.
The ICTY establishes facts through judicial process,
which is critical to countering those who seek to distort
facts, revise history or rewrite reality.

The United States notes with great concern the
detrimental impact of increasingly diverse and divisive
political speech in the region about the pursuit ofjustice
for war crimes committed in the former Yugoslavia.
Such inflammatory rhetoric can harm regional
cooperation among the States of the former Yugoslavia,
which is essential to promoting accountability for
war crimes.

The United States would like to reiterate the
importance of full cooperation of all concerned States
with the ICTY. The United States remains concerned
that three arrest warrants for individuals charged with
contempt of court in relation to witness intimidation
in the Seselj case have remained unexecuted in Serbia
for 22 months. Recognizing that cooperation is an
ongoing obligation essential to the functioning of the
Tribunal, the United States calls on Serbia to execute
these arrests expeditiously. Failure to fully cooperate
with the Tribunal in accordance with its statutes and
the resolutions of the Security Council compromises
the core functions of the international justice system
and must be addressed with appropriate urgency.

The United States commends recent efforts by
the Prosecutor's Office to review its fugitive tracking
efforts and implement revised strategies to address
key challenges so that the eight remaining fugitives
from the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
may be swiftly located, arrested and brought to justice.
The United States is unwavering in its commitment
to ensuring that these fugitives are apprehended and
brought to justice, and we continue to offer a reward of
up to $5 million for information leading to the arrest or
transfer of these eight men. The United States would also
like to express our sincere appreciation for the Tribunal's
efforts, especially the Office of the Prosecutor, in
building capacity among national prosecutors.

The pursuit of justice for victims in Rwanda and the
former Yugoslavia must not end with the closure ofthese
Tribunals. While both Tribunals have successfully tried
many high-level perpetrators, further accountability
for crimes committed depends on fair and effective
trials for alleged mid- and lower-level perpetrators in
national courts.

The United States remains deeply concerned about
the Mechanism's casework, which has been severally
impaired while Judge Aydin Sefa Akay, who was
expected to be working on a case before the Mechanism,
remains detained in Turkey. We recall that the Security
Council designed the Mechanism in a way that provides
for judges to work remotely, except for sittings or as
directed by the President. We reiterate the importance
of judges being able to carry out this important work
on behalf of the United Nations. With this in mind, we
hope that this matter can be resolved expeditiously.

Thanks to the unrelenting dedication of these
Tribunals, the victims of horrific atrocities have
received a meaningful measure of justice. Promoting
justice and accountability is all the more critical
in the present moment when leaders' horrific acts
against civilians have so far been met with impunity in
places such as Syria and South Sudan. The successful
completion of the work of the Mechanism will serve to
prove that justice is not an afterthought in the work of
advancing international peace and security but the core
of it.

