Mr. Sharma (India): Let me begin by thanking you,

Sir, for giving us the opportunity to speak on this subject.
I have read with interest the statements made by members
of the Council on 21 January and 12 February and by the
experts who addressed them. Most of those statements,
particularly of the experts, were marked by great emotion,
which is understandable. It is natural to be moved by
suffering. We also have deep concerns on the subject.
However, no matter how emotive an issue, solutions to
problems must be based on facts and on pragmatism.

This is why we are disturbed by some liberties taken
with history on which the discussions were premised. It
is simply not the case that the targeting of civilians in
armed conflict is an innovation of the 1990s or that its
frequency has increased. Throughout the colonial wars
that continued into our era, the main victims of the
imperial armies were civilians. It is worth recalling that
Additional Protocol I to the Geneva Conventions, which
deals with wars of national liberation, was negotiated and
adopted only in 1977, after decolonization was almost
complete. When the colonial Powers fought each other, in
increasingly vicious conflict, ending in the two World
Wars of this century, the distinction between civilians and
those in uniform was lost. Concentration camps, carpet
bombing and total war are concepts which have been with
us throughout this century. The persecution of civilians in
armed conflict is not a recent, third-world malaise.

Any evolution in the situation has also been slow in
coming. Military doctrines based on the first use of
nuclear weapons would cause the wholesale slaughter of
civilians. Very few soldiers were among the hundreds of
thousands killed in Hiroshima and Nagasaki, and very few
would be among the hundreds of millions killed in any
nuclear exchange. The report which the Secretary-General
has been asked to produce for the Security Council should
therefore make it clear that, if steps are being taken to
either ban or control weapons, such as landmines or small
arms, that cause civilian casualties, steps must also be
taken to outlaw the use of nuclear weapons. However, we
know that the report will not be able to say this, and that
even if it does, the Council will not act on any such
recommendation. In this matter as in others, politics
determines what is possible.

Once we accept that this issue is as deeply
politicized as any other, we will also understand why
many countries are troubled by the Council's selective
activism. Even in countries affected by conflict that are
not fully functioning democracies, it is usually the case
that outrages against civilians are carried out by terrorists

 

or irregular elements owing no allegiance either to the
nation or to any concept of law. Unfortunately, many
Governments in more placid parts of the world are driven
primarily by what happens on television, and the media
feed on horror. Therefore, it is now known to ruthless and
ambitious men that if they commit atrocities sufficiently
spectacular, media attention will follow, and international
attention will come in its wake. Having created
humanitarian disasters, they are then quite willing to have
humanitarian agencies operate in the areas they have
devastated. This offers them several advantages: the de
facto acknowledgment that an area is under their control;
international attention to the causes they purport to
represent; the lifting of responsibility from their shoulders
for the maintenance of the populations they repress; and,
when they can, the appropriation of humanitarian assistance
to sustain their fighters.

These are advantages which Governments under siege
are naturally reluctant to concede those who kill and
terrorize their citizens and challenge their legitimate
authority. However, it is then the Governments concerned
that bear the brunt of philanthropic outrage if they do not
concede what is now claimed as the right of humanitarian
intervention. Humanitarian assistance becomes an issue
between the Governments concerned and the humanitarian
agencies and donor countries; the protection of civilians
becomes an excuse for the assertion of political will. In
these circumstances, humanitarian assistance becomes not
a part of the conflict but a tool, indeed a means of waging
conflict, for many who wish to undermine established
authority. This is not received wisdom, because it flies
against the interests of both philanthropy and realpolitik,
but Somalia is a sombre reminder that good intentions by
themselves do not prevent a debacle.

It also worries us that some of the experts who spoke
in the Council asked for its help in ensuring that
humanitarian agencies had access as a matter of right to
civilian populations affected by conflict. It is important that,
in promoting the rule of law, we should not stretch or
violate it. The Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War makes it
clear that, when military necessity so requires, access may
be denied. There is no automatic right of access, and to
press for it would violate both international humanitarian
law and the sovereignty of States. In practice, only strong
States that respect and can enforce the rule of law, within
their borders and internationally, will be capable of
ensuring the human rights of their citizens. Weakening
State authority, particularly that of Governments already
under violent internal stress, through claims of a right of
intervention not only violates international law, it works
against the objective of ensuring that civilians under
threat are protected as much as possible.

We are also disturbed by the recommendations made
by more than one expert that targeted sanctions should be
used both to ensure the protection of civilians and to
punish those who violate their rights. Sanctions are a
blunt instrument. Targeted sanctions have had two ends
in view: to streamline the process for countries and
agencies that impose sanctions, and to try to limit, not
human suffering in the countries targeted, but the effects
on the economic interests of those imposing sanctions.
This too is an unpleasant truth that must be faced. The
effect of sanctions on Iraq is a clear example of how
innocent civilians have suffered for years in the aftermath
of a conflict which they did nothing to provoke. As
against that, sanctions have not been implemented in other
parts of the world, for reasons on which introspection in
the Council might provide answers. We trust that the
Secretary-General's report will examine these issues
objectively and in depth.

These issues were considered in depth by the
Twenty-sixth International Conference of the Red Cross
and Red Crescent in Geneva in 1995. Balancing the rights
of civilians to impartial humanitarian relief, the
Conference also laid down several important principles,
among them the need to build long-term developmental
perspectives into humanitarian assistance, the need for
independence of humanitarian action in times of crisis,
and the need to strengthen national capacities to provide
humanitarian and development assistance and protection
to the most vulnerable. It also expressed concern about
the humanitarian consequences of economic sanctions,
including those imposed by the United Nations. These are
principles which should be respected.

We have repeatedly heard that there are enough
international instruments for the protection of civilians
and that what we need to do is make sure that they are
honoured. What the Council needs to consider is how this
is to be done. By definition, international instruments are
signed by Governments, most of which honour them; if
they do not, they can be held accountable. But most
violations of human rights are committed by elements and
forces that are accountable to no one, who have no
interest in international humanitarian law or in being
educated in its niceties, and have signed no agreements to
respect it. However, when a country situation is under
discussion, blame is ascribed to the body that is at hand
and accountable - the Government - though it may not

 

be responsible for the outrages and be powerless to prevent
them. The Council is as impotent as any other body in
these situations, having very little influence over the actions
of irregular forces, terrorists and warlords. We wonder,
therefore, how, in practice, it will implement the elements
of the presidential statement issued on 12 February.

A fundamental issue is how to distinguish a civilian
from an armed adversary in conflicts where at least one of
the parties deliberately does not put its fighters in uniform.
Children, as we have repeatedly been told, are under arms,
but so are women. While some armed forces in the West
have recently conceded to women the right to go into
combat, this dubious privilege has existed in other parts of
the world for many years, particularly in irregular warfare.
When a civilian cannot be distinguished from a soldier and
neither sex nor age guarantee civilian status, the chances of
genuine civilians' being killed in conflict increase sharply.
The alternative is for regular armed forces to expose
themselves to risks and casualties that can be unacceptably
high. This is a tragic but real operational conundrum and
cannot be ignored.

So, too, is the problem, addressed by others in this
debate, caused by the shift over the last decades in the
status of refugees. From Afghanistan in the 1980s to the
Great Lakes in the 1990s, refugees have been seen by
interested parties as an asset of war, fighting forces have
been recruited from refugee camps and the camps
themselves have been used as safe havens from which
cross-border raids are carried out. This blurring of the
distinction between combatants and civilians in distress has
created serious dilemmas, not least for the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees.

We have heard repeatedly that the nature of war has
changed and that civilians are now targets as they have not
been before. As I said, this ignores historical reality, but,
even more, none of the many examples that have been
given have addressed a basic problem inherent in the nature
of war. During the Gulf War, it was believed that the
Government of Iraq had moved civilians, including
foreigners, into the vicinity of targets that would have been
attacked by the coalition. The Security Council, through
resolutions 664 (1990) and 674 (1990), condemned these
actions. If, however, the Iraqi Government had continued to
keep civilians near those targets, would the coalition have
desisted? Almost certainly not, because the Geneva
Conventions clearly lay down that the presence of civilians
cannot be invoked to seek protection for a legitimate
military objective.

Unfortunately, most Governments which have to
handle conflicts where armed elements regularly use
civilians as shields do not have the means of having the
Security Council adopt resolutions condemning the
practice of their enemies. State forces are asked to hold
their hand or - if they do not and civilian casualties
result - are condemned for not having acted according
to the highest standards of international humanitarian law.
Here again, unfortunately, there is a clear disparity of
treatment: The powerful can invoke the law and can get
away with actions, even when such actions are in breach
of the laws of war; the weak suffer opprobrium and
censure.

Irrespective of whether the nature of war has
changed or not, no war can be fought unless the
combatants have weapons and money to sustain conflict.
The manufacture of weapons, including the small arms
and light weapons with which the majority of conflicts
have been fought in the 1990s, is still largely the
prerogative of a few developed countries. Other
Governments have cynically or for political gain sent
arms across borders to sustain insurgencies. These
Governments must take the responsibility of controlling
or stopping the flow of arms that fuel or sustain conflict.
These are patterns of behaviour that must be checked; it
would be interesting to see what the Security Council
does to contain or prevent these practices.

There is a further point involved, brought up
courageously by Special Representative Otunnu, and that
is the role of major business interests in fomenting and
financing conflict. This has two aspects, the obverse of
the problems faced by Governments accused of human
rights violations committed by elements outside their
control. First, when business interests from the developed
world provoke or sustain conflicts, as is currently the case
in more than one ongoing conflagration, the Governments
concerned shrug off responsibility on the grounds that
they cannot be held responsible for the operation of
multinational business concerns. Secondly, the supply of
arms over which there are no national controls is justified
on the grounds that these are commercial operations,
subject only to the rules of the market place, which open
capitalist societies cannot curb. And, as a further twist,
some Governments believe and contend that the arms
industry is so significant a component of their economies
that their exports must necessarily be encouraged to
maintain the health of the industry and of the national
economy. In other words, lives in a distant continent are
a necessary sacrifice to ensure that economies in the
developed world continue to flourish.

 

Finally, two problems, neither of them new, but which
singly and together have given a new virulence to violence
against civilians: The first is racism and the other the
problem of mercenaries. The first problem has been hinted
at by several speakers in the debate; it needs to be faced
openly because it has surfaced, not only in conflicts, but in
several United Nations peacekeeping operations. It is
significant that no United Nations contingent from a
developing country has ever been accused of racist
violence; it is equally significant that very few soldiers
guilty of racist violence in the course of United Nations
operations have ever been seriously punished. If the United
Nations cannot uphold the highest standards, it can hardly
carry authority in prescribing good behaviour to others.

Related to this is the scourge of mercenarism. A very
large number of conflicts are now sustained by mercenaries.
Almost invariably, these are foreigners, often from distant
lands and therefore men without the slightest concern for
the lives of the civilians in the country where they fight for
gain. Some of the worst outrages against civilians have
been committed by mercenaries and, by definition, unless
this practice is curbed, violence against civilians will be
endemic wherever they operate. However, in the guise of
security agencies' hiring personnel laid off by armed forces
that can now shed staff, their number is on the increase,
often encouraged clandestinely by agencies in the countries
concerned. We would be interested in seeing how the
Council deals with this problem.

I have spoken almost exclusively about the problems
that we see in the way this issue has been handled. This is
not to say that we underestimate the gravity of the problem
or belittle the efforts of those agencies and individuals who
have made enormous efforts, and sometimes supreme
sacrifices, to protect civilians in situations of armed
conflict. We honour their efforts and we salute the men and
women involved. As I have said, this has to be a matter of
the gravest concern to the entire membership and one to
which it would like to see improvements.

However, what we are discussing is an extremely
complex matter and, if we are not to cause problems
through misguided benevolence, it is necessary to address
the paradoxes and difficulties which face anyone who has
had to grapple with these issues, not in the comfort of this
Chamber, but on the ground. There are some questions to
which there are no easy answers; a simple answer might be
the wrong one and create more difficulties in the long run.
Our interest is in making sure that the international
community examines this complex and multifaceted issue
in depth, before the Council is authorized to take any action
on its behalf. It is in that spirit that we have spoken
today.

