Mr. Gonzalez de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): The Ebola crisis has clearly become more
than just a serious epidemic. Given its exponential
growth and its impact on public order, the economy
and the political situation in affected countries, it has
now become a threat to the stability and security in
West Africa, with a potential global impact. That fact
underlines the timeliness of this debate and of resolution
2177 (2014), which Spain has co-sponsored.

Our response must be immediate and coordinated
under the leadership of the United Nations and regional
organizations, and geared towards supporting the
initiatives of the affected States. We welcome the
initiative of the Secretary-General to establish an
emergency response mechanism.

There are three major challenges. The first is to
provide care for those affected; the second is to provide
care for those who care for the sick; and the third is to
ensure that the medical, social, economic and security
institutions of the affected countries do not collapse. To
those I would add a fourth challenge; it may be obvious,
but I must mention it. We must avoid and prevent the
isolation of the affected countries. Marginalization and
stigmatization are counterproductive. Not only are they
totally useless, but they also delay the response to the
epidemic.
Spain is particularly alive to this crisis because of
its geographic proximity and close links to West Africa.
We have a great deal to contribute. We are doing so, and
we are prepared to do much more. Let me offer just
a few examples of our action in the three areas that I
mentioned.

With respect to providing medical care for those
affected by Ebola, it is essential that we increase the
number of treatment units, provide medical supplies
and deploy specially trained staff. We must also break
the contagion chain and develop a communication
strategy. That is what we are doing. We have sent tons
of emergency medical and health supplies, material for
protection, disinfection and isolation, an emergency
response unit and experts in water, sanitation and
logistics to various medical centres in Liberia, Sierra
Leone and Guinea.

Among those who are struggling to alleviate the
suffering of the victims, at this point there are some
30 Spanish nationals offering care to persons infected
with Ebola. That is a small demonstration of our efforts
in working together with many other humanitarian
workers of many other nationalities.

We are aware of the logistics and training needs
and are working to meet them. We also are particularly
sensitive to the need for protection. We have been
involved in one of the first medical evacuations, of
two humanitarian workers, and we now have a detailed
protocol that we are willing to make available to the
United Nations and interested countries.

We also have to share the sad news of the death of
the first victim, Father Miguel Pajares, whom I recall
with emotion and gratitude for the humanitarian work
that he continued through to the last days of his life.

With respect to ensuring that the affected States
can continue to provide basic protection and health
care to their citizens, it is true that the collapse of
their health-care systems is causing increases in the
numbers of victims of common diseases. Unfortunately,
maternal and infant mortality rates in those countries
are trending upward again, because the related needs
are being neglected now that all efforts are focusing on
fighting Ebola. We shall continue to provide support
towards food and nutritional security in the region and
to strengthen health capacities in water and sanitation
in the countries that I have mentioned.

It is also essential to prevent the spread of the
epidemic to neighbouring countries. We intend to
scale up our support for national response mechanisms
in neighbouring countries, namely, Senegal, Mali,
Mauritania, the Niger, Cote d'Ivoire and Nigeria.
Furthermore, we will work within the European Union
to ensure that it strengthens its action in that area.
That will, of course, require additional resources,
which we are prepared to provide. Our action will be
coordinated internationally and our capacities will be
integrated within the response plan of the World Health
Organization.

In conclusion, I wish to pay a heartfelt tribute to
all of the victims and those working on the front line
against this disease. To Guinea, Liberia and Sierra
Leone, I offer our solidarity in the face of the tragedy
they are experiencing and our promise and commitment
that together, we will overcome the crisis and those
countries will find their way back to the path towards
the peace and prosperity for which they have been
fighting in recent years.

