Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): This
meeting is taking place at a sensitive stage in the
Council's efforts to put an end to the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. There can be no
doubt that the Security Council has done a great deal to
analyse the various aspects of the conflict. It has had
recourse to a number of mechanisms to deal with this
very complex issue. Events and developments on the
ground, however, mean that we must continue to
pursue our efforts, which will require greater political
and material commitment. Further courageous and
difficult decisions will also be necessary.

We support the priority assigned by the Security
Council and the Secretary-General to backing and
encouraging the peace process, which is beginning to
bear fruit after a long period of waiting. All of the
internal political parties must commit themselves to
both the letter and the spirit of the Lusaka accord and
the Luanda, Sun City and Bujumbura agreements. The
activities of the Transitional Government of National
Unity must be supported. The Government must be
able gradually to expand its authority throughout the
territory.

Significant and difficult challenges, however,
remain to be overcome. The Security Council must
take decisive measures and adopt policies that move
the political process forward. Half measures must be
avoided. Resources must be made available, and an
appropriate mandate adopted for the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) so that it can properly discharge
its mission in a number of areas.

First, support must be provided for the political
process, including a guarantee of the commitment of all
political parties to the meetings and other activities of
the Transitional Government. Secondly, the protection
of civilians and property must be assured and access to
displaced persons and refugees guaranteed for
international rescue organizations. Thirdly, the
implementation of ceasefire measures and of steps to
prevent arms supplies to the various military factions
must be monitored. Fourthly, the monitoring and
implementation of the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of former combatants into civilian
life must take place. Fifthly, the activities of United
Nations programmes and bodies in the area of social
development, institutional capacity-building and
human rights protection must be coordinated. Sixthly,
capacity must be strengthened for training national
security institutions to discharge their functions to
protect the internal and external boundaries of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the national
resources of the country.

We reaffirm the critical role that is being played
by the group of experts that is studying the illegal
exploitation of the natural resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo within the framework of support
for the political operation under way. We are all well
aware of the close relationship between the illegal
exploitation of resources, arms flows and the
continuation of the fighting in the east and north-east
of the country. Thus the establishment of peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo will depend, to a
significant extent, on the determination of the
international community to put an end to the illegal
economic activities taking place there.

It is well known that the current conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is having negative
regional repercussions for the entire Great Lakes
region. The balance of forces in the region plays an
important role in that bloody conflict. We believe,
therefore, that the establishment of peace and security
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo will depend
first and foremost on taking into account the political,
security and economic needs of the States of the Great
Lakes region as a whole, as well as on creating a
common denominator of shared interests based on
good-neighbourliness and respect for the sovereignty
of each State over its own territory.

In that context, the holding of an international
conference on the establishment of peace in the Great
Lakes region takes on increasing importance. That will
require serious preparatory work under the auspices of
the United Nations and the African Union, with the
participation of all the forces involved, both
international and regional. That conference must study
the concept of peace-building in a comprehensive
manner, including development, political and security
issues, and accept the idea that peace is indivisible.

We welcome the courageous initiative of the
European Union to create the International Emergency
Multinational Force in Bunia, which has allowed for
the stabilization of the situation in that city - a city
that has suffered from bloody conflict. In the context of
that important decision, we welcome Mr. Javier Solana,
who is here with us today.
As a country contributing troops to MONUC,
Egypt would like to congratulate Mr. Ngongi for his
outstanding leadership in dealing with the mandate and
resources of MONUC. We are sure that MONUC, with
the guidance of Mr. Swing, and given his experience
and many contacts, will also make great progress on
the basis of the new mandate with which the Council
will soon provide the mission.

