Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): Today's meeting is taking place at a time
when Iraq is being subjected to massive missile and bomb
strikes by the armed forces of the United States and the
United Kingdom. There have been casualties, valuable
material goods have been destroyed and a threat has been
created to peace and security not only in the region but
beyond it. I should like to recall that there are Russian
citizens in Baghdad. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Russian Federation, Mr. Ivanov, stated today that if

 

their lives should prove to be imperilled, that will have
extremely serious consequences.

Grave harm has been done to the tremendous amount
of work done in recent years to effect a post-crisis
settlement in the Persian Gulf region and to dismantle the
capability of Iraq's weapons of mass destruction and their
delivery systems. The very existence of the system that was
so carefully set up over a long period of time to monitor
the prohibited programmes of Iraq has been called into
question. Such a turn of events, to which Russia decidedly
objects, has caused very serious concern and deep alarm. In
carrying out this unprovoked act of force, the United States
and the United Kingdom have grossly violated the Charter
of the United Nations, the principles of international law
and the generally recognized norms and rules of responsible
behaviour on the part of States in the international arena.
Essentially, a threat has been made to the entire system of
international security, in which the United Nations and the
Security Council act as a central link.

The Security Council alone has the right to determine
what steps should be taken in order to maintain or restore
international peace and security. We reject outright the
attempts made in the letters from the United States and the
United Kingdom to justify the use of force on the basis of
a mandate that was previously issued by the Security
Council. The resolutions of the Council provide no grounds
whatsoever for such actions.

I should like to recall that paragraph 6 of the most
recent resolution of the Security Council on Iraq, resolution
1205 (1998), clearly states that the Security Council

"Decides, in accordance with its primary
responsibility under the Charter for the maintenance of
international peace and security, to remain actively
seized of the matter."

Clearly, therefore, those actions have been undertaken
in violation of Security Council resolutions. The entire
responsibility for the consequences of those actions must be
borne by those States that have chosen a unilateral act of
force in order to resolve their problems with Iraq. No one
is entitled to act independently on behalf of the United
Nations, still less assume the functions of a world
policeman. Russia has consistently made intensive
diplomatic efforts to promote a swift settlement of the
situation around Iraq. The potential for a political and
diplomatic resolution of the Iraqi crisis has by no means
been exhausted, as is made particularly clear by the
basically normal course of cooperation between Iraq and
the United Nations recently. The Iraqi leadership even
now confirms its readiness to continue on that course.

We believe that although there are certain problems
regarding the cooperation between Iraq and the United
Nations Special Commission and the International Atomic
Energy Agency, the current crisis was created artificially,
partly as a result of the irresponsible acts of the Executive
Chairman of the Special Commission, Richard Butler. On
the night of 15 December this year, he presented a report
that gave a distorted picture of the real state of affairs and
concluded that there was a lack of full cooperation on the
part of Iraq. That conclusion was not borne out by the
facts. Without any consultations with the Security
Council, Richard Butler then evacuated the entire Special
Commission staff from Iraq. At the same time, there was
an absolutely unacceptable leak of the report to the
communications media, which received the text before the
members of the Security Council themselves. Richard
Butler thus grossly abused his authority. His acts have led
to a sharp deterioration of the situation regarding Iraq.

It is symbolic that precisely at the time when
Richard Butler, during today's consultative Council
meeting, was attempting to defend the conclusions
reached in his report, we were informed about the strike
against Iraq, and the justification for that unilateral act
was precisely the report which had been presented by the
Executive Chairman of the Special Commission.

In the light of this new situation in Iraq, the Russian
Federation cannot remain unconcerned. We appeal for an
immediate end to these acts of military force, that
restraint and prudence be demonstrated and that no further
escalation of the conflict be allowed, a conflict which is
fraught with completely predictable consequences,
dangerous not only for the Iraqi settlement but also for
international stability as a whole.

We are convinced that the resolution of the Iraqi
problem is possible only through political and diplomatic
methods on the basis of compliance with the resolutions
of the Security Council and the norms of international
law.

We are grateful to the Secretary-General for his
statement today in which he, inter alia, confirmed his
readiness to promote a peaceful settlement of the problem
in the region of the Persian Gulf.

We believe that the Security Council has its part to
play in accordance with the Charter of the United

 

Nations, including giving an assessment, in principle, of the
current unilateral military action. In this context, today's
meeting is of particular significance.

