Mr. Annadif: Allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on
assuming the role of President of the Security Council
for the month of October. I would also like to take this
opportunity to greet and congratulate the Ambassador
of Russia for his presidency of the Council during the
month of September.

(spoke in French)

It is an honour and a renewed pleasure for me to
present to the Council today, from Bamako, the report
ofthe Secretary-General on Mali (S/2019/782), covering
the past three months, in accordance with paragraph 64
of resolution 2480 (2019).

I also take this opportunity to welcome Ambassador
Issa Konfourou, Permanent Representative of Mali to
the United Nations.

This report comes at a time when news from Bamako
is, unfortunately, not encouraging, particularly last
week's gruesome attacks on Boulekessi and Mondoro,
as well as the death 48 hours ago of a peacekeeper
in Aguelhok and the injury of another in the vicinity
of Bandiagara.

Despite these ongoing tragedies committed by the
enemies of peace, significant progress has been made
in the implementation of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation on Mali, particularly with regard
to political and institutional reforms, defence and
security issues and socioeconomic development issues,
as mentioned in the report under consideration. That
progress includes the promulgation last July of the Loi
d'entente nationale and legislation establishing the
fundamental principles for the creation, organization
and control of the northern economic development
zone, which lays the foundations for relaunching
development at the local level.

In the same vein, it is worth noting and welcoming
the workshop held from 14 to 16 September in
Bamako, which endorsed the terms of reference of
the inclusive national dialogue and the official launch
of the dialogue by Prime Minister Boubou Cisse, on
16 September. In that regard, we note that the main
political and institutional reforms provided for in the
Agreement are well reflected in the terms of reference.
The consultations at the local level began yesterday and
will through today. They will continue at the cercle
level on 14 and 15 October, then at the regional level
on 21 and 22 October, before moving to the capital,
Bamako, for the national dialogue to be held towards
the end of October, or early November at the latest.
The Malian political class and civil society should
be commended for taking this important step, and an
appeal should be made to the various stakeholders to
take part in the debate in order to ensure massive and
truly inclusive participation.

The failure to hold the thirty-eighth session of the
Agreement Monitoring Committee, scheduled to take
place in Kidal on 17 September, caused some unease
among the signatories. That unease was amplified
by the Government's announcement of its wish to
review certain provisions of the Agreement during
the inclusive national dialogue. In the light of these
developments, which could hinder the smooth progress
of the peace process, it is extremely important to call
on all stakeholders to continue the dialogue in the spirit
of the Agreement, which remains the only basis for a
return to peace and stability in Mali. Building trust
among the signatories is essential in order for the next
session of the Committee to take place. I would like
to take this opportunity to commend Ambassador
Ahmed Boutache, who, after leading the work of the
Committee in an outstanding way for almost five years,
is about to take on other responsibilities in the service
of his country, Algeria.

Concerning the defence and security pillar of
the Agreement, the planning of the redeployment of
1,006 combatants from the Operational Coordination
Mechanism, who are now an integral part of the
Malian security forces, is on track. That number will
be supplemented by 328 other combatants who are still
in training; a further 506 will be added, bringing the
number oftroops to nearly 1,840. The troops, who are all
from the Mouvement national de liberation de l'Azawad,
will be mixed with others in already constituted units
and redeployed to the northern regions to form the core
of the reconstituted and reformed Malian defence and
security forces.

The establishment of a national security council
and the appointment of its permanent secretary are
significant steps forward, which were welcomed by
all the partners at the fifth session of the strategic
committee on security sector reform, held on 4 October.
The council's establishment will likely facilitate the
adoption of the national defence and security policy,
which is essential to the coherent implementation of
security sector reform in Mali.

By initiating its efforts under the policy framework
on crisis management in Centre, the Government of
Mali is demonstrating its determination to remedy the
situation, including through the implementation of its
Centre stabilization strategy. Thanks to the efforts
of the Malian Government, combined with those
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), statistics
show a significant decrease in the number of attacks
against civilians and the number of civilians killed or
injured in recent months. This is a good opportunity to
call for an increased presence of defence and security
forces in Centre, in coordination with MINUSMA
efforts to protect civilians and combat impunity.

In that context, on 27 September, MINUSMA
held a coordination meeting with the National
Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration
Commission to discuss the implementation of the
community rehabilitation programme designed to
handle the disarmament and dismantling of self-defence
groups and at-risk youth, particularly in Centre. The
Government plans to launch the programme very soon.
The provisional date is set for 11 October, in the presence
of the Prime Minister. MINUSMA will support the
operation, particularly in the areas of disarmament,
biometric registration, human rights awareness, child
protection and HIV/AIDS testing, as well as through
the community violence reduction project.

In addition, the humanitarian situation in Centre
continues to deteriorate. The cycle of violence has led
to waves of internal displacement, currently numbering
around 171,000 people. That is the highest number of
displaced persons since 2015. Some of them live in
displaced persons' camps, while others live with host
families, in often very difficult conditions, which is
putting humanitarian assistance under strain owing to
the lack of regular funding and, above all, to difficult
humanitarian access despite MINUSMA's support. The
restoration of public services, whether security, judicial
or social, is essential if the level of violence is to be
reduced. Humanitarian workers are not immune from
the violence. At the end of September, two vehicles of a
United Nations agency were stolen by armed men.

On cross-cutting issues such as child protection,
the Plateforme, one of the signatories to the Agreement,
submitted its action plan against the recruitment and
use of children on 18 September.

In the area of combating sexual violence,
MINUSMA held a workshop from 24 to 27 September
to prepare an action plan following the signing, on
1 March, of the joint communique on conflict-related
sexual violence by the Government and the United
Nations. The draft action plan is currently being
reviewed and will have to be signed at the end of this
year in order to be rolled out in 2020.

Lastly, in accordance with resolution 2480 (2019),
a workshop on the inclusion of women in the peace
process is planned for 25 November. It will focus on
determining and validating the modalities for their
inclusion, including the establishment of a women's
observatory. MINUSMA, UN-Women and donors stand
ready to support the Government's efforts to organize
and run the workshop.

As members can see from the Secretary-General's
report, While there are many challenges, MINUSMA is
determined to fulfil its obligations, in full coordination
not only with the Government of Mali but also with
international partners, including the Joint Force of the
Group of Five for the Sahel, Operation Barkhane and
the European Union (EU) missions, such as the EU
Training Mission in Mali and the EU capacity-building
mission Sahel Mali.

I thank you, Mr. President, for your kind attention
and continued support to Mali and MINUSMA.

