Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Military Adviser for Peacekeeping Operations,
Lieutenant General Maqsood Ahmed, and the Force
Commanders of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
and the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
for their briefings. I would like to make two points
today.

First, our regular exchanges on peacekeeping are
important because peacekeeping, which is at the heart
of the Charter of the United Nations, now represents a
substantial and symbolic part of the work of the United
Nations. Peacekeeping touches upon questions of war
and peace and life and death, and therefore triggers our
moral and political responsibility.

The number of Blue Helmets and the budgets for
peacekeeping operations have been multiplied by 10
in 10 years. The budget today amounts to $8 billion,
nearly four times the general budget. It is important to
keep those facts in mind.

Many only know the United Nations through
the Blue Helmets, who have become symbols of the
Organization. France pays tribute to their courage and
dedication that sometimes comes at the price of blood,
as unfortunately recently occurred in Mali, where
soldiers from Chad, the Niger and Senegal were killed.

Starting as an ad hoc concept to serve the purposes
of the Charter, peacekeeping operations have gradually
emerged as an invaluable tool, and our expectations
of them have not stopped growing. They have a vital
function, focused or refocused, as in South Sudan
recently, on protecting civilians. Their mandates are
more comprehensive and complex, extending support
to political transitions and stabilization, as in Mali,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Central
African Republic. In parallel, deployment occurs in
intra-State conflicts or non-stabilized environments
where political processes are disturbed by non-State
actors, which increases the difficulty of their work, as
the briefers have explained.

Therefore - this is my second point - we have a
duty to ensure that peacekeeping operations have the
resources they need to achieve success and that they
use them with the utmost professionalism with a view to
efficiency. That implies several requirements. First, we
must meet the needs in terms of troops and equipment,
especially through the multiplier effect. I am thinking
in particular of air assets, but also medical support and
engineering units, which are often lacking.

We need contingents that are immediately
available, responsive, well equipped, well trained and
capable of taking initiative. We encourage Member
States that have such capabilities to close those gaps,
as Mexico is preparing to do following its recent
decision to re-engage in the uniformed components of
peacekeeping operations, or Angola, which just made
offers to serve to the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations.

A second requirement is to strengthen the logistical
and operational support in missions that need it. French
forces are working in that direction in Mali and the
Central African Republic. The European Union plays
its role in Mali and in the Central African Republic, and
by providing decisive financial support to the African
Union Military Observer Mission in Somalia. But the
functioning of those Missions emphasizes the progress
still needed, including in terms of mission support.
No doubt the Force Commanders will be able to give
us additional, particularly valuable comments on that
point.

The third requirement is to adapt the peacekeeping
operations procedures to their mandates, so that they
can better do what we ask them. That is even more
crucial in the least stabilized contexts, where the
interests of efficiency must be combined with those of
force protection. The balance between the protection of
Blue Helmets and their efficiency is also particularly
important in the context of the protection of civilians,
as General Dos Santos Cruz clearly explained.

We are convinced that inaction is not an option,
as it does not respond to any concerns because it
leaves complete freedom of action to those who want
to derail the peace process and who attack civilians
and peacekeeping soldiers. A dynamic attitude and
proactive is the best way to meet the dual objective of
protecting civilians and protecting military personnel.
The Force Commanders ofMONUSCO and MINUSMA
will be able to give us some useful examples in that
connection.

In addition to this change in attitude and methods of
operation, and this is our fourth requirement, we need to
allow peacekeeping operations to incorporate modern
technology. This is avery promising track. By increasing
the capacity for observation, information-processing
and the protection of peacekeepers, technology makes
it easier to understand the environment, to anticipate
and act ahead of spikes of violence and thus protect
itself and populations. Here I would give the example
of the observation drones used by MONUSCO. I would
be very grateful to the Commander of MONUSCO if
he would share with us his experience in this area;
possibly the other Force Commanders could share with
us their views on the technological contributions from
which their forces could benefit.

The fifth requirement is to foster inter-mission
cooperation and thereby increase synergies. This is
another promising area of action; a good example is
the cooperation between the United Nations Operation
in Cote d'Ivoire and the United Nations Mission in
Liberia in West Africa. This cooperation should not
be limited to equipment issues, but should also include
exchange of information, planning and the sharing of
best practices. I would be grateful if the briefers could
comment on this.

Lastly, the human aspect must never be neglected.
Missions must be adapted to the local context and be
capable of building close ties with the people they are
meant to protect. The use of French should be fully
taken into account, and I wish to recall that we need to
have more French speakers in peacekeeping operations
deployed in French-speaking areas at all levels, from
rank-and-file soldiers to Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, as well as in New York. This is a
powerful factor in operational efficiency.

I should like to commend the unwavering
commitment of Mr. Herve Ladsous, at the head of
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, and
of his team in meeting all these challenges. With
their impetus, peacekeeping has become even more
professional and modernized, through, inter alia, the
adoption of operational standards, the creation of the
post of director of partnerships in charge of the mission
of inspection of peacekeeping operations, and the
provision of modern technology.

The peacekeeping review that the Secretary-
General has decided to launch will be decisive in
defining the profile of a peacekeeping mission that is
more reactive and more dynamic in order to meet new
challenges. France will contribute to this actively and
will remain mobilized on this issue, in keeping with
the 2009 New Horizon report, which made it possible
to continue the process of reflection on policy and
doctrine in this area. The report was a joint effort on
the part of France and the United Kingdom.

I would like to once again reiterate the strong
commitment of France to peacekeeping, to which my
country contributes fully in the form of the Blue Helmets,
who are serving, for instance, in the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon, in their national capacity
or under the European flag in support of peacekeeping
operations such as those in Cote d'Ivoire, Mali and the
Central African Republic. Today 7,800 French soldiers
are involved in peacekeeping operations, including
nearly 1,000 who are serving directly in the United
Nations and 6,000 under a United Nations mandate.
Since January 2013, 13 of our countrymen have paid the
ultimate price, and I would like to pay tribute to their
memory and to that of all their Blue Helmet comrades
who have fallen on the field of glory in the name of the
ideals of the United Nations.

