Mr. Eitel (Germany): Like those delegations that have
spoken before me, and probably like those that will speak
after me, I want to begin by congratulating you, Mr.
President, on your assumption of your high office. Your
wealth of ideas and your readiness to take initiatives and to
shoulder responsibility are well known, and that is why we
look forward to working under your leadership.

Let me add a word of thanks to your predecessor,
Ambassador Legwaila of Botswana. I must say that we
enjoyed his good-humoured and effective guidance.
However, speaking of Ambassador Legwaila's
effectiveness, I am afraid that I would not be quite honest
if I did not add a word of caution, if not criticism.T h e
Botswana coat of arms bears the ominous word "pula",
which Ambassador Legwaila himself was good enough to
translate for me. It means "May it rain upon you", which
seems to be, in his country, a wish full of the best
intentions. I hope Ambassador Legwaila will forgive me if
I have to state that in his month of presidency - and well
into yours, Mr. President - he simply overdid it. We at the
German delegation are at present examining how to deal -
possibly in the Open-ended Working Group - with this
new phenomenon of Security Council outreach.

Coming now to the agenda proper, Mr. President, I
should like to commend your initiative to have an open
Security Council debate on the situation in Afghanistan. I
welcome the Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Afghanistan and the Afghan Permanent Representative here
at our table.

Germany enjoys a long history of friendly relations
with all segments of Afghan society. We share with many
other countries a sense of the urgency of the situation, a
sense that something must be done to put an end to this
terrible conflict. With many others, we have tried to
alleviate the plight of the civilian population through
humanitarian aid.

Sixteen years of war have placed a heavy burden on
this country and its people. I hope that today's debate will
send a signal of support to the people of Afghanistan -
a signal that the international community does care and
that it will continue to work, through the United Nations,
for the establishment of peace and stability in this
country.

The situation on the ground in Afghanistan is
frustrating. So far, all international peace efforts have
been in vain. An end to all this bloodshed is not yet in
sight. This conflict does not concern Afghanistan alone.
It could easily develop into a threat to the peace and
stability of the whole region.

What are we to do?

The international community has made a
commitment to Afghanistan. This commitment is
contained in the General Assembly resolution on
Afghanistan adopted by consensus on 19 December 1995.
What we are to do is, essentially, to put our consensus
back to work, with the aim of ensuring this resolution's
full implementation. The resolution is very clear, both on
the aims of international peace efforts in Afghanistan and
on the ways the international community wants to pursue
to achieve these aims. Quoting from it, we can reaffirm
today our strong commitment to

"national reconciliation in Afghanistan and to its
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity" (General Assembly resolution 50/88 B fifth preambular paragraph)
as well as the readiness of the United Nations to assist the
people of Afghanistan in their efforts to achieve national
reconciliation.

The General Assembly resolution gives the United
Nations Special Mission an unequivocal mandate to
facilitate national reconciliation through the creation of a
transitory mechanism, transfer of power and an immediate
and durable cease-fire. The Head of the Special Mission,
Ambassador Mahmoud Mestiri, and his staff have already
invested enormous efforts to work with the parties
towards achieving these goals. We would like to thank
them for their tireless work.

 

Germany is happy to have been able to provide one of
the four political officers who were recruited to strengthen
the Special Mission, in conformity with the General
Assembly resolution. He left for the region in late February,
has already spent 10 days in Kandahar and has also
travelled with Ambassador Mestiri to Kabul. We are ready
to continue to give our full support to the United Nations
Special Mission and to cooperate with other interested
delegations in working for its success.

Today we want to encourage Ambassador Mestiri and
his staff to follow their course in trying to bring about an
agreement on the composition of a transitory mechanism,
usually referred to as the "authoritative council". The
composition of this council is certainly one of the central
questions that must be solved, if a viable peace process is
to be created.

At the same time, we agree with others that the
Special Mission should be encouraged to somewhat broaden
its approach by also seeking solutions to other questions
that have to be addressed within the framework of the
Commission's mandate. We are convinced that such a
broader approach may open up new opportunities for
success in the work of the Special Mission. In addition, we
are also prepared to consider all additional measures that
may benefit the peace process in Afghanistan as outlined in
the General Assembly resolution.

Should the United Nations feel that in order to achieve
its goals in Afghanistan new forums are required for
bringing together all the parties, we are ready to support the
idea of a United Nations-sponsored meeting or conference
on Afghanistan. Obviously, such a meeting would have to
be well prepared and should include not only all the parties
to the conflict, but also a certain international element. We
have full confidence in the United Nations
Secretary-General to decide if and when the time for such
a meeting may have come.
While the international community, through the United
Nations General Assembly, has assigned to the United
Nations the pivotal role of helping to bring about peace and
stability in Afghanistan, the United Nations cannot achieve
this goal on its own. Quite to the contrary: the United
Nations can only facilitate the efforts the parties must make
to achieve a lasting and peaceful solution to their
differences. The United Nations Special Mission constitutes
in itself an offer by the international community. It is up to
the parties to accept or decline this offer. So far we do not
see a wholehearted and unequivocal acceptance. Should this
perception continue, the United Nations may face a
situation in which it will have to reconsider its
commitment.

Besides the parties to the conflict itself, the countries
of the region also bear a special responsibility. We are
alarmed by reports of continuous and even increasing
foreign interference in Afghanistan: foreign interference
by more than one country, benefiting more than one
Afghan party. The aim of the United Nations peace
efforts is to facilitate a peaceful solution to the conflict,
thereby also ensuring the sovereignty, unity and territorial
integrity of Afghanistan. Foreign interference - for
example, through the shipment of arms - is thwarting
this aim.

Only if all those concerned fully cooperate do we
stand a chance of putting an end to this terrible conflict.
The United Nations Special Mission must be encouraged
to intensify further its efforts to fulfil its mandate. All
States concerned must refrain from interfering in
Afghanistan and must instead put their whole weight
behind the United Nations peace initiative. But, first and
foremost, the Afghan parties must rebuke the deadly logic
of war and embark on the road towards peace.

