Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Today our briefers
have sounded the alarm and warned us of the surging
levels of acute hunger, which are largely attributable
to conflict. But that is not for the first time. More than
a year ago, the Secretary-General drew the Council's
attention to the change in the long-term trend in
global hunger: it was then rising for the first time in
a decade. He stated that the situation was critical. The
United Nations predicted four simultaneous famines,
threatening the lives of 20 million people. Through the
generosity of donors and the actions of humanitarian
and development organizations, international financial
institutions and regional Governments, famine itself
was prevented or, at least, contained.

But let us be clear. Over the past year, suffering and
hunger have increased. In the world today, one out of
every nine people is undernourished. That is a total of
815 million people - an increase of 38 million in the
past year. Conflict is the main reason for that increase
in hunger. Sixty per cent of hungry and malnourished
people live in countries affected by conflict. Almost
75 per cent of the world's 155 million stunted children
under the age of five live in countries affected by
conflict. It is the most vulnerable, in particular women
and children, who are most affected by hunger. Those
statistics indicate that the actions we have taken in the
past year to reduce hunger have not been enough. As
so clearly stated by our briefers, we must examine and
address the root causes of the severe hunger crisis if we
hope to put an end to it.

Last August, the Council adopted a presidential
statement (S/PRST/2017/14) that for the first time
acknowledged that hunger and conflict are linked.
That was a step forward, but it provides us with
only half the picture. In the statement the Security
Council emphasized:

"with deep concern that ongoing conflicts
and violence have devastating humanitarian
consequences and hinder an effective humanitarian
response in the short, medium and long term and
are therefore a major cause of famine".

It reads as ifhunger isjust an inevitable consequence
ofwar or a by-product ofthe changing nature ofconflict,
but that is clearly not the case. Hunger does not need
to be a product of war. I hope we can make that clear
in future Council products. We must understand and
acknowledge the true nature of the problem in order
to take the necessary collective actions to break the
deadly link between conflict and hunger. In that regard,
we see three key areas ofresponsibility for the Council.

First, we must redouble efforts to prevent and resolve
conflicts and build and sustain peace. Secondly, we must
uphold international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. We are quickly approaching a new
normal where warring parties believe it is acceptable
to destroy crops, interrupt markets and attack water
points, hospitals and schools. Too often, there is a lack
of accountability for State actors and other parties to
conflict who are responsible for increasing hunger.
Thirdly, we must actively safeguard humanitarian
access. In almost all of the crises before the Council,
people are denied or are unable to access essential aid,
often with the most vulnerable people being the worst
affected. The Security Council can, and must, play a
key role to enable the safe, unhindered and rapid access
of populations to humanitarian assistance. We must
engage with national and regional authorities to apply
diplomatic pressure and insist on the removal of access
constraints. We must also pursue accountability for
any violations.

We must think creatively when responding to the
crisis. For example, to identify the most serious cases of
obstructed access objectively, we could use a model that
articulates access in terms of needs met by the delivery
of health-care protection and education, rather than
simply by the number of aid convoys. We could also
include the denial of access in the design of sanctions
mandated by the Council more routinely.

We are extremely grateful to you, Madam
President, and to the Kingdom of the Netherlands for
convening today's meeting, because it is a subject
about which the United Kingdom - the third-largest
humanitarian donor - cares deeply and in which it
is deeply engaged. The scale of the challenge we face
is clear. The threat of famine remains. In a world of
abundance, 815 million people are still hungry. Their
hunger is used as a weapon of war. We must act and
use the tools at our disposal to show the world that it
is not acceptable and that we around this table do not
accept it. We must seek accountability and make the
consequences of those appalling actions clear.

