Mr. Wu Haitao (China): The delegation of China
would like to welcome Foreign Minister Abdrakhmanov
and thank him for convening today's debate. We are
also grateful to the Secretary-General for his briefing.

In the current context, ensuring peace and stability
in Afghanistan is crucial to the vital interests and
long-term welfare of the Afghan people as well as to
the security, development and prosperity of the region
as a whole. Central Asia is generally stable and has
enormous development potential. China supports the
quest for solutions from a regional perspective and the
adoption of a comprehensive approach, with a View
to achieving lasting peace and shared development
in Afghanistan and Central Asia. We appreciate the
Afghan Government's efforts to maintain national
stability, facilitate national reconciliation and promote
economic development, and we value the important role
played in dealing with the issue of Afghanistan by its
neighbours and other relevant countries of the region,
including those in Central Asia. However, we have to
keep in mind the fact that Afghanistan is still facing
many political, security and economic challenges, and
that the international community should continue to
provide it with staunch support.

First, all the parties must remain committed to
promoting a settlement of the Afghanistan issue through
political dialogue and reconciliation. All stakeholders
in Afghanistan should work to strengthen their unity
and actively participate in reconciliation, making the
long-term interests and welfare of the people their top
priority. The international community should continue
to promote efforts to achieve a broad, inclusive political
reconciliation that is Afghan-led and -owned, and
encourage the relevant actors in Afghanistan to launch
peace talks as soon as possible, as well as welcoming
all assistance provided by countries of the region and
relevant mechanisms. The international community
should also fully respect the Afghan people's right to
independently choose their own political system and
development path, and should support the Government
in increasing its capacity to govern.

Secondly, maintaining peace and stability is the
foundation of Afghanistan's national reconstruction
and development. The international community
should continue to support the capacity-building of the
Afghan National Defence and Security Forces, enhance
the country's independent self-defence capabilities
and work together to effectively address the threats
posed by terrorism, transnational crime and narcotics
trafficking. While efforts at the regional level are
essential to assisting Afghanistan in responding to
such challenges, promoting the achievement of peace
and stability there can also contribute to improving the
security situation in Central Asia and the region as a
whole. The international community should enhance
its cooperation and coordination in fighting terrorist
elements in the region, avoid finger-pointing and
support the important role played by entities such as
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization in regional
counter-terrorism efforts.

Thirdly, integration into regional economies is
ultimately the way forward for Afghanistan in the
areas of peace and reconstruction. The countries of
Central Asia and the wider region are close neighbours
of Afghanistan and share interests with the Afghan
people where regional development is concerned.
Development in Afghanistan cannot be achieved
without the support and assistance of those countries,
while in turn prosperity for the region as a whole will
not be possible without the economic development
of Afghanistan. Stability and development in the
region are in the common interests of Afghanistan
and its neighbours. China hopes that the relevant
countries will strengthen their cooperation and work
together for peace and prosperity in the region. The
international community should make active efforts to
fulfil its pledges of assistance and support the Afghan
Government's efforts to promote economic and social
development. In accordance with the relevant Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions, all parties
should work to build a community with a shared future
for humankind, in the spirit of win-win cooperation,
and promote the development and regional cooperation
of Afghanistan and Central Asia through the Belt and
Road Initiative and other endeavours aimed at regional
cooperation on the economic and trade fronts.

As a friendly neighbour of Afghanistan, China
has been playing a constructive role in promoting its
peace and development. On 26 December last year
in Beijing, our Foreign Minister, Wang Yi, convened
and chaired the first dialogue between the Foreign
Ministers of China, Afghanistan and Pakistan. Its
purpose is, first, to help Afghanistan and Pakistan
improve and develop their relations; secondly, to
support the peace, reconstruction and reconciliation
process in Afghanistan; thirdly, to enhance trilateral
cooperation on security and work jointly to combat
terrorism; and fourthly, to promote international
cooperation on the One and Road Initiative and explore
effective ways to achieve trilateral connectivity and
economic integration. The three Foreign Ministers
agreed on three major themes - mutual political trust
and reconciliation, development and connectivity, and
cooperation on security and counter-terrorism. The
trilateral cooperation will focus on those three areas.
They also reached consensus on a number of important
issues in areas related to people's livelihoods, such as
health, human resources and agriculture.

China stands ready to cooperate with the international
community in working tirelessly for peace, stability
and development in Afghanistan and Central Asia.

