Mr. Rishchynski (Canada): Let me start by
adding Canada's voice in deploring the events today in
Somalia. Terrorism has once again struck, seeking to
deny Somalis the right to move forward in their future
and making the United Nations a target for the work that
it undertakes on behalf of its members and all Somalis.
I would like to commend you, Sir, for refocusing
the Security Council's attention on conflict prevention
and natural resources by organizing this debate.
Canada welcomes a fulsome discussion of the role of
effective natural resources management in conflict
prevention. Without sound management, extractive
sector development can lead to increased corruption,
poor development outcomes, illicit trafficking and, in
certain circumstances, the fuelling of armed conflict
and human rights violations. There is an increased
international acknowledgement that economic growth
is fundamental to long-term stability in fragile and
conflict-affected States. Benefits from extractive sector
activities have the potential to transform economies
and can be important drivers of sustainable economic
growth and job creation.

(spoke in French)

Supporting mechanisms that ensure responsible
resource development is a priority for the Government
of Canada. We understand the potential benefits of
natural resources for a country. One important element
of sustainable resource development, highlighted by the
United Kingdom at this year's Lough Erne Summit of
the Group of Eight, is transparency and accountability
in the extractive sector.

In recognition of the importance of that issue,
on June 12 Canada's Prime Minister announced that
Canada will be establish new mandatory reporting
standards for Canadian extractive companies. The new
reporting regime will improve transparency, ensure
that Canada's framework is consistent with existing
international standards, ensure a level playing field
for companies, enhance investment certainty, and help
reinforce the integrity of extractive companies.

While we recognize the need for transparency
initiatives, we also want to ensure that the debate
today and discussions that follow also identify other
tools available to strengthen the links between natural
resource development and conflict-prevention. As an
example, by encouraging conflict-sensitive business
practices in fragile and conflict-affected situations,
donor Governments can sensitize their extractive
companies to local conflict dynamics, and help them
find ways to structure their operations to contribute to
positive peacebuilding and development outcomes.

To advance such tools, it is essential that all the
right actors be at the table, including communities, civil
society and the private sector. It is also important to
address core sources of instability, such as by providing
employment opportunities for youth and bolstering
Government finances for basic service provision.

Canada's commitment to promoting responsible
natural resource governance features prominently in
our efforts abroad. To cite several examples, we are
continuing to implement Canada's corporate social
responsibility strategy and support many international
initiatives, such as theExtractive Industries Transparency
Initiative, the United Nations Guiding Principles on
Business and Human Rights, the Kimberley Process
certification scheme, the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development multi-stakeholder
forum on implementing due diligence, and others. The
recent establishment of the new Canadian International
Institute for Extractive Industries and Development
will encourage policy innovation on how Governments,
companies and others can contribute to improving
development outcomes in the future.

The evidence is clear that responsible governance
practices ensure that natural resources contribute
to lasting, positive impact on economic growth and
poverty reduction. As such, Canada welcomes the
inclusion of these issues in relevant mission mandates.
United Nations missions can play an important role by
helping to build national institutions, manage related
conflict risks, and ensure inclusive participation.

(spoke in English)

For that reason, we are very pleased that the
Security Council is renewing its consideration of this
very timely subject, and we are committed to working
with the international community and all partners to
encourage responsible natural resource development.

