Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, on behalf of my delegation, I would like to
join all those who have expressed their condolences on
the tragic death of Pierre Gemayel, Minister of
Industry of Lebanon. Through you, Mr. President, we
would like to extend our condolences to the Gemayel
family, a family which, unfortunately, has shed its
blood for Lebanon. This is another reason for my
country to be concerned over the future fate and
territorial integrity of Lebanon. As we express our
condolences, we would like to condemn vigorously this
assassination. We hope that the perpetrators will be
brought to justice as quickly as possible.

Secondly, we would like to thank Mr. Gambari
for his briefing on the situation in the Middle East, on
a long-standing conflict. We know that the Palestinian-
Israeli conflict is the key to beginning to resolve the
overall conflict in the Middle East - and, indeed, not
just in the Middle East. Other conflicts, in other
countries in Asia and Africa, have invisible links to the
matrix of the long-standing Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

At this new stage in the process of destruction,
death and hatred which, as we have said, goes back a
long time, we believe that we have to begin at the
beginning: by taking the initial measures to prevent the
conflict from continuing. Within this framework, we
renew our call to the parties and to the international
community to break the vicious circle of death and
destruction.

First, we believe that Israeli military operations
that endanger the civilian population in the Gaza Strip
should be stopped immediately. Similarly, attacks
carried out by Palestinian groups with Qassam rockets
into Israeli territory must also cease immediately.

Secondly, we believe that we should continue
supporting the efforts of President Abbas to form a
government of national unity, without such support
constituting interference in internal Palestinian affairs.
The international community must contribute and must
fully support the process. In this regard, we hope that
the talks under way, which have still not reached a
successful conclusion, can continue between Fatah and
Hamas leaders and that a government of national unity
can be formed as soon as possible.

Thirdly, we believe that the immediate and
unconditional release of the Israeli soldier, Gilad
Shalit, should take place. Similarly, Palestinian
legislators and ministers taken prisoner by Israel
should be released.

Fourthly, we believe that urgent measures must
be taken to ease the suffering of the Palestinian people.
Palestinian tax and customs revenues withheld by
Israel must be transferred through the appropriate
international mechanisms. Likewise, we believe that
the Agreement on Movement and Access should be
fully implemented, and that the crossings in and out of
Gaza should be kept permanently opened.
Here, we must point out that all of those
measures would be in vain unless a genuine process of
negotiations between Israelis and Palestinians were
resumed. The first step should be for Prime Minister
Olmert and President Abbas to meet and start to
negotiate. But this dialogue will not be viable if Israel
continues with its policy of faits accomplis on the
ground, such as the construction of the separation
barrier and the settlement activity in the West Bank.
Clearly, such policies should stop in order to begin the
dialogue.

Unfortunately, the parties have demonstrated that,
on their own, they are unable to take the necessary
measures. That is why the active assistance of the
international community is required. The Security
Council and the Quartet have an important role to play
and in future must be as proactive and effective as
possible. We also wish to express our satisfaction with
and support for the initiative of an international
conference, as proposed by the head of State of Spain,
with the support of France and Italy. We believe that
we must return to the path embarked upon at the
Madrid Conference 15 years ago.

Regarding the situation in Lebanon, in addition to
expressing our concern about today's tragic
assassination - which will obviously increase the
tension and deepen the political crisis - we affirm our
belief that all the parties in Lebanon must resolve their
differences, while respecting the democratic rules of
the process, and that they must not under any
circumstances resort to the threat of force. All
Lebanese actors must act with the utmost caution,
taking into account their past and the terrible civil war
that they have experienced.

With respect to the implementation of resolution
1701 (2006), we welcome the fact that the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and the Lebanese
armed forces have continued to maintain peace and
order south of the Litani River. We consider as positive
the measures undertaken in recent weeks to find
weapons caches in that area. Nevertheless, we cannot
fail to indicate our grave concern at the continued
Israeli incursions into Lebanese airspace, which are
violations of the cessation of hostilities. We also
express our concern that no solution has been found to
the issue of the two Israeli soldiers captured more than
four months ago.

Concerning other outstanding aspects of
resolution 1701 (2006), we hope that the Secretary-
General makes some specific recommendations in his
next report.

The difficult juncture being experienced in the
Middle East demonstrates once again that the path of
violence only helps to increase the suffering of the
peoples of the region. Therefore, the only viable
alternative is that of a just and lasting peace that
encompasses all tracks: Palestinian, Lebanese and
Syrian. The foundations for such a peace are the
relevant resolutions adopted by the Security Council;
the Madrid terms of reference, including the principle
of land for peace; and the Beirut Arab Peace Initiative.

