The Secretary-General: It gives me great
pleasure to attend this Council meeting and to present
my report (S/2009/72) on the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT). I am
particularly pleased that President Ramos-Horta is with
us this morning. At this time last year, we were all
anxiously following the news of his medical condition
in the wake of the tragic attacks of 11 February. His
presence today, clearly in fine health and spirits,
symbolizes the resilience of his young nation, which
responded so maturely to that terrible event.

My report on UNMIT comes at a watershed
moment for Timor-Leste. In 2007, order was
re-established; the security situation was stabilized,
peaceful elections were held and a smooth transfer of
power took place. In 2008, the country took in its stride
a small but serious challenge to its stability. It stuck to
its immediate priorities. By the end of the year,
remarkable progress had been made in addressing the
residual problems of the 2006 crisis. The petitioners
reached a settlement with the Government. The vast
majority of internally displaced persons have returned
to their communities without incident. I have the rare
pleasure of being able to say to the Council that more
progress has been achieved than had been anticipated
in my last report (S/2008/501).

We begin 2009 with a clear horizon. The country
can finally devote its undivided attention to the
essential task of building the strong and durable
foundations that are crucial for long-term stability and
prosperity. That work will require the concerted efforts
of all Timorese. I commend President Ramos-Horta for
engaging all political actors and working to forge a
unified effort on issues of important national interest.

One of the main priorities in the year ahead must
be the development of the security sector. A major step
09-24239
will be the gradual resumption of executive policing
authority by the national police. UNMIT is working
closely with the Government to plan a series of
handovers based on agreed criteria. As the Timorese
police begin that new phase of its development, United
Nations police will remain fully in place to support,
advise and intervene as necessary as a guarantor of
security.

My report to the Council includes a set of
benchmarks for measuring UNMIT's progress in
achieving its mandate. I am keenly aware that a
number of fundamental issues will require sustained,
long-term attention well beyond the Mission's lifespan.
In his last appearance before the Council, in 2007 as
Prime Minister, President Ramos-Horta argued that a
United Nations peacekeeping presence would be
required until at least 2012, a date that now seems less
distant than it did. Whatever the ultimate length of
UNMIT's mandate proves to be, it is clear that bilateral
partners, with the ongoing cooperation of the United
Nations family, will have to ensure that long-term
support. I urge them to do so, not least because, in
areas such as police training and the development of
military doctrine, bilateral expertise may be more
effective than traditional United Nations means.

I am heartened to know that the mood of the
country has become very positive. Government
transfers to individuals have injected much-needed
cash into the economy. Parliament has passed the
budget, which projects considerable investment in
infrastructure for the coming year. Indeed, the
Government has designated 2009 as the year of
infrastructure, to lay the foundations for Timor-Leste's
future. Investing in infrastructure is crucial but, as we
all know, infrastructure is not just a matter of roads,
schools and power grids. It is equally a question of
strengthening democratic governance and the rule of
law. Without accountability, not only of the
Government to its people but of the people to each
other, there is no hope for a viable democratic State.

In that regard, I am pleased to note the productive
tone and content of recent debates in Parliament,
including the active and constructive role of the
opposition, and of women in general. Prime Minister
Gusmao, for his part, has shown laudable respect for
the democratic process by personally presenting and
defending his budget in front of Parliament every day
for three full weeks.
09-24239

This year marks the tenth anniversary of the
Organization's full-time presence in Timor-Leste. Our
partnership has become strong and close. President
Ramos-Horta's presence here today exemplifies the ties
that inseparably bind the United Nations and Timor-
Leste. Just over a year ago, the members of the Council
and I had the pleasure of visiting that brave new
country and seeing Timor-Leste's progress for
ourselves. With what we saw very much in mind, I
have no doubt that the Council will take this
opportunity to renew its collective commitment to
Timor-Leste. For my part, I pledge the full support of
the United Nations system in helping the Timorese
people realize their hopes for security, stability and
well-being.

