Mr. Errazuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Chile
congratulates the German presidency on its decision to
make this important issue the subject of an open debate
in July. My delegation is grateful to the Secretary-
General for his comprehensive and interesting report
(S/201 1/250). We also thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, for the
valuable information she shared with us today, and
Mr. Anthony Lake, Executive Director of UNICEF, for
his comprehensive briefing.

Chile associates itself with the statement made by
the Permanent Representative of Switzerland on behalf
of the Human Security Network, of which Chile is a
member.

The protection of children in general, and of
those living in areas of armed conflict in particular, is a
matter of special concern for my country, which is why
Chile is a sponsor of resolution 1998 (2011), adopted
by the Council today, and hopes to see it fully
implemented.

There is no doubt that the issue of the protection
of children in armed conflict has made progress since
the Security Council first included it on its agenda. The
Secretary-General's decisive action in appointing a
Special Representative for this area, and the efforts of
that Special Representative, have contributed
effectively to this progress. Moreover, the increased
interaction between the latter and the Office of the
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict
should be emphasized, since they deal with two sides
of the same coin. I also stress the growth of
coordination with other United Nations agencies
devoted to the protection of children once they have
returned to society and have been reintegrated into the
educational system. Special attention should be paid to
the scars that the experience of violence has left them
with, and of course even more attention and care are
needed if they have been subject to sexual violence.
20

We share the concern, expressed in the Economic
and Social Council ministerial declaration adopted
yesterday in Geneva on implementing the
internationally agreed goals and commitments in
regard to education that "a large number of the world's
out-of-school children live in States affected by armed
conflict and natural disasters" (E/20]I/L.28*, para. 30).
This is a clear warning that we must work to improve
access to education in a safe environment for children
living in armed-conflict or post-conflict situations.
Assistance in helping these children to recover must be
provided through the appropriate channels and reach
the families and communities, who are generally those
most directly involved in the recovery process.

Chile calls on those Governments suffering
through armed conflict to make every possible effort,
while taking necessary precautions, to establish
channels of communication with the other actors in the
conflict so as to keep children at a distance from the
hardships of conflict and prevent their direct
involvement in it. At the same time, justice must be
done when children are involved and abused. This goes
hand in hand with reparation, which could be provided
in special facilities for education, health and so forth,
including symbolic reparation as well.

My country shares the Secretary-General's
concern about the increase in attacks on hospitals and
schools. In that regard, Chile calls on the parties to
conflict to refrain from using any people - much less
children - as human shields. Whatever the situation,
attacking schools and hospitals is to be especially
condemned.

Lastly, Chile joins in calling on those States that
have not yet ratified the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict to do so.

