Mr. Wittig (Germany): In today's briefing, I
would like to provide an update on the activities and
achievements of the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011),
concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals and
entities, since my most recent briefing in May (see S/PV.6767). In my remarks, I shall focus on what the
Committee considers to be the most important elements:
first, the evolving threat posed by Al-Qaida; secondly,
maintaining an up-to-date and dynamic sanctions list;
and, thirdly, fair and clear procedures. A more detailed
version of this statement will be distributed in hardcopy
today and be made available on the Committee's
website.

First, with regard to the evolving threat posed
by Al-Qaida. Al-Qaida and its associates continue to
pose a threat to international peace and security, and
that threat continues to evolve. While the operational
impact of Al-Qaida's core leadership has declined since
the death of Osama Bin Laden and several other key
leaders, Al-Qaida networks have become an ever more
complex phenomenon, with an internationally diverse
range of supporters and active fighters. Affiliate groups
continue to be active in a number of regions worldwide,
and in many cases have managed to blend regional
and local issues and interests with Al-Qaida's global
agenda in order to increase their appeal. Al-Qaida
and its associates are working on rebuilding terrorist
structures in Europe. There is a continuing danger that
individual acts of terror may occur in that theatre.

After thorough consideration and in-depth
discussion, the Committee has transmitted to the
Security Council the twelfth report of the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team (see S/2012/729), together with the Committee's position
on the recommendations (see S/2012/730). The report
addressed the issue of the evolving terrorist threat. The
Committee has now received the thirteenth report of
the Monitoring Team and will begin its discussion of
that document shortly.

In the light of the continuing threat posed by
Al-Qaida and its affiliates, it is important for Member
States to continue to make every effort to fully implement
the measures outlined in resolution 1989 (2011).

The Committee remains committed to ensuring
that the Al-Qaida sanctions list is dynamic and
responsive to the changing nature of the threat. The
Committee recalls that it remains the responsibility
of Member States to ensure that the list of targeted
individuals and entities accurately reflects the evolving
threat posed by Al-Qaida, through the submission
of listing and delisting requests in a timely manner.
In that context, the Committee also emphasizes that
it stands ready to receive from States the names of
individuals and groups associated with Al-Qaida in
the Sahel region, notably in north Mali, in accordance
with paragraph 24 of resolution 2056 (2012) and
paragraph 3 of resolution 2071 (2012), to be considered
for designation on the Al-Qaida sanctions list.

Measures adopted under Chapter VII are binding
on all Member States, and the sanctions regime
is most effective when States are well placed to
facilitate implementation. The Committee, together
with the Monitoring Team, continues to explore
ways to collaborate with Member States to support
implementation efforts.

Secondly, with regard to maintaining an up-to-date
and dynamic sanctions list, resolution 1989 (2011)
directs the Committee to undertake the most extensive
and regular review processes of any United Nations
sanctions regime. The various specialized and periodic
reviews ensure that the Al-Qaida sanctions list is a
credible and effective tool in the fight against terrorism.

The Committee has undertaken three specialized
reviews, as set out in resolution 1989 (2011). The
Committee reviewed the list entries of 34 reportedly
deceased individuals and 55 entities reported to have
ceased to exist. The review resulted in 12 delistings
and 24 amendments to the list. In addition, the
Committee reviewed 70 entries on the list that lacked
identifying information necessary to ensure effective
implementation of the sanctions measures.

The Committee has also completed its first round
of the so-called triennial review, in which 18 names
were considered. That is a periodic review of all names
that have not been reviewed in three or more years. It
ensures that no name remains on the list in perpetuity.
Every single entry undergoes a regular assessment by
the Committee to determine whether continued listing
remains appropriate.

The third element is fair and clear procedures.
The sanctions regime benefits from increasingly fair
and clear procedures. In the light of the renewal of
the Committee's mandate next month, there will be an
opportunity to review the procedures, possibly spelling
them out in greater detail and rendering them more
transparent.

The Office of the Ombudsperson continues
to provide an important element of fair and clear
procedures to the sanctions regime. The Office plays
an important role in assisting the Committee to ensure
that the list of designated individuals continues to
reflect the current threat posed by Al-Qaida. Since the
Committee's most recent report, the Committee decided
to delist six individuals and one entity on the basis of
reports submitted by the Ombudsperson. In addition,
the Committee is considering three comprehensive
reports of the Ombudsperson, while the Ombudsperson
has three cases in the dialogue phase and six cases in
the information-gathering phase.

The Security Council will also have to review
the mandate of the Ombudsperson in December. That
will provide an opportunity to continue improving
the procedures related to the Ombudsperson process.
Questions to be addressed may include the modalities
for information-sharing between the Office of the
Ombudsperson and Member States. Member States are
strongly urged to provide all relevant information to
the Ombudsperson, including any relevant confidential
information where appropriate.

On 26 July, the Committee held a meeting with
Mr. Ben Emmerson, United Nations Special Rapporteur
on the promotion and protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism.
Mr. Emmerson and the Committee exchanged views
on questions relating to the fairness and effectiveness
of the Ombudsperson process. Mr. Emmerson has
since published a report providing his assessment
of the process, which the Committee will carefully
consider. The Committee notes Mr. Emmerson's
recommendations regarding the use of evidence
obtained under torture and undertakes to give them
close consideration.

I would now like to add some brief words in my
national capacity.

In early 2011, Germany assumed the Chair of
the 1267 sanctions Committee, which covered both
Al-Qaida and the Taliban. At the time Germany
took the helm, there was a clear need to reform the
sanctions regime. Among other demands, there were
calls to strengthen due process elements. Critics found
remedies to listed individuals and entities insufficient.
Sanctions implementation was successfully challenged
in various courts, the so-called Kadi case, which made
it twice to the European Court of Justice, being the
most prominent. The challenge to the sanctions regime
threatened to undermine the most important tool the
Security Council has against Al-Qaida. There was a
clear need for a determined response.

In June 2011, the Security Council adopted
resolutions 1988 (2011) and 1989 (2011), landmarks
for the United Nations sanctions policy. Of particular
importance was the Security Council's decision, in
resolution 1989 (2011), substantially to strengthen the
role of the Ombudsperson for the Al-Qaida sanctions
regime. The Office of the Ombudsperson was
established, in 2009, to assist the Sanctions Committee
in processing applications for removing individuals
from the sanctions list. The conclusions of her reports on
delisting requests, previously of an advisory character,
were upgraded to recommendations. The Sanctions
Committee can overrule those recommendations only
by consensus. However, any Committee member has
the option of taking a case to the Security Council.

Those review procedures introduced and element
of the rule of law in the sanctions regime. While the
Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection
of human rights and fundamental freedoms, Mr. Ben
Emmerson, has reminded us in his recent report that,
while countering terrorism, "the mandate of the
Ombudsperson still does not meet the structural due
process requirement of objective independence from
the Committee" (A/67/396, para. 35), we believe that
the Ombudsperson process represents an important
advance. It has increased the credibility of the
sanctions regime and helps to ensure that sanctions are
implemented around the globe.

The Al-Qaida sanctions regime is coming up
for renewal in December. Germany and the group
of like-minded countries on targeted sanctions
have prepared a number of proposals for the further
development and fine-tuning of the regime. Among
those are enhancing the cooperation of States with the
Ombudsperson for information-gathering, codifying the
Ombudsperson's practice and improving transparency
in procedure and substance, including disclosing the
designating State and clarifying listing criteria. We
further recommend extending the Ombudsperson's
mandate, allowing the Ombudsperson to transmit
requests for humanitarian exemptions and to assist
persons or entities that are inadvertently affected by the
sanctions regime, imposing time limits for all listings
and administrative improvements. I am confident
that there will be serious discussion among Security
Council members about those proposals.

Before I conclude, I should like to make a few
remarks on the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004).

Attempts by non-State actors to acquire weapons
of mass destruction and related material remain one of
the gravest threats to global security. The Committee
plays a pivotal role in addressing those issues. My
country attaches great importance to the effective
implentation of resolutions 1540 (2004) and 1977
(2011). We welcome resolution 2055 (2012), which has
paved the way for providing the Committee with the
assistance of more experts. It is our hope that the group
of experts will soon be fully operational again. In our
view, the provision of assistance channelled through the
Committee continues to be a key priority. We feel that
an even more comprehensive and structured approach
on collaboration and coordination with other actors,
such as intergovernmental and regional organizations,
as well as non-governmental bodies, could benefit the
work of the Committee.

Germany remains committed to the non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction. We continue to support
the Committee's work by facilitating the working group
on monitoring and implementation. In April 2011,
Germany, together with the Office for Disarmament
Affairs, organized a first-ever conference in Wiesbaden,
an event explicitly focussed on international, regional
and subregional industry associations, with a view to
identifying how to advance the objective of resolution
1540 (2004). Since the Wiesbaden process continues to
attract attention in many parts of the world from various
business sectors, we are currently examining, along
with interested parties, the scope of further cooperation
in specific fields.

