Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom welcomes the adoption of this
resolution and the presence with us today of the
Secretary-General, who has shown such leadership on
this issue.

The situation in Darfur remains extremely
serious, with over a million people displaced. The most
recent figures suggest that there are some 2.5 deaths
per 10,000 displaced persons per day. That means that
there are still about 8,000 people dying each month.
There are widespread security implications for the
entire region. It is therefore right and entirely
consistent with the facts on the ground that the Security
Council should again address this issue under Chapter
VII of the Charter.

Today's text acknowledges that there has been
some progress by the Government of Sudan in response
to resolution 1556 (2004). We very much welcome this,
but there is much more to do, particularly in relation to
security. The United Kingdom believes it is the
pressure of the international community that has been
chiefly responsible for this progress. By repeating the
clear threat of measures, the Council is underlining our
commitment to ensure that the Government of Sudan
achieves the targets we have set and, moreover, that it
meets its responsibilities, the most basic of which is to
protect its own citizens.

The rebels, too, must cooperate. This resolution is
also addressed to them. They have responsibilities, in
particular to maintain humanitarian access and to
respect human rights. This resolution should in no way
be interpreted as giving cover to the rebels to carry on
unacceptable behaviour.
We welcome the contribution of the African
Union to date and the expansion of the African Union's
mission. We call on all Member States to provide any
assistance required.

There have been many credible reports of
widespread violations of international humanitarian
law in Darfur. It is therefore right that this Council
quickly set up an international commission of inquiry
to establish the facts. There can be no impunity. Those
guilty of serious violations of international
humanitarian law or human rights must be brought to
justice. That applies to all parties to the dispute.

Whatever the decisions taken in this Council,
ultimate responsibility lies with the Government of
Sudan and the rebel groups. The United Kingdom
therefore regrets the adjournment of the Abuja talks
without signature of the humanitarian protocol agreed
on 2 September. We urge both sides, in particular the
rebel groups, to engage fully in those talks when they
resume next month to bring about a sustainable
resolution of the situation in Darfur. It is only a
political settlement in Darfur and in [Nevasha] that can
bring sustained peace to the Sudan. My Government -
and the European Union more generally - are
determined to maintain their support for those political
processes.

