The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Togo.

Togo is pleased by the fact that this Security
Council debate on piracy in the Gulf of Guinea is
taking place just a few days after the meeting of the
Council that was devoted to the impact of transnational
organized crime on peace, security and stability in
West Africa and the Sahel region (see S/PV.6717), over
which Togo's Head of State personally presided.
Today's debate therefore represents the determination
of the Security Council to provide the necessary
responses to the new threats to peace and security that
the States in the region of the Gulf of Guinea now face.

Before continuing, I would like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his briefing to the
Council on the issue under discussion. I also wish to
again express my country's gratitude to Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for his excellent initiative in
deploying, last November, to those countries directly
affected, a United Nations assessment mission on
piracy in the Gulf of Guinea.

The observations contained in the report of the
assessment mission (see S/2012/45) perfectly illustrate
the gravity of the threat posed by piracy in the Gulf of
Guinea. For Togo, those observations inform the
Security Council on the alarming nature of the
situation. At the same time, they justify our serious
concern about the implications of the threat on peace,
security, stability and the economic development of the
region. Those concerns are exacerbated by the ever-
clearer links between piracy and other forms of
organized crime in the region, as was stressed during
the 21 February debate to which I just referred. Indeed,
the statistics contained in the report show that from
2010 to 2011 there was an alarming increase in the
number of attacks in the West African sector of the
Gulf of Guinea. The Republic of Benin, which is
suffering the consequences of that increase, has
witnessed a precipitous drop in activity in the port of
Cotonou. The considerable financial losses suffered by
the country are clear evidence of the disastrous impact
of piracy on the economies and the strengthening of
economic governance in the region.

In order to address that grave situation, the States
of the Gulf of Guinea have taken joint initiatives to
deal with the scourge, including in particular the
programme known as Operation Prosperity, under
which joint patrols are being carried out by the
Nigerian and Beninese security forces off the coast of
Benin.

Nationally, and in order to strengthening its legal
arsenal in that respect, the National Assembly
authorized the Government of Togo last November to
ratify the international Convention for the Suppression
of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Maritime
Navigation, of 10 March 1988. Furthermore, the
building of national actors' capacities to combat piracy
enabled the Togolese navy, on 8 February, to repel a
pirate attack against a Panamanian vessel.

At the regional level, the States members of the
Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) have established a comprehensive maritime
security framework: the West African Regional
Maritime Security Centre. In addition, the States
concerned have adopted a funding mechanism whereby
they pool their maritime taxes into a single community
tax so as to finance maritime security.

We also welcome the determination reiterated by
the heads of State of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), during the summit held on
27 and 28 January last, to enhance cooperation with the
Gulf of Guinea Commission and all stakeholders in
order to combat piracy.

Togo believes that, while we await the holding of
the conference of heads of State and Government of the
States of the Gulf of Guinea, these approaches should
be supported and encouraged in order to promote
exchanges of information and experience. However, as
is made clear in the report of the Secretary-General,
despite the resolve of those States and their efforts to
eradicate piracy, on an individual basis or within the
framework of bilateral cooperation, our countries'
national and regional capacities are insufficient to
allow them to alone effectively put an end to or even
contain that threat.

It is therefore imperative that a collective
approach to the problem be taken in order to prevent
this evil, once addressed at the national or subregional
level in the Gulf of Guinea area, from spreading
elsewhere. The increase in the number of pirate attacks
off the coast of Benin, even as that number has begun
to diminish off the coast of Nigeria, makes clear the
importance of international support in helping to deal
with this scourge.

It also goes without saying that piracy in the Gulf
of Guinea poses a threat not only to the countries of the
region but also to international trade and seagoing
staff, some of whom are from other regions of the
world. Hence the combat against piracy requires joint
efforts on the part of all regions and cannot be left to
the countries of the Gulf of Guinea to deal with alone.

Togo wishes to commend and encourage the
various forms of support provided to Benin and other
countries of the subregion by various partners,
including France, the United States of America, China,
the European Union and INTERPOL, to enhance their
capacity in the field of maritime security.

My country believes that given what is at stake,
the international community has a very important role
to play. That is why we endorse the proposal that the
United Nations encourage the countries of the region to
take the measures necessary to mobilize international
support for the activities being carried out in the region
and help coordinate international assistance,
particularly for the implementation of a comprehensive
strategy.

The upcoming adoption by the Security Council
of the second draft resolution on the issue of piracy in
the Gulf of Guinea reflects the commitment of the
United Nations and that of the international community
as a whole to working with resolve to combat maritime
piracy jointly with the States of the Gulf of Guinea.

Togo reiterates its sincere thanks to the members
of the Security Council for their contributions in that
regard and hopes that the implementation of the
aforementioned resolution will help to resolve the
problem.

The President (spoke in French): I now resume
my functions as President of the Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Benin.


