Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): I would also like to
thank Mr. Klein for his very comprehensive briefing
and to welcome the report of the Secretary-General on
the activities of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia
and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) over the past six months.

As described in the Secretary-General's report
and in Mr. Klein's briefing, the United Nations Mission
and other bodies of the United Nations system have
made further progress in assisting the people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina to implement in full the Dayton/Paris
Peace Agreement. We are satisfied with the positive
developments, and we commend the efforts of
Mr. Klein and of the Mission's staff in pursuit of a
comprehensive strategic framework aimed at
successfully completing UNMIBH's core mandate by
the end of 2002.

We continue to regard highly the activities of the
International Police Task Force (IPTF), as the core of
the Mission, in carrying out police reform and
restructuring and in supporting the establishment of the
criminal justice system and effective law enforcement
institutions. With regard to police reform, my
delegation is satisfied with the completion, in May
2001, of the registration of all police personnel, which
contributed to the success of the key objective of
transforming the police, namely, to ensure that all law
enforcement personnel meet international standards of
personal integrity and professional competence.

As for police restructuring, we welcome a number
of targeted projects designed to address the
organizational capacity of law enforcement institutions
and to create an apolitical police service, including the
"Manage the Managers" project and police
commissioner projects. In this context, UNMIBH's
efforts to prevent any attempts at political interference
in the implementation of these projects are highly
commendable.

In the field of cooperation between the police and
the criminal justice system, my delegation is
encouraged by the initial success in the establishment
of a court police service as a multiethnic Federation
police force. We also note with satisfaction the
significant progress made by UNMIBH in creating the
State Border Service (SBS) as a viable multi-ethnic
State-level law enforcement institution. The
achievements of the SBS in combating smugglers,
confiscating contraband and cutting off illegal
migration to European destinations are quite
remarkable.

The continuing return of significant numbers of
displaced persons and refugees is also vivid testimony
of the substantive results achieved by the United
Nations and the international community in improving
the necessary conditions for sustaining such returns,
including through the implementation of property
legislation. Still, much more has to be done in this
field.

While reviewing the appreciable progress made
by the United Nations Mission during the period under
review, we cannot fail to mention some dangerous
developments of recent months, in particular in the
Croat part of the Federation and in the Republika
Srpska.

We were seriously concerned at the continued
confrontation between the international community and
the Croat nationalist parties united in the Croat
National Congress, which resulted in clashes with the
Stabilization Force in Mostar and other places in April.
In our view, any attempts by the Croat nationalist
forces to create self-governing structures and to impair
the functioning of the Federation army and police are
unacceptable, as they contradict the Peace Agreement
and the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We were also worried by the manifestations of
extremism, national and religious intolerance and acts
of violence against the international personnel that
occurred in Trebinje and Banja Luka in May. All those
actions are to be resolutely condemned. The measures
applied by the High Representative and by UNMIBH in
those circumstances were absolutely adequate. These
pitiful events have clearly demonstrated that, after
almost six years of international efforts in Bosnia, there
is still a long way to go to ensure that the process of
reconciliation and building a common State in the
country becomes sustainable and irreversible.

In that context, we share Mr. Klein's view of
regarding the need for a renewed discussion on a clear
exit strategy for Bosnia, with the involvement of all the
international players and mechanisms and with a
distinct division of labour between them. I think that
discussion acquires additional relevance given
UNMIBH's plan to complete its core mandate by the
end of 2002.

Allow me to conclude my remarks in a broader
context. We are convinced that good-neighbourly
relations and a favourable political environment in the
region are prerequisites for the successful
transformation of Bosnia and Herzegovina into a stable
and prosperous country and member of the European
community. In this regard, we believe that the recent
political changes in the Republic of Croatia and in the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia - both signatories to
the Dayton Peace Accord 4 contribute positively to
the ongoing process in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is
worth mentioning here that the joint statement made by
the Presidents of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
and the Republic of Croatia, in the framework of the
recent Central European Initiative summit in Italy,
reconfirmed their commitment to the letter and the
spirit of the Dayton Peace Agreement and to full
respect for the territorial integrity and sovereignty of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

We welcome the conclusion of the trilateral
agreement on combating illegal migration and
organized crime brokered by UNMIBH, as well as the
recent establishment of an inter-State council at the
head of State level between the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and Bosnia and Herzegovina, which
confirmed the mutual will of these nations to develop
their beneficial dialogue. These events strengthen our
belief in positive prospects for Bosnia and Herzegovina
within the European framework. We hope that the
adoption of the draft permanent law on elections will
open the door for the country's membership in the
Council of Europe and other European institutions.

Lastly, we believe that UNMIBH's role in
confronting the remaining challenges of ethnic
reconciliation, democratic institution-building,
economic reconstruction and the implementation of
human rights in Bosnia and Herzegovina is still
essential. Against this background, my delegation fully
supports the recommendation by the Secretary-General
to extend the current mandate of UNMIBH for a
further 12-month period.

