Mr. Vieira (Brazil): I thank you very much,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate. We hope
that our discussions today will have a direct bearing on
our efforts to increase the levels of transparency and
accountability of the Security Council.

I also thank Ms. Karin Landgren and Mr. James
Cockayne for their insightful briefings and for their
continuous efforts to disseminate information and
analyses concerning the activities of the
Security Council.

We commend the attention devoted by the Security
Council to enhancing its working methods and
encouraging its members to commit themselves to fully
implement the recommendations contained in the note
by the President (S/2017/507, annex), known as note
507. I would also like to highlight the valuable work
done by Japan during the latest update of note 507 in
2017, as well as the leadership of Kuwait in steering the
discussions of the Council's Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.

Brazil has long upheld the need for the Security
Council to operate within the letter and the spirit of the
Charter of the United Nations. The Charter establishes
that this organ should act on behalf of the wider
membership and should therefore guarantee adequate
levels of inclusivity and transparency, including by
listening to the Member States affected by its decisions.

One particular challenge is to maintain, whenever
appropriate, regular coordination, cooperation and
interaction with the principal organs of the United
Nations. The relationship between the Security
Council and the General Assembly must be dynamic
and complementary. One key provision is Article 10 of
the Charter of the United Nations, according to which
the General Assembly may make recommendations to
the Security Council. That enhanced exchange could
contribute to mitigating the cases of encroachment on
and consequent erosion of the authority and mandate
of the General Assembly by the Security Council. In
that regard, the Security Council must make strides
in holding more regular and substantive consultations
with the General Assembly, either to review work plans
or to consult specific issues of mutual concern.

Let us not lose sight of the fact that a healthy
relationship with the General Assembly is also a
matter of accountability. Article 24, paragraph 3,
of the Charter of the United Nations establishes that
the Security Council shall submit annual and, when
necessary, special reports to the General Assembly
for its consideration. There has been a long-standing
call from the wider membership for the submission of
an analytical and comprehensive annual report with
an assessment of its work and the challenges ahead.
Special reports have rarely been presented to the
General Assembly, even though the Charter envisions
them as another way of keeping the wider membership
abreast of the Council's activities.

More should be done to enhance the consultations
with troop- and police-contributing countries (TCCs/ PCCs). Keeping in mind the current efforts to improve
the effectiveness of our peacekeeping operations, the
views of TCCs and PCCs should have a bearing on
the formation, review and drawdown of peacekeeping
operations and the mandates of special political
missions. To that end, TCCs and PCCs should be
consulted in a regular and timely manner. Unfortunately,
the mechanism for consultations that is in place today
does not have the desired impact on the deliberations of
the Security Council.

We believe that the Security Council should be
open to all United Nations bodies that can substantively
contribute to its work. The Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) is one of the most prominent examples, given that
it was conceived to play an advisory role to the Security
Council. Nevertheless, after 13 years of existence, the
potential of the PBC has unfortunately not yet been fully
tapped by the Security Council. Having been an active
member of the PBC since its inception, and as Chair
of the Guinea-Bissau configuration, Brazil still feels
that there is ample room to improve the coordination,
coherence and cooperation between those two bodies.

As for the decision-making process within the
Security Council, Brazil believes that elected members
should be offered real opportunities to be penholders. A
fair and adequate distribution of penholderships should
be seen not as an exception but as a common practice
essential to fostering appropriate levels of transparency
and accountability in the Council. The possibility
of co-penholderships envisaged in presidential note
507 is a positive development and the Chairs of the
subsidiary bodies are uniquely placed to be considered
co-penholders on issues pertaining to their activities.

Access for affected Member States to the Security
Council's subsidiary bodies should also be ensured, as
appropriate, especially in view of the fact that those
bodies usually deal directly with issues that concern
the wider membership. Let me once again invoke the
Charter of the United Nations, whose Article 31 states
that any Member of the United Nations which is not a
member of the Security Council may participate in the
discussion of any question brought before the Security

Council whenever the latter considers that the interests
of that Member are specially affected. That provision
should also be applied to the subsidiary bodies.

Finally, we encourage efforts to review the use ofthe
veto in the Security Council, in view of the ample call
of the wider membership for its abolition or restriction.
Even though that topic goes beyond presidential note
507, it also has a direct impact on the functioning of the
Security Council.

Undertakings to improve the working methods of
the Council do not replace but rather complement the
need for a structural reform of the Security Council,
with the creation of new permanent and non-permanent
seats. The effectiveness of the Council cannot be
reduced to procedure; it is also related to substance.
Many of the shortcomings in the operation of the
Security Council are related to the absence of actors
that can contribute to bridging differences and avoiding
blockages. A structural reform will necessarily entail
a broad revision of the Council's working methods in
order to align them with the desire expressed by the
majority of Member States for greater transparency
and accountability. An updated Council that is more
inclusive, transparent and accountable will also be
more efficient.

Unfortunately, Security Council reform is long
overdue. It is high time for us to intensify our efforts in
moving forward and bringing about a Security Council
that reflects the contemporary reality.

