Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank you, Mr. President, for taking the initiative to observe a minute of silence before our meeting in memory of the victims of the earthquake in Haiti and the recent terrorist attack in Niger. We grieve together with our colleagues. We extend our condolences to our Nigerien friends. We welcome the participation of Ms. Claudia Blum de Barberi, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia. I take this opportunity to congratulate her on her appointment to that important position and express our hope that the topic of Colombia will be discussed in the Security Council only in a positive manner. We also thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Carlos Ruiz Massieu Aguirre for his presentation of the report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/988). Based on that document, the Security Council and the Secretary-General agree that the success of the peace process depends entirely on the ability of Colombians to fully meet their obligations under the historic Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace. Colombia has entered a crucial phase that will determine the sustainability of the peace that the Colombians achieved at such a high price. As the Secretary-General rightly notes in his report, the Final Agreement stipulates a long period of post-conflict recovery but the solid foundations for peace must be laid now. That is why the Security Council, which is entrusted with monitoring the Colombian peace process, is closely following developments and hopes that the success achieved by the signing of the Final Agreement will not only be maintained but also built upon. The role of the Verification Mission is very important. However, the primary responsibility for the peace process clearly lies with the Colombians themselves. As the report points out, despite some progress most of the work to consolidate peace still lies ahead. Since the signing of the Final Agreement, it has become clear that, in addition to the emergence of new challenges in the Colombian peace process, there remain basic issues that need to be urgently addressed. While the October elections were more peaceful than previous ones, the Secretary-General notes increasing mistrust among various sectors of society. There are various reasons for that situation. One of the main ones is the lack of solutions to security-related issues. The year 2019 saw the highest number of victims since the final peace agreement was signed. We believe that every murder must be investigated and that those responsible must be appropriately punished. The report also notes gaps in the area of political reintegration. In particular, one seat in Parliament remains temporarily blocked, althoughunder the final agreement it was supposed to be allotted to the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Comtn (FARC) party, not to a specific representative. There is public demand for increasing the effectiveness of socioeconomic reintegration. The report notes the widespread dissatisfaction in society with regard to insufficient progress in the implementation of agrarian reforms, including reintegration and crop substitution programmes. In terms of legal reintegration, it is worth noting that, during the reporting period, State programmes did not accredit a single new participant, although they had received applications to that effect. The Security Council regularly insists on the need to preserve the independence of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace. In that regard, we cannot but be concerned about information in the report that lawyers representing former combatants in court have been subject to threats. Regardless of the origin of those threats, we see them as an attempt to pressure the justice system. That practice must stop immediately; prominent cases need to be investigated, and those responsible must be brought to justice. I also note the report's observation that communities and civil society organizations affected by the actions of the Ejercito de Liberacion Nacional are insisting on the need for dialogue with the latter. We agree with the view that achieving genuinely lasting peace in Colombia is hard to imagine without taking into account the full spectrum of opinions. We trust that Bogota will find a way to resolve disagreements with Cuba over negotiations with the Ejercito de Liberacion Nacional. We share the position of Havana that members of that group cannot be extradited, because Colombia cannot ensure their immunity, as demanded by the guarantees established under the protocols signed by the parties governing the actions of participants in the event that the dialogue breaks down. Like all those who have read the report, we are alarmed by the wave of protests in the country. We are convinced that only the effective implementation of the final agreement can reassure society and prevent another return to arms. That document and its core element, the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, have made it possible for the Secretary-General and the Security Council to support the peace process. It has been our consistent belief that the situation can be stabilized only through peaceful means, with the greatest possible level of public dialogue. That approach is enshrined in core resolution 2282 (2016), on peacebuilding, which states that national responsibility for preserving peace presupposes that the Government concerned take into account the views of every segments of society. In that regard, we hope that the initiatives announced by the President and society to establish a broad national dialogue will yield results. The most important thing is to prevent duplication of work. We welcome the declared commitment of the Colombian leadership to the peace process, but we cannot stop there. The international community, the United Nations, the Security Council and, most important, the Colombians themselves expect the strict implementation of obligations under the final peace agreement. Absent that, the consequences of half a century of internal armed conflict will be insurmountable. We trust that the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia will continue to play a significant role in the peace process.
