Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): Thank you,
Mr. President, for taking the initiative in calling this
meeting. The efficacy of the format is, I believe, amply
demonstrated by the stimulating, interesting and very useful
briefing that Mrs. Ogata has given, and I should like to pay
a considerable tribute to her. Like others, we hope that we
will be able to use this format again in the future.

Time is short, and I would like to concentrate very
much on questions rather than statements. But one point I
should like to make of a rather more general nature is that
in managing crises, whether of a humanitarian, political or
security nature, it is vital to have a regular flow of reliable
information. That is as true of humanitarian crises in Africa
as it is in other areas. We are very pleased that briefings in
Geneva of donors on the subject of the Great Lakes by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) will now take place every fortnight.
We appreciate the amount of information now available on
that region. We hope that more can be made available on
the refugee situation in West Africa.

In the context of maintaining the civilian and
humanitarian nature of refugee camps, the Secretary-
General's report on Africa referred to a UNHCR initiative
addressing security issues among Burundian refugees in
Tanzania. We would be very grateful for more
information on the progress of what seems to have been
an extremely valuable initiative. We would be interested
to hear from the High Commissioner what lessons were
learned, and whether she feels they can be applied
elsewhere. We would also be interested to hear what
other steps UNHCR is contemplating in follow-up to the
Secretary-General' s report.

On the former Yugoslavia, UNHCR's performance
in Kosovo will be a further, and very important, test of
the agency's ability to deliver. Our own initial reports,
borne out by Mrs. Ogata's briefing, indicate that it is
tackling the job well in very difficult circumstances. We
would be particularly interested to hear further
information on when the conditions are likely to be right
for the refugees to return. How many internally displaced
persons are there now, and in what conditions are they
living? Is the High Commissioner satisfied with the
arrangements in place in Kosovo for protecting UNHCR
staff against various security threats such as landmines?

But, as others have indicated, Kosovo is not the
whole story in the former Yugoslavia. We would also be
interested in Mrs. Ogata's assessment of minority returns
to Bosnia. We note that Mr. Carlos Westendorp, the High
Representative for implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina, has said that
120,000 returns are possible in 1999, as opposed to
between 35,000 and 40,000 for this year. Is this figure
realistic, and is UNHCR content that it has the resources
to protect such a large number of returnees?

I shall leave it there, with many thanks to you,
Mr. President, and to Mrs. Ogata.

