Mr. Ruzicka (Slovakia): We salute the initiative of
the Lithuanian presidency to bring this important topic,
highlighted by the recent crises in Syria, the Central
African Republic, Mali and other countries, to our
attention. It is worth noting the symbolism of holding
our discussions today on the International Day against
the Use of Child Soldiers. Slovakia would like to express
its appreciation for the work of Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs Valerie Amos, High
Commissioner for Human Rights Navi Pillay, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations Herve
Ladsous and Director-General of the International
Committee of the Red Cross Yves Daccord.

At the outset, I would like to align myself with the

statement made by the observer of the European Union.

The protection of peace and the prevention of war
are among the most important objectives of the United
Nations. Not long ago, we discussed in this Chamber
the lessons of war and the search for a permanent
peace in post-conflict areas (see S/PV.7105). In
today's discussion we tackle another question: how to
achieve substantial progress in two equally important
tasks - the prevention of war and the protection of
civilians once a conflict breaks out.

In the event that we fail to prevent wars or conflicts,
we must combine our efforts, capacities, means and
resources to protect those who are most vulnerable,
namely, women, children, older persons and persons
with disabilities. Those groups are always the easiest
targets in conflict situations and the most likely victims.
But we should ask ourselves: can we take immediate
and well-focused action to ease suffering and provide
effective assistance? Can we protect volunteers, United
Nations employees and other dedicated women and men
who are providing or trying to provide humanitarian
assistance and relief, often putting their own lives
in danger? What is the price of overcoming political
divergences, national interests and global objectives in
situations where we see millions of people suffering,
when they are internally displaced, forced to flee their
homes or killed in military action? How do we protect
children recruited to fight, women used as human
shields, girls who are being sexually abused?

Blue Helmets and United Nations symbols are,
perhaps more often than we think, the only safe haven
they can hope for. By failing to take decisive action, we
betray those hopes, the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and the essence of humanity. But above
all, we betray ourselves.

The number of civilian casualties in current
conflicts is extremely disturbing. According to
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/689),
1.1 million people remain displaced in Somalia. More
than 2.6 million have been internally displaced in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Civilians are also
targeted in other conflict and post-conflict zones, such
as Mali, Yemen, the Sudan and South Sudan. In those
conflicts, even United Nations peacekeepers have been
under attack.

In the Central African Republic, it was probably only
the swift action of the Security Council that prevented
the worst-case scenario from occurring. Nevertheless,
more than 1 million people have been forced from their
homes, and the humanitarian situation is alarming. The
security situation there is still very fragile and, even
with the deployment of European Union forces on the
ground in the next few weeks, stabilizing the country
will be a challenge. To date, the conflict in Syria has
cost 100,000 human lives, and, since March 2011,
more than 6.2 million have been internally displaced.
More than 9.3 million people are in urgent need of
humanitarian assistance.

Through various channels, Slovakia has, as an
emerging donor, helped to lessen the suffering of
refugees from Syria and Mali. Last year, we joined
the family of donors in the Peacebuilding Fund, which
supports countries emerging from conflict.

Since the first peacekeeping operation was
mandated to protect civilians in 1999, we have
accumulated substantive information about possibilities
and limitations. While the Security Council has the key
role to mandate peacekeeping operations, we have to
face reality and seriously discuss the way forward.

Numerous challenges and shortcomings impede
peacekeepers' capacity to effectively protect civilians
on the ground. As Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
recently acknowledged, the relevant actors continue
to struggle over what it means for peacekeeping
operations to protect civilians, in both definition and
practice. The perennial problem of many operations
is summarized very well by the Brahimi report from
2000 (see S/2000/809): peacekeepers may not be able to
justifiably use force against attackers in order to protect
civilians when they feel morally compelled to do so.

In the world of continuous globalization and growing
interdependence between national developments and
regional stability, we should look more deeply into
the concept of national sovereignty when dealing with
internal conflicts and should seek the highest possible
international legitimacy for our much needed action.

In that context, the role of an international body
for post-conflict justice and for taking action against
impunity for crimes against humanity should be
reinforced. In many instances, attacks against civilian
populations could amount to crimes against humanity
or war crimes. It is necessary that the individuals
responsible for such crimes be held accountable and
tried by an independent and impartial court of law. If
authorities at the national level are unwilling or unable
to adequately address the issue, the International
Criminal Court should step in.

There are many areas in which we may improve the
situation of protecting the innocent and vulnerable. Let
me mention just a few of them.

First, global adherence to the Geneva Conventions
should be improved, especially to the Additional
Protocols of 1977, as well as to the protocols prohibiting
the use of certain weapons.

Second, we need to accelerate the acceptance of the
2000 Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child, on the involvement of children in armed
conflict.

Third, we must improve the ability of national
and international units to reach people living in areas
affected by conflicts.

Fourth, the safety of humanitarian volunteers
and workers when accessing people in need must be
improved.

Fifth, a ban on the use of public facilities in war
must be fully implemented. It is unacceptable to
tolerate the use of civilian facilities such as hospitals or
schools as shields or covers for military operations, not
to mention using civilians as human shields. We must
stand firm against the recruitment of child soldiers.

Six, more effective mechanisms to monitor the use
of explosive weapons in heavily populated areas must
be created.

Seven, we should concentrate on the elimination of
post-conflict effects on the mortality rate of children
and women as an indirect cause of war. In ongoing
conflicts, men die more frequently in direct armed
actions, whereas women die more frequently in the
post-conflict period.

Eight, when appropriate and when on-site
developments require it, we must consider taking action
in the humanitarian field separately from political,
security or military decisions.

In conclusion, as a small step for the United Nations
but a leap for the Security Council, we commend France
for its initiative designed to limit the use of the right
of the veto in cases of genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing or crimes against humanity. We suggest that
other members of the Council give serious consideration
to that initiative.

We welcomed the Secretary-General's proposals
for further strengthening United Nations mandates
on the protection of civilians, and we call on Security
Council members to act consistently across all relevant
situations, while using a broad range of tools to improve
the actions of the United Nations.

