Mr. Annabi: It is a pleasure for me to participate,
on behalf of the Secretariat, in this morning's debate on
a subject that is of crucial importance for the
maintenance of international peace and security.

Let me, at the outset, pay tribute to the delegation
of South Africa, and in particular to Foreign Minister
Dlamini Zuma, for convening this meeting and for
providing a stimulating set of questions to facilitate our
discussion. This is, as she has said, the fourth time in
the past few years that the Security Council is meeting
on the issue of relations between the United Nations
and regional organizations. The frequency of our
discussions underscores the importance of that
relationship for collective security. That significance
was recognized at the time of the establishment of the
United Nations and is reflected in the framework for
cooperation set out in Chapter VIII of the Charter. That
Chapter provides clear and detailed guidance on the
relationship between the Security Council and regional
arrangements and remains a fundamental guide for the
activities of the Secretariat in relation to regional
organizations.

The more complex the challenges of our
globalized world, the more crucial partnership between
our respective organizations has become for the pursuit
of a security that is truly collective, effective and
equitable for all men and women around the world.
International peacekeeping is the most potent, practical
demonstration of our commitment to collective
security. Partnership in that area between the United
Nations and regional organizations has become crucial
for the success of our common endeavours.

The partnership between the African Union (AU)
and the United Nations is among the most intense of all
peacekeeping partnerships. It is a partnership that
stretches back many years - to the Organization of
African Unity and its successor, the African Union -
and has translated into cooperation at all phases of
conflict management - prevention, peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding - on all corners of
the African continent, from Western Sahara to the
Comoros Islands and from the Horn of Africa to West
Africa.

The establishment of the African Union, and its
commitment to develop African peacekeeping
capabilities, has given a new dimension to our
partnership. That has opened up new avenues as well
as new challenges for our cooperation. The fact that
over 75 per cent of all United Nations peacekeepers are
today deployed in Africa makes our relationship
essential, not just for the success of African regional
endeavours, but for the United Nations and
international peacekeeping around the world. Africa
provides up to 40 per cent of those United Nations
troops, and it participates in United Nations missions
throughout the world. That contribution has been
remarkable in its consistency.

Over the past three years, we have forged
ambitious new directions in the United Nations-AU
partnership, which have been reflected in a range of
documents - most recently the November 2006
declaration between the United Nations and the African
Union. In support of the AU's commitment to develop
its continental security architecture and peacekeeping
capabilities, the Secretariat recently established a
dedicated capacity known as the African Peacekeeping
Support Team. Significantly, the bulk of this capacity
is located in Addis Ababa, focusing on direct support in
priority areas identified by the African Union -
military, police, logistics and finance, as well as
information and communication systems. The goal of
that cooperation is the operationalization of the African
standby force by 2010.
07-28578
Following the many discussions we had with
Chairperson Konare and our friend Commissioner
Djinnit, whom I would like warmly to welcome in the
Chamber, the two organizations have developed a joint
action plan for the provision of United Nations support
as well as a detailed annual work plan that is focused
on three areas: support for AU capacity development in
planning peacekeeping missions, in mission
management and in mission support, particularly in
logistics and resource management.

Alongside this work agenda, we continue to
deepen cooperation in specific operational areas such
as training and information exchange, both with the
African Union and with the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), which has been a key
subregional partner for United Nations peacekeeping.

At the level of specific conflict situations, our
cooperation has become particularly intensive. This
morning I will confine my remarks to the United
Nations-African Union partnership in two conflict
areas, Darfur and Somalia.

In the context of the Darfur crisis, the African
Union and the United Nations have established since
2004 a collaborative and mutually reinforcing
relationship that is redefining the scope and content of
peacekeeping partnerships. The United Nations has
provided strategic support to the African Mission in the
Sudan (AMIS) through a special assistance cell
established in Addis Ababa, That work has contributed
directly to the development and enhancement of
African Union plans for AMIS. The cell has facilitated
the provision of practical assistance by the United
Nations to AMIS operations in the field, including the
deployment of technical experts to assist AMIS in the
areas of planning, logistics, communications and
transport.

AMIS, for its part, has been instrumental in
providing support for humanitarian convoys and the
delivery of humanitarian assistance in Darfur, where,
as the Council is aware, the security situation is often
prohibitive. The United Nations has also provided
considerable support to the African Union's efforts to
reach a political settlement of the conflict by providing
substantive expertise and logistical support to the AU
mediation and the participants in the talks held at
Abuja last year.

African Union-United Nations cooperation with
regard to peacemaking in Darfur continues, with the
07-28578

joint efforts of Special Envoys Jan Eliasson and Salim
Ahmed Salim, to re-energize the political process and
achieve an effective cessation of hostilities. The AU
and the United Nations have cooperated in developing
the contents of substantial United Nations support
packages for AU peacekeeping efforts in Darfur. That
has culminated in joint planning conducted in Addis
Ababa for an African Union-United Nations hybrid
operation.

Subject to the cooperation of the Government of
the Sudan, the implementation of these initiatives
would mark an unprecedented peacekeeping
arrangement between the United Nations and a regional
organization. It would also open the way to the
provision by the United Nations of substantial financial
support to AMIS on the basis of joint command,
control and management structures.

Turning to Somalia, as Council members are
aware, the African Union began deployment of an
operation known as the African Union Mission to
Somalia (AMISOM) in early March, and so far 1,700
Uganda troops have arrived in Somalia. However, the
security situation in the country, and particularly in
Mogadishu, remains tense and volatile. We are working
with the African Union in support of its efforts to
obtain assistance to complete the full deployment of
AMISOM.

The Department of Peacekeeping Operations is
also assisting the African Union in the planning of
AMISOM. A team of 10 planners has been assembled
and will be dispatched to Addis Ababa shortly. The
team will work side by side with their AU colleagues
to assist with the deployment of AMISOM. and will
coordinate closely with other United Nations staff
currently supporting AU peacekeeping capacity
development in Addis Ababa.

In the meantime, a United Nations technical
assessment mission to Somalia is returning this week
and will report to the Security Council on its findings.
We welcome the ceasefire agreement reached on 22
March, as we strongly believe that there can be no
military solution to a conflict which has already
inflicted untold suffering on the people of Somalia.

We also welcome the decision of the Transitional
Federal Government to hold a national reconciliation
congress, which should be as inclusive as possible so
as to create a meaningful political basis for a
peacekeeping operation. It would be essential in that
5
regard for the international community not to lose sight
of the painful lessons learned in Somalia and elsewhere
during the past decade.

Over the past three years, African Union-United
cooperation in peacekeeping has gone in new
directions, in ways that few of us would ever have
envisaged. Our practical cooperation in the planning
and conduct of a range of peacekeeping operations
takes place at all levels, in a variety of contexts and
locations. Those multiple experiences and the
innovations introduced provide rich sources for
learning lessons that can further inform and deepen our
cooperation in future. The range of parallel new
initiatives that we have set in motion gives us
confidence that African countries will be able in future
to assume an even greater role in peacekeeping on their
continent and beyond.

I would like in that context to pay tribute to the
African Union for the commitment and courage of its
troops, police and civilian personnel, who often
spearhead the action of the international community, as
was the case recently in Burundi, for example, at a
time when the United Nations was not ready to become
involved.

The United Nations-African Union partnership in
peacekeeping demonstrates the indivisibility of
international peacekeeping. We are guided by shared
principles - the purposes and principles set out in the
United Nations Charter. We are supported by the same
international community which provides the political
direction as well as the personnel, material and
financial resources crucial to peacekeeping, and we are
seized with many of the same conflicts, many of them
in Africa, which challenge our commitment to
collective security and rob the continent of Africa of so
much of its promise.

Peacekeeping partnerships cannot be seen in
isolation from each other. Other partners, including
regional and subregional actors, such as ECOWAS, the
European Union, NATO and others, play a crucial role
in supporting peacekeeping in Africa. The United
Nations will continue to work with the African Union
at its request in mobilizing international political,
material and financial support.

The Security Council, in accordance with its
responsibilities under the Charter, has a vital role to
play in facilitating partnerships between the United
Nations and regional organizations or arrangements
6

that can contribute to achieving our common goals.
The innovations of the United Nations-African Union
partnership demonstrate the practical potential of such
cooperation. We look forward to the Council's
consideration of how we can advance this realization.

