Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): I wish to thank
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), for her updates to the
Council today.

We welcome the important developments that have
been made in the ongoing investigations, including the
collection of evidence by the Darfur investigation team,
since we last met on this item in June (see S/PV.8290). It
is evident that the Office of the Prosecutor and relevant
partners continue to make progress on this file.

Member States, on the other hand, continue to fail in
upholding their responsibilities. All suspects remain at
large and the President of the Sudan continues to travel
internationally, including to States parties to the Rome
Statute that have an obligation to arrest and surrender
suspects to the Court. The failure to implement
the Court's orders is not only disappointing - it is
disturbing. Yet again, we call on the Government of the
Sudan and all Member States to cooperate fully with
the ICC, in accordance with resolution 1593 (2005),
and to arrest individuals subject to arrest warrants. The
Government of the Sudan must also take further steps
to ensure justice for the women, men, girls and boys
who have been victims ofhorrendous crimes during the
conflict in Darfur.
The issue of non-cooperation with the Court
remains challenging. Without its own enforcement
mechanism, the Court relies on States to fulfil its
mandate, including by executing arrest warrants. The
Council should approach cases of non-cooperation
in a structured manner. We support the proposal
made by France at our last briefing with regard to
inviting Member States that have been found to be in
non-compliance with the Court's orders to address the
Council. The Court's decisions must be respected.

Turning to the current situation in Darfur, we
welcome that the reported violence against civilians has
declined and that the overall situation has continued to
improve, as noted in the Prosecutor's report. However,
we remain concerned about the reported sexual and
gender-related violence, which remains a serious
problem. A holistic approach to sustaining peace and
addressing the root causes of instability, including by
building effective rule of law institutions, is essential
to addressing the remaining challenges.

A sustained focus on peacebuilding and development
activities remains critical, and in this regard we
welcome the presidential statement adopted earlier this
week on this very issue (S/PRST/2018/19).

During Sweden's two years on the Council, we
have followed the work of the ICC and the Prosecutor's
Office closely. We have seen how the Court, through
dedicated and efficient action, has taken significant
steps to ensure accountability for perpetrators of
the worst crimes known to humanity. The Court
has continually contributed to the advancement of
international criminal law, including by rendering
landmark verdicts on the recruitment and use of
children in armed conflict, which is a matter to which
Sweden has paid particular attention during our time
on the Council.

We have also seen the tireless efforts made by the
Prosecutor to engage the international community,
not least the African Union and African States, and
inform all Member States about the work of the Court.
We commend the Prosecutor's outreach efforts. We
are also encouraged by her work on integrating a
gender perspective and analysis into the Office's work,
including policies on sexual and gender-based crimes,
as well as children.

This year has been a special year, as we celebrated
the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the Rome
Statute. Only a few days ago, we also celebrated the
seventieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights and the Convention on the Prevention
and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, which are
both based on the idea of the inherent and inviolable
rights of every individual and the need for individual
criminal responsibility for mass atrocities. The
international community's recognition of the fact
that upholding human rights and pursuing justice are
fundamental to a just and sustainable peace represents
an acknowledgement, reflected by the actions of the
United Nations and international criminal justice, that
now forms part of the fabric of this Organization.

This year's anniversaries remind us of how
much we, through joint efforts, have achieved for the
development of the international justice system. We
should be proud, but, regrettably, our achievements
have been clouded by increased pressure on and hostile
rhetoric against the Court. We therefore repeat what we
said during the briefing on the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals earlier this week
(see S/PV.8416): that as regrettable as this situation is,
what it also tells us is that the work of the international
Court and Tribunals has real impact. The courts and the
Tribunals were not established to serve or depend on
any one country's interests. They were set up to see that
justice is served for victims and to ensure accountability
for perpetrators of the worst crimes known to humanity,
and, naturally, they are uncomfortable for those who
violate international law.

The ICC is not targeted at any particular region
or continent; it is impartial and goes wherever justice
is most in danger. It is a Court of last resort that
complements and does not replace national courts.
Complementarity and cooperation between national
jurisdictions and the Court are essential features of the
Rome Statute.

We wish to conclude by reiterating our steadfast
support for the Court and the Office of the Prosecutor.
Ms. Bensouda's unwavering commitment to justice is
admirable, and we commend her for her continual fight
for accountability, not least in these challenging times.

