Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): It is an honour
to have you lead this meeting, Mr. President; many
congratulations to you and to Guatemala on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the first time.
Many thanks to the German delegation for everything
it did during its presidency of the Council last month.
Many thanks, too, to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for his briefing and for everything
that he and everyone in the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) has been doing to
implement the mandate we have given them in support
of Haiti.

Seven months ago, when the Council
debated MINUSTAH following our visit to Haiti
(see S/PV.6732), inertia in the political system was
blighting decision-making on all the issues central to
the nation's development. Seven months on, several
political milestones have been achieved, including the
ratification ofthe Prime Minister and the installation of
the Superior Council of the Judiciary. Haiti now has the
opportunity to build on that progress.

Following our visit, we called for the Mission
to begin planning, so that, when conditions on the
ground allowed, it could begin drawdown. Now we
see signs that those conditions are improving. For
example, MINUSTAH and the Haitian National Police
have brought to a peaceful conclusion a potentially
inflammatory demonstration by former members of the
Haitian army. There has been a handover of security
from MINUSTAH to the Haitian National Police in
camps for internally displaced persons. And in four of
ten regions, responsibility for security now rests with
MINUSTAH's police units rather than with its troops.
It is important that we note those successes.

We support the Secretary-General's proposals to
reduce the number of uniformed personnel deployed
with the Mission, but it is in no one's interest that
MINUSTAH leave before the security it has established
can be maintained by the Haitian authorities. Now
more than ever, it is critical that the Mission undertake
the planning needed for it to draw down without
jeopardizing its hard-won security gains.
MINUSTAH's activities must be carefully
prioritized. Building the capacity of the Haitian National
Police - both operational and institutional - should
be MINUSTAH's highest priority. I underline that we
believe that that should not be a top but the top priority
for MINUSTAH.

The Haitian National Police must also meet
appropriate human rights standards, if it is to win the
confidence of the Haitian people. Effective oversight,
transparency and zero tolerance for corruption will
all be important. Officers should expect the support
of all political parties and a reasonable salary that is
paid on time. Capacity-building in the justice sector,
both regionally and at the institutional level, is also
important to complement that activity.

Neither of those tasks is solely for MINUSTAH.
Clarity is needed among all the actors involved as to
what capacity the Haitian National Police and the
justice system more broadly needs to build, and what
the benchmarks and timetable will be for achieving
those goals.

As long as political uncertainty remains the most
likely trigger of instability, activity to support political
stability must continue to be a priority. MINUSTAH
should support the elections planned for the end of the
year. The appointment of a Permanent Electoral Council
is a crucial step and needs to be achieved quickly, if
the partial Senate and local elections are to be held on
schedule. It is vital that the Electoral Council be able to
act independently and that it have the funding to do so.

However, that necessary prioritization inevitably
means cutting back on some activities. The report of the
Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti of the Economic and
Social Council focuses on the importance now of strong
and coherent development support and the mobilizing
of Haitian stakeholders, as well as the phased transfer
of tasks from MINUSTAH to other actors. We agree:
MINUSTAH should be handing over tasks where other
actors, including the United Nations country team, have
a comparative advantage in conducting them. Where
possible, tasks should be handed over to national actors.
Where that is not yet possible, all elements of the United
Nations system need to work together to build national
capacity. MINUSTAH should be adopting the most
efficient configuration. It should be drawing on lessons
from other missions. Decisions in that context should
take into account the differences between geographic
areas and the varying progress among sectors.

The United Kingdom believes that it is essential
that peacekeepers conform to the highest standards of
conduct at all times. We firmly support the Secretary-
General's zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation
and abuse, and we urge a rigorous and transparent
approach to all allegations in that area.

In conclusion, MINUSTAH has achieved some
encouraging results over the past 12 months. Looking
forward, efforts now need to focus on utilizing the
more favourable environment in which it is operating
to deliver its core tasks.

It must engage other actors to share the burden
where appropriate. MINUSTAH should be stopping
activity which others are better able to conduct.

