Mr. Ryan: I have listened with great care to the
interventions of the members of the Council and the
large number of other speakers. It is very clear from
the debate that the issue and the effectiveness of
sanctions against UNITA continue to be of great
concern to Member States. I know that Ambassador
Larrain and the members ofthe Monitoring Mechanism
have also listened carefully to the debate and that they
will wish to draw on it in discussions with the
sanctions Committee. In the interim, the members of
the Mechanism will now undertake some important
visits to Angola and to some other concerned States
and organizations. An essential part of my own
responsibility will be to follow up on the report of the
Monitoring Mechanism with involved States,
organizations and individuals. In that regard, I will
shortly visit a number of countries, including Angola.

I feel able, very briefly, to draw four clear
conclusions from today's extensive debate.

First, the Security Council and the wider United
Nations membership have reiterated their
determination under the resolutions concerned to erode
and eradicate international support for UNITA's
capacity to use violence for political objectives against
the people of Angola.

Secondly, there is overwhelming support for
maintaining the sanctions regime and the necessary
mechanisms targeted against UNITA for as long as
necessary, and pending further consideration of a
permanent monitoring mechanism referred to by
various delegations today.

Thirdly, the message of the membership to the
Monitoring Mechanism itself is clearly that it is on the
right track and that it should continue its work with
continued determination and diligence.

Fourthly, I feel empowered by today's debate to
convey a clear message to all concerned that the
Security Council and the United Nations system and
associated systems will maintain their vigilance, their
expectations of all concerned States and parties, and
their determination that support for UNITA's violent
agenda must be ended definitively. Together we intend
that what must be done will be done to bring peace to
all the people of Angola. As Chairman of the sanctions
Committee, I will take this clear message from today's
open debate in the Security Council.

