Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): Since I am
the last speaker and, as it is lunchtime, I will shorten my
statement; the full statement will be circulated.

Let me start by expressing our gratitude to
Under-Secretary-General Ladsous, as well as
Mr. Fedotov, Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), for their
briefings today.

Afghanistan still faces some important challenges
that could derail the country's stabilization and
development, and harm regional and international
security. Terrorism, violence, extremism and
narcotic-drug production and trafficking are among the
major threats that Afghanistan faces. But one important
issue for the region and in the area of the relationship
between Afghanistan and its neighbours is the presence
of foreign forces in the country. that presence has
provided a major security concern over the past decade
for neighbouring countries and the region as a whole.

In analysing the situation on the ground, we
believe that the long-term international engagement in
Afghanistan should not lead to a long-term presence
or permanent foreign military bases or a military and
security presence in Afghanistan. The longer foreign
forces are present, the longer disability will endure.
Of course, the Afghan authorities have assured their
neighbours that such a long- term presence will not
be a security concern for its neighbours. Nevertheless,
in our case, at least, we have experienced incidents
such as the drone transgression into our airspace, and,
obviously, security considerations are a matter that
cannot compromised on.

Another area of ongoing concern is drug production
and traffic. In his statement today, Mr. Fedotov
noted that Afghanistan produces 90 per cent of the
world's opiates. The narcotic drugs originating from
Afghanistan affect not only neighboring countries but
also other countries far away from the region. This
menace has hindered the advancement of the affected
countries towards development and has put at risk their
social cohesion.

At the national level, the Islamic Republic of
Iran has taken sweeping measures to counter drug
trafficking. On the basis of that approach, the Islamic
Republic of Iran has mobilized 30,000 military
troops and law enforcement personnel along the joint
borders with Afghanistan and Pakistan. We have also
reinforced and re-managed the fortifications, facilities
and intelligence control systems in transit and border
checkpoints in order to prevent the entry of trafficking
caravans into the country, and annihilate them in case of
infiltration. More than 400 kilometres of embankments
along the borders, 800 kilometres of deep canals, 90
kilometres of concrete walls, 20 kilometres of barriers
and 140 kilometres of barbed wire fencing are just
some of the control and security measures taken by the
Islamic Republic of Iran along its eastern borders. That
area was visited by Mr. Fedotov during his trip to Iran
in July 2011.

In order for our fight against narcotic drugs to
be effective, there is a need to review regional and
international policies and programmes in order to
overcome shortfalls and effectively counter them in
dealing with such a global problem as narcotics. The
Islamic Republic of Iran once more emphasizes its
strong determination to combat this significant global
problem and expresses its readiness to cooperate with
others to decisively resolve such problems of global
concern.

Regarding regional cooperation and the Tokyo
conference, both of which we fully support, my full
statement will be circulated among my colleagues.

