Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Special Envoy De Mistura for his briefing and for his
dogged efforts - no matter how many obstacles are put
in his way - to seek a way out for the people of Syria
from this abysmal conflict.

We are gathered here at a critical moment.
Resolution 2268 (2016), which we have just adopted and
in which the Security Council endorses the cessation of
hostilities in Syria, offers a genuine opportunity for a
pause, at least in part, in the fighting in one of the most
brutal conflicts the world has seen in a generation, a
conflict that for the past five years the Security Council
and the international community have been unable
to stop. This resolution endorses a set of practical,
concrete steps, along with terms to which the parties
to the conflict must commit, to reduce the violence and
create space for a long overdue political transition.

There is some scepticism as to whether this
cessation of hostilities, which is scheduled to go into
effect in less than an hour, at midnight Damascus time,
will be respected from the outset or, just as important,
whether it will hold with time. That scepticism is more
than reasonable, given previous efforts that the Council
and other multilateral institutions have undertaken to
try to stop the monstrous violence and immeasurable
suffering experienced by the Syrian people. Yet that
record does not change the fact that this is our best
chance to reduce the violence. Today, as in every
previous effort, the only measure that matters is not the
words on the page of this resolution, but whether these
commitments are actually put into practice and whether
these commitments lead to real changes on the ground.

For that to happen, first and foremost, the parties
to the conflict must abide by the terms endorsed
today. To that end, the United States has continued to
consult closely with the major Syrian armed opposition
groups, which have confirmed their acceptance of the
terms of the cessation of hostilities through the High
Negotiations Committee or directly with us. The vast
majority among them are ready to participate in the
cessation provided the Syrian Government, and the
Governments and forces supporting it, abide by their
commitments under the terms. We are therefore deeply
concerned by the continued Syrian and Russian aerial
bombardment of towns across Syria, aerial bombing
that has caused massive displacement and hundreds of
civilian deaths. Many of the towns being hit by Syrian
and Russian bombers are towns such as Daraya, a
suburb of Damascus that is being pummelled up to this
very day, a town that is not held by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant or the Al-Nusra Front. It is hard
to seem serious and sincere about ceasing hostilities
when you ramp up fighting right up to the minute the
cessation of hostilities is to take effect.

Secondly, those countries with influence on the
parties must use it to press the parties to live up to their
commitments. And thirdly, when violations occur, as
inevitably they will, a sober, coordinated response is
critical. The International Syria Support Group (ISSG)
has set up a task force assigned specific steps to address
allegations of non-compliance, including working with
parties to de-escalate violence that could quickly spiral
out of control.

Let us be real. It is going to be extremely challenging,
especially at the outset, to make this work. In a world
of horrific crises, arguably no crisis has done more
to threaten international peace and security or has
inflicted as much human suffering as the conflict in
Syria. We are all now broken records here in the Council
about the fact that this crisis cannot be resolved through
force alone and that it will require a political solution.
We have heard it; we have said it. But today we have an
opportunity. If we can make this cessation of hostilities
hold, which is a very big if, we will take a genuine step
towards that political solution we have been talking
about for so long.

As we all know, if implemented, a cessation of
hostilities would not apply to terrorist groups such as
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, which will
continue to fight. Yet even a partial de-escalation would
make a real difference in the lives of Syrians, and it
would also allow us to expand the reach of humanitarian
access, which, despite the modest gains that have been
made in recent days and weeks, is extremely limited
and extremely inadequate, particularly when it comes to
hard-to-reach or besieged areas, where people continue
to starve to death and die of treatable illnesses owing
to a lack of medicine. Man-made starvation continues,
man-made deaths, because medicine is being stripped
from convoys. Regular, sustained and unimpeded
access must be granted to all Syrians in need, no matter
where they live.

A cessation of hostilities will also help foster
conditions in which Special Envoy De Mistura could
reconvene talks between the parties in Geneva, which is
crucial to working towards the political transition that
offers the only long-term solution to Syria's conflict.
That transition, as we have said all along, must be a
transition away from Bashar Al-Assad, who has lost all
legitimacy to lead. As President Obama said yesterday,
it is clear that after years of his barbaric war against
his own people, including torture and barrel bombs and
sieges and starvation, many Syrians will never stop
fighting until Al-Assad is out of power.

The cessation will not itself ensure that a political
solution is reached, but it does at least create conditions in
which one is possible. Beyond respecting the cessation,
the parties can take other meaningful steps to build
confidence, starting by releasing detainees, especially
women and children, who continue to be subjected to
deplorable treatment and inhumane conditions.

Let me conclude. All are aware that on 11 February
the ISSG issued its statement in Munich, which set out
the initial terms of the cessation of hostilities that is
supposed to go into effect shortly. Not long after the
statement was issued, a group of around a dozen Syrians
huddled in the rain outside a checkpoint in the town of
Kilis, along Turkey's border with Syria. The men are
just a handful of the nearly 4.5 million Syrians who
have fled their country since the conflict began. These
Syrians were actually waiting to go back into Syria in
hopes of retrieving their families and bringing them
to safety in Turkey. A journalist asked them if they
thought that the deal reached in Munich would actually
lead to a pause in the violence, No, they all said, without
hesitation. One of the men, a 25-year-old named Faisal,
who would not give his full name out of fear that his
loved ones still in Syria could be harmed as a result,
said of the ISSG statement, "The deals they make there
are so isolated and detached from this reality here".
Whether this effort at a cessation of hostilities helps to
change that reality, the reality on the ground for people
like Faisal and so many millions of Syrians who have
been through what no human being should ever have
to endure, whether that happens depends in significant
part on what the nations in this Chamber do when the
cessation begins less than an hour from now.

It is true that our actions alone will not determine
whether or not the cessation of hostilities holds. Even
if we all act in good faith, other parties have to power
to sabotage the cessation by their actions. Yet it is also
true that the failure by any one of our nations to live
up to our part of the deal, which includes working to
ensure that the commitments made are honoured,
pressing on the parties within our respective spheres
of influence and making sure that sober, united steps
are taken to de-escalate violations when they occur,
could also result in the failure of the cessation. If this
collapses,we will lose the most tangible opportunity we
have had in a very long time to reduce the suffering
of the Syrian people and to create space for finding a
political solution that will finally bring them peace.
So much depends on what we do. Let us not squander
this chance.

