I thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to brief the Security Council today. I will start with an update on political and security conditions and then touch upon changes to the operations of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) in response to the evolving situation in the country. Most critical right now is progress on the peace process. On the positive side, the transitional Government continues to function, and activities are progressing well within the clusters of ministries headed by the five Vice Presidents. The appointment of state governors has dampened tensions in the regions, with the exception of the historically volatile Upper Nile state, where a deadlock remains with the Government's unwillingness to appoint the opposition's preferred candidate, General Johnson Olony. State ministerial positions were recently agreed, but the appointment of county commissioners - the level below governors - has been delayed by disagreements over the number of counties. Elsewhere, however, progress has been painfully slow. Cabinet meetings occur irregularly, and South Sudanese want to see the President and Vice Presidents meeting and working collectively. There has been almost no movement on the critical area of security sector reform. Force personnel brought together for training have yet to graduate, and those remaining are abandoning the camps owing to food and other shortages. Despite the urging of the Heads of State of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development in July, the Transitional National Legislative Assembly has yet to be reconstituted, and therefore necessary new laws are not being passed and progress on the Constitution has been delayed. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has slowed the implementation of the 2018 Revitalized Peace Agreement in South Sudan, including meeting key benchmarks, but the pandemic is not entirely to blame. We are seeing a reversion to business as usual, where progress on the peace agreement itself limps along. The continuing delays risk pushing elections out well beyond the timeline prescribed in the agreement. That will add to the growing disillusionment among communities about whether the political will exists to give South Sudanese citizens the opportunity to choose their own leaders. Our experience has been that, without significant international pressure, political will does wane. Momentum is therefore urgently needed, particularly to maintain confidence among the signatories. South Sudan is also facing other pressures. Falling oil prices, a lack of financial accountability, delays in paying civil servants and a near doubling in the street exchange rate since March is adding additional pressure on the Government and on families struggling to survive. With high rainfall and the Nile River at 60-year highs, flooding has devastated the centre of the country, with 500,000 people affected, particularly in Lakes and Jonglei states. Humanitarian workers are working incredibly hard to help people living without shelter, food, water and sanitation in the middle of the rainy season. But this humanitarian work has not come without a cost. This year, seven aid workers tragically lost their lives, and another 144 have been evacuated because of subnational violence. There has been an upturn in this conflict resulting from splintering between and within groups. The difference this year is that external political actors are fuelling these local conflicts with military advice and heavy weapons. From January to July, UNMISS documented 575 incidents of subnational conflict - an increase of 300 per cent in comparison to the same period last year. In Jonglei alone, 600 people were killed in six months, women and children were kidnapped and thousands fled their homes as they were looted and torched. The Nuer, Murle and Dinka communities were all victims. But all three groups are also guilty of carrying out crimes against others. While the situation has now been calmed, tensions remain high, and every effort must be made to stop a resurgence. The Government has appointed a high-level committee on Jonglei. Last week, UNMISS also organized a meeting with senior leaders to chart a way forward. We were encouraged by the leaders' willingness to engage with all participants, showing that they understand the cost of going back to war. UNMISS will provide political and logistical support for peacebuilding in Jonglei, including peacekeepers to monitor buffer zones, increasing police capacity and helping with infrastructure development. In Central Equatoria, the National Salvation Front has launched a series of politically motivated attacks. Despite claims that its actions are defensive, civilians and humanitarians are among the casualties of their ambushes. The heavy-handed response of Government security forces has also taken its toll. All parties are signatories to the ceasefire. They should respect this commitment, stop fighting and pull back. In response to local appeals for help, UNMISS deployed peacekeepers to the area, but our troops were blocked by Government forces, despite earlier agreements for the deployment. In the past three weeks, the usual mechanisms through which UNMISS coordinates its movement have seriously deteriorated. COVID-19 can be partly blamed, but the influence of hardliners in the security forces is the principal obstacle. We continue to work cooperatively with the security forces, but we are impressing on the Government that their restrictions on our ability to carry out our mandate are unacceptable. To avoid future confrontation, it is critical that this issue be resolved. The political violence of the past has largely subsided despite delays to the peace agreement. The ceasefire holds, and the unified transitional Government is up and running. UNMISS is looking at this evolving situation and examining how it can better support peace and protect civilians. One area of change springs from last year's report to the Council on the future of protection of civilians sites (S/2019/741). As the report noted, external threats that led to the establishment of protection of civilians sites no longer exist today. For example, the protection of civilians site in Juba has become more of an outer suburb of the town. Residents move back and forth daily to attend schools and university, to shop and go to work. Therefore, in consultation with the Government, non-governmental organizations, donors and internally displaced persons themselves, we have gradually withdrawn troops and police from static duties at the protection of civilians sites in Bor and Wau. That is also likely to occur at the remaining three sites. The spike in subnational violence is occurring in remote areas, not near protection of civilians sites. We therefore have to deploy our forces to provide protection where there is the greatest need. For example, freeing up troops from the protection of civilian sites in Wau and Bor has allowed us to redeploy our forces to hotspots such as Tonj and Jonglei, where people are in immediate danger. Following the gradual withdrawal of peacekeepers, the protection of civilian sites will be redesignated and sovereign control will be with the South Sudanese Government, not the United Nations. Let me be clear. No one will be pushed out or asked to leave when that transition occurs. Humanitarian services will continue. The South Sudanese police will be responsible for law and order. The United Nations police work closely with them to build capacity and, in some areas, are co-locating with them. Responsibility must lie with the Government to help its citizens to return home or find other land to settle. The Government also holds the primary responsibility for protecting the country's citizens and respecting the rights of the displaced. UNMISS, of course, maintains its clear mandate to protect civilians and will intervene if necessary. With our need to respond to isolated outbreaks of fighting across the country, our forces need to be robust, nimble and proactive. To do that, we are looking at innovative ways of deploying our troops to overcome the challenging environment, such as riverine patrols, rapid air transport and all-terrain vehicles. That does not mean more resources. In fact, without tying down large numbers of peacekeepers at protection of civilian sites, we can be more effective, with less. It is about working smarter with the right mix of troops and the right logistics. The foundations for change are under way, including reconfiguring our military, police and civilian components. That is why we welcome the independent strategic review of UNMISS requested by the Security Council. It is an opportunity for us to review our mandate and implement better ways to meet the future demands of South Sudan more effectively and efficiently. No matter where they live, no matter who they are, all South Sudanese hope for peace and prosperity. Our job is to do everything we can to make that dream a reality.
