Mr. Champion (spoke in French): I am very
grateful to the Security Council for having given me the
floor today. I wish to introduce an aspect of our work on
the protection of civilians in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the Strategy to Combat Insecurity in
Beni (SOLIB) in the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF)
territory. The model is not yet well known, and I wish
to thank Assistant Secretary-General Dmitry Titov
for mentioning it to the Council on 20 August (see S/PV.7508).

SOLIB was established in April 2014 to respond
to serious threats and multiple killings in the previous
months inBeni. We were observing increasing insecurity
at that time. In four months, there had been 17 murders,
15 terrorist acts, 14 armed robberies, threats or assault,
and 6 cases of mob justice that had killed 20 and
injured 29. The diagnosis took into account a number
of factors, including the infiltration of local criminals
and accomplices; insufficient coordination between
the Forces armees de la Republique democratique du
Congo and the Congolese National Police (PNC); the
uncontrolled movement of armed police and military
personel, who are poorly paid and poorly trained; the
intra-State and cross-border trafficking of weapons
linked to the illicit exploitation of natural resources;
and the people's loss of trust in the security services.

The Congolese National Police suffer many
shortcomings in Beni territory, as they do in the entire
region. Officers are poorly trained, the infrastructure
needs to be overhauled and facilities are poorly
financed, primarily by the Government and the United
Nations. In that regard, I pay tribute to the courage
and determination of many police officers at all levels
who have shown their skill and determination despite
a situation of extreme deprivation. Progress, while not
very tangible, does exist. The number of deaths during
the presidential elections decreased considerably in
2011 as compared to 2006.

SOLlB was designed in accordance with the
following principles. The joint United Nations
police-PNC undertaking goes beyond the mere
police dimension and takes on a more comprehensive
approach that seekss to involve as many partners as
possible. The Strategy also combines the protection of
civilians and the restoration of State authority towards
the two objectives of strengthening the professional
and operational capabilities of the PNC and ensuring
security and public order through a coordinated
security response from all local actors, be they civilian
or military, Congolese or from the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).

SOLIB is involved in 37 operational, administrative
and logistical activities, including training, mobility
assistance, monitoring and advising; human resources;
rapprochement between the population and the
authorities and listening to their voices; joint security
management; civil-military coordination; and naturally,
strengthening joint, immediate-impact preventive
and law enforcement actions to assist the population.
SOLIB has benefitted from the performance leadership
of the United Nations police, including the Chief of
Staff's office in Goma and Beni, and regular Visits from
the United Nations police monitoring teams.

The MONUSCO police are committed to providing
specific responses to reduce threats to the population.
I will mention a few. On the authorization of the
Mayor, the SOLIB team coordinator participates in the
meetings of the Urban Security Committee. Meetings
have been organized between the PNC and civil society,
working to ensure community security. Three seminars
have been held by non-governmental organizations on
community policing and human rights. And we have
formally collected and processed information on armed
groups.

Our experience in 2014 on the police use of drones
has shown their added value in public security, but
it has not been currently implemented. The United
Nations police is also involved for 16 months in very
significant efforts to secure logistical support for the
Congolese National Police, for example by providing
$7,000 for two SOLIB telephone hotlines to be used by
the population to call for help or inform the police.

Concerning the Rights Up Front initiative, in
November 2014 we were able to act in accordance
with those principles. The formed police unit could
not, in accordance with United Nations regulations,
intervene in Beni because its initial training was not
complete. Given the disturbances, the United Nations
police decided on the immediate use of the unit, which
contributed to the security of the population.

Some results have been achieved. We have set up a
coordination, command and control centre linked to the
two SOLIB hotlines to improve police response. Over 16
months, we have had 3,000 calls that have led to 1,000
interventions, 700 interrogations and 7 search-and-raid
operations. The total number of arrests and individuals
brought tojustice amounts to 1,500 in Beni - including
more than 300 soldiers and police officers and a dozen
ADF and Mayi-Mayi rebels - and 200 in Oicha. The
population and the authorities welcome this work and
its security benefits on a regular basis. We follow up
through a regular monthly satisfaction survey. The
elected officials have noted an improvement in the
climate of trust with the Congolese National Police and
now welcome meetings with civil society organizations.
The PNC authorities in North Kivu want to extend the
model to several cities, including Goma.

The United Nations police faces a number of
challenges and limitations - such as the complexity
of partnerships and coordination, the mobilization of
all kinds of resources, the transformation in the United
Nations police and MONUSCO, further developing
command and control, and performance guidance - that
it is seeking to overcome with the means at its disposal.

Attaining greater effectiveness in the United
Nations police will require certain measures. The
swifter and more resolute implementation of resolution
2185 (2014) would respond to many of our difficulties.
The integration ofthe United Nations police operational
strategy component, in particular, would facilitate the
tactical performance of our tasks. The police component
must continue to implement its strategy Forward to 2020
within the strategic guidance framework. The effort
on behalf of SOLIB was especially burdensome. The
United Nations police needs multidisciplinary, human,
technical, operational, methodological, logistical,
financial, administrative and performance assistance.

To conclude, the Congolese National Police are
in a delicate situation. No miracles can be carried out
without flexibility support. We must act beyond simple
advice and review. Finally, the protection of civilians
requires determination, capacities and resources, which
is as true for the Congolese National Police as for the
United Nations.

