Mr. Deng (South Sudan): Permit me to thank
you, Madam President, and the other members of the
Security Council for giving us this opportunity to
speak on an issue of great importance to our country.

As this is the first time I speak in the Council under
your leadership, Madam, I would like to congratulate
you on assuming the presidency of the Council for this
month and to pledge our full support and cooperation
to you and your team. I would also like to acknowledge
the role of your predecessor in successfully leading the
Council last month.

Let me begin by reaffirming that the Government
of the Republic of South Sudan is fully committed
to the implementation of the recently signed peace
agreement. President Salva Kiir Mayardit, in his recent
statement to the nation and to the National Legislative
Assembly, reiterated his commitment to implementing
the agreement in letter and spirit. He urged members of
the Assembly to honour their obligation to the people of
South Sudan byjoining hands with him in implementing
the agreement in order to put an end to the suffering
of the people of South Sudan, restore normalcy to the
country and deliver services to the people.

The process of the implementation of the agreement
has indeed begun and is under way. The Government of
the Republic of South Sudan started withdrawing its
forces to within a 25-kilometre radius of the capital city
of Juba, as stipulated by the peace agreement under the
security arrangements.

On 27 November, the Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission (J MEC) Chair, Mr. Festus
Mogae, former President of the Republic of Botswana,
officially opened its offices in Juba. On 28 November,
we welcomed our brothers and sisters who are former
detainees back home from Nairobi and await the coming
of our brothers and sisters from the Sudan People's
Liberation Movement/Army in Opposition, whom we
expect to return soon. The arrival of the aforementioned
persons back to Juba is a very important step, as it will
help build confidence and a measure oftrust after many
months of hostilities.
The President, in his inspiring words to the nation,
called on all of its citizens to welcome their returning
brothers and sisters with open arms and hearts, to
forgive and forget the bitterness of the war and to go
forward as one people and one nation.

The Government of South Sudan stands ready to
form the Transitional Government of National Unity as
soon as all our brothers and sisters who are stakeholders
in the peace agreementjoin us in Juba, hopefully soon.
Despite allegations of ceasefire Violations on both
sides, there is reason to believe that all are interested
in ending the violence and rebuilding the nation,
united rather than divided by what should be enriching
diversity.

As much as the Government of South Sudan
is committed to the implementation of the peace
agreement, it is bound to fall short due to financial
constraints and lack of sufficient resources. For these
reasons, we call upon all parties to the agreement and
the international community to come in and support
the implementation of the agreement so as to ensure
sustainable peace, in which we all have a stake.

We sincerely appreciate the efforts being made
by the international community to alleviate the
humanitarian suffering of our people. But while a
great deal has already been done, as the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2015/902) indicates, the situation
remains dire and much more needs to be done not only
by the United Nations, but also by the international
community, donors and friends of South Sudan.

During this period, when the Council is about to
negotiate the renewal of the mandate of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), we
urge that the United Nations consider reintroducing
capacity-building that is more targeted towards the
implementation of the agreement. The other action to be
considered could be the inclusion of the Peacebuilding
Commission, which would complement the work of
UNMISS and JMEC.

Indeed, one sees encouraging proposals in the report
of the Secretary-General on the review of the UNMISS
mandate (S/2015/899). Many areas are beginning to
emerge that indicate a return to capacity-building,
although this is conditional on progress in the peace
process and the availability of resources. This calls for
support from the wider international community. As
the Secretary-General indicates in paragraph 79 of his
report:

"UNMISS is not in a position to deliver all the
support necessary to ensure the success ofthe peace
process. Substantial resources will be required
to take forward the framework for democratic
transformation, good governance, justice and
reconciliation, reparations and healing and early
recovery provided for in the peace agreement.
Technical and financial assistance must be provided
to the Transitional Government of National Unity
in support of peace. I would encourage donors
to support the implementation of the programme
of transition in a coordinated manner. The dire
humanitarian situation in the country must not be
forgotten. I appeal to donors to continue to fund the
humanitarian effort, as long as needs persist."

As we begin the implementation of the peace
agreement, the Government of South Sudan and
UNMISS should jointly find a way to encourage
civilians in the protection sites to return to their
villages, as the current status quo cannot be sustained,
as shown by the incidents that have taken place within
those camps and the poor living conditions due to
overcrowding, because these sites were never intended
to hold such large numbers, nor were they meant
to continue being used for such a long period. Since
UNMISS itself admits to the challenges facing it in
providing protection within its camps, there is an urgent
need to broaden the protection of civilians outside the
United Nations camps to the broader population.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate my
Government's commitment to implementing the peace
agreement in earnest and to working closely with the
United Nations and the international community at
large to address the challenges facing the country. We
also hope that the Government of South Sudan will
be involved in the negotiation of the new UNMISS
mandate, to be renewed on 15 December. In this
connection, we note with satisfaction the Secretary-
General's statement that, in preparing the report, his
Special Representative has consulted with a number
of stakeholders on the findings and recommendations,
including a number of named Cabinet ministers. This
process should to be encouraged and broadened.

