Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): In
following my Gabonese colleague, I will extend this
French-speaking oasis. That is not to say, however, that
everything else is desert.

First of all, I should like to thank all those who
have spoken for their briefings, and I welcome the
initiative of the Portuguese presidency.

Since the February 2010 debate on cross-cutting
threats (see S/PV.6277), which my country proposed,
some progress has been made in addressing those
issues in the Council. I am thinking in particular of
resolution 1983 (2011) on security and AIDS, on the
debate organized by Gabon on drug trafficking and
organized transnational crime (see S/PV.6565), and on
the debate organized by Germany on climate change
(see S/PV.6587). Those advances are a sign of the
Council's interest in these issues. It is indeed our
responsibility to anticipate the consequences of those
new threats for international peace and security.

I thank the director of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) for his briefing. By
undermining States' capacities for governance and
economic development, illicit trafficking and organized
crime weaken State structures and destabilize entire
regions. The Council has witnessed this for itself with
respect to Haiti, Afghanistan and Guinea-Bissau.
Particular attention should already be focused on the
Sahel region in View of the worsening security
situation in that area, which has been infected by
multiple forms of trafficking. It is time for us to
develop a Sahelian strategy.

The regional programmes of the UNODC
effectively contribute to the comprehensive, joint and
integrated approach that the Council hopes will prevent
conflicts, as the statements made earlier by my
colleagues indicate. France, for its part, is actively
promoting such a strategy. The Group of Eight
meetings on cocaine and the Paris Pact of early 2012
fall within the framework outlined by the Council
through a series of decisions. Further, my country calls
for the universalization of the Palermo Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime and its
Protocols, of the United Nations Convention against
Corruption and of other instruments to combat drugs
and psychotropic substances.

I also wish to thank the Director-General of the
World Health Organization (WHO). The fight against
natural and accidental risks and against threats requires
common action to strengthen all stages of monitoring
and alert systems, rapid response preparation and
health crisis management.

Over the course of the past decade, we have made
outstanding progress in preparing for and preventing
the risk of pandemics. Eleven years ago, resolution
1308 (2000) recognized that the AIDS pandemic was a
threat to international peace and security. Last June, we
noted the degree to which AIDS constitutes a handicap
to stabilization in post-conflict situations, above all
because the pandemic affects women first and foremost
in their fundamental role in the reconstruction phase.
The Council has also called for concerted effort against
the spread of AIDS during conflict due to the rise in
sexual violence as a weapon of war.

The WHO remains the lead manager for health
security in crisis situations, above all in times of

conflict or in their aftermath. The WHO should also
pursue its monitoring of the risk of epidemics and
pandemics by relying on the network of contact points
it has established, and it should oversee the revised
International Health Regulations, which have been
legally binding on all Member States since they entered
into force in 2007. The Pandemic Influenza
Preparedness Framework approved last May by the
World Health Assembly could be used to advantage for
other kinds of epidemics.

Finally, as the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees reminded us today, the
displacement of populations is the result of complex
causes and should claim a greater share of the
Council's attention. The situation of refugees and
displaced persons as a result of conflicts can serve as a
deterrent to the re-establishment of stability. Climate
change, which is one of many factors that influence the
decision to migrate, should be taken into greater
account in conflict prevention.

In a more general sense, as July's debate
reminded us, the threat of climate change concerns us
all. It affects small island States, food security, water
resources and the viability of coastal regions. My
country wishes and hopes that the Durban Conference
will give an operational content to the agreements
negotiated at Cancun, so that the international
community can prove that it is capable of combating
threats while there is still time.

France hopes that the Council will remain
invested in these issues, which place international
peace and security in mortal peril and have
consequences on our work. France believes that the
Council should discuss these questions in a regular and
systematic fashion.

