Mr. Martinez Vazquez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
It is an honour to address the Security Council. I thank
the Lithuanian presidency for organizing this meeting
and I believe that it is very judicious to incorporate the
perspectives ofMinistries ofthe Interior, given the clear
responsibility they shoulder in the fight against the
threat ofterrorism. This is a very positive initiative that
highlights something that we have also observed in the
European Union - the very close relationship between
domestic security and foreign policy. This meeting
therefore represents both an obligation and opportunity
to reaffirm our political commitment against terrorism
and to pursue our efforts to implement resolution 2178
(2014), which was adopted in September last year.

Spain's experience reveals that, with considerable
effort and sacrifice on the part of society, it is possible
to defeat terrorism and radicalization, but it requires
a firm political and social commitment and decisive
and ongoing law enforcement and judicial action.
By adopting such a comprehensive View, and while
upholding the rule of law, Spain has been able to defeat
the terrorism perpetrated by Euskadi Ta Askatasuna
and other local terrorist groups. Spain also experienced
the scourge of international terrorism in a very painful
manner with the attack of 11 March 2004, which made
us the European country with the highest number of
deaths caused by terrorism.

On the basis of our experience in the fight against
terrorism, we have come to a number of conclusions.
First, a comprehensive response from all State
authorities is needed, as is robust and well-constructed
international cooperation. Secondly, the fight against
terrorism requires the utmost political and social
legitimacy. That is why Spain recently adopted a State
agreement to strengthen unity in defence of liberty and
in the fight against terrorism, thereby guaranteeing
optimum consensus and united political action.
Thirdly, the fight against terror should not focus solely
on repression; there is also a need to rely on intensive
preventive action and a counter-narrative that rejects
the language of radicalization. That must always be
undertaken in the presence of and with proactive
testimony and input of victims of terrorism.

We are facing terrorism with very new aspects,

necessitating a flexible and effective political response.
First of all, there must be a law enforcement response.
Since 2004, the year of the brutal attack in Spain, we
have carried out 124 operations to combat international
terrorism, resulting in a total of 568 arrests. Since late
2011, the Government I represent has carried out 38
operations in Spain and made 104 arrests.

We all know, however, that a law enforcement
response is insufficient. We are at a decisive moment
in building trust, sharing information and enhancing
our cooperation capabilities. That is why we in Spain
have stressed the need to work with the international
community to identify those displaced terrorist fighters
who return or will return to any of our countries more
radicalized, trained for combat and often with very
clear instructions to carry out attacks. We must make
a resolute political commitment in the light of that
common threat.

That is why, last autumn, the Spanish Ministry of
the Interior took a very strategic decision, in line with
resolution 2178 (2014), to merge its coordination and
criminal intelligence capabilities with the establishment
of a new intelligence centre against terrorism and
organized crime in order to combine our capacities to
combat those two criminal phenomena. In only a few
months, we have identified 200 links among different
areas, demonstrating that there is a relationship
between international terrorism and organized crime.
As we know, that fact is key to efforts to combat their
financing methods effectively.

Similarly, earlier this year, the Spanish Government
approved its national strategic plan to combat violent
radicalization. It is a multidisciplinary tool for detecting
outbreaks of violent radicalization and for taking timely
action against them from different perspectives - the
social, educational and communication - including
producing counter-narratives that serve as an effective
response against terrorist propaganda.

We have also been proactive with regard to
resolution 2178 (2014), which includes, among the best
practices identified by the Global Countererrorism
Forum, action within penal facilities. Last year, we
launched a new programme to prevent radicalization in
such facilities, with a View to preventing inmates from
taking advantage of their time in prison to recruit new
followers, increase their own radicalization and that
of those around them or to interact with other cells of
terrorist groups or common criminals.

Moreover, on 2 February, the Prime Minister
and the leader of the main opposition party signed a
State pact to combat international terrorism, which
they invited the entire political spectrum to join. The
pact has already borne preliminary fruit, by way of a
thorough reform of the penal code, passed with broad
parliamentary support, that criminalizes new behaviors
as crimes of terrorism, as requiresd by resolutionn 2178
(2014). Among other things, it also delinks the crime
of terrorism from membership in a given terrorist
organization, so as to effectively prosecute lone wolves.
It also addresses indoctrination and military training,
specifically including passive indoctrination and
training, with special mention of such via the Internet.
We also explicitely criminalize the phenomenon of
foreign terrorist fighters. And the criminal code now
also covers recruitment and training, encitement
to terrorist acts, defending terrorism, and victim
humiliation.

At the moment, we are modifying our criminal
procedure act in order to ensure greater certainty with
regard to technological research. Specifically to that
end, we will update provisions concerning undercover
agents with respect to future activities under assumed
identity in the context of closed communication
networks in order to allow the recording of images and
conversations when necessary.

On another front, in urder to comply with the
requirement in resolution 2178 (2014) to prevent
terrorists from crossing borders by ensuring effective
border controls, we are aware of the fact that we
should strengthen the security of our land, sea and air
borders. As part of that effort to improve security at
our borders and prevent the flow of foreign terrorist
fighters, Spain actively advocates for the adoption of
the European Union policy on such fighters coming
from our continent. That is our responsibility as a State,
which has suffered a great deal as has always remained
at the forefront of the fight against terrorism in all its
manifestations.

That is also the message that we uphold in
international forums that serve as our point of reference,
such as the United Nations, the European Union and
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, as well as in regional forums where we see
international cooperation as a vital and irreplaceable
tool. To cite the most recent meetings in that regard, I
would mention those held by the group of five Sahelian
States and by the conference of 10 countries of the
Western Mediterranean.

I should like to reiterate my gratitude to the
presidency of the Council for affording ministers
of the interior this opportunity to share their views.
The capacity for political commitment is the measure
of our strength to face the threat of foreign terrorist
fighters. I am therefore convinced that this political
momentum will imbue the spirit of the meeting we
will hold in Madrid next July, which will be devoted
to counteracting the flow of foreign terrorist fighters.
It will be an honour to welcome participants to Spain.

