Mr. Raytchev (Bulgaria): First of all, I would
like to join previous speakers in extending our thanks
to you, Mr. President, for organizing this timely
meeting of the Security Council. We welcome this
opportunity to exchange views on the situation in
Guinea-Bissau. I would also like to thank the
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. David
Stephen, for his detailed briefing. We also welcome the
participation and contributions of Ambassador Kumalo,
in his capacity as the Chairman of the Economic and
Social Council's Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Guinea-
Bissau, and of the representative of Gambia on behalf
of the Group of Friends of Guinea-Bissau.

Bulgaria fully associates itself with the statement
of the Greek Presidency of the European Union
adopted on 18 June 2003. I would like to make just a
few comments in my national capacity.

My country, like others, is concerned about the
political and institutional instability in Guinea-Bissau,
as well as about the worsening economic and social
problems in that country. The troubling information
that continues to emerge about the human rights
situation is of particular concern to us. We agree that
every effort should be made by the national leadership
of Guinea-Bissau to make sure that the peace-building
process is put on the right track.

We concur with the Secretary-General's view that
the forthcoming legislative elections are regarded as a
crucial test of Guinea-Bissau's nascent democratic
process. The importance of organizing timely, free and
fair legislative elections cannot be overemphasized.
Bulgaria fully supports the principles set out in the
European Union Statement on Guinea-Bissau for
organizing transparent and democratic elections. We
expect that the authorities of Guinea-Bissau will take
the necessary action in order to ensure equal
opportunities for all participants in the forthcoming
elections. We welcome the readiness of the donor
community to provide assistance for holding the
elections if the Government of Guinea-Bissau adheres
to internationally recognized legal procedures.

Bulgaria shares the view that respect for the
principles of democracy, the rule of law and good
governance are essential for the political and economic
development of Guinea-Bissau. We express our
concern with regard to the weakening of the rule of law
and of the independence of the judiciary system, as
well as with regard to infringements upon freedom of
expression and access to information. In our View,
concrete steps need to be taken at an early stage in
order to address this situation. In that regard, we
express the hope that the Constitution will be
promulgated and that the President and Vice-Presidents
of the Supreme Court will be elected as soon as
possible.

We note with concern that the human rights
situation in Guinea-Bissau has become more fragile.
The report of the Secretary-General contains
worrisome information regarding that issue. While we
note that the reopening of the independent Radio
Bombolom was a step in the right direction, we believe
that there is much to be done in order to restore a
climate of trust and national reconciliation in the
country and to ensure that human rights and civil
liberties are fully respected.

Bulgaria appreciates the involvement of the
United Nations system in the efforts of the
international community to address the peace-building
needs of Guinea-Bissau. We are grateful for the
contribution made by the Security Council's Ad Hoc
Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution
in Africa, which agreed last year on a set of useful
recommendations on Guinea-Bissau. We also highly
appreciate the work done within the framework of the
Economic and Social Council to help the peace-
building process in the country. It is our hope that the
authorities of Guinea-Bissau will respond in a positive
manner to the partnership approach defined by the
Economic and Social Council's Ad Hoc Advisory
Group on Guinea-Bissau.

In conclusion, I would like to express our
appreciation for the role played by the Representative
of the Secretary-General for Guinea-Bissau, Mr. David
Stephen, and the entire staff of the United Nations
Peace-building Support Office in Guinea-Bissau in
supporting the consolidation of democracy and
promoting the rule of law and the protection of human
rights. We also appreciate the draft text of the
presidential statement prepared by the delegation of
France, and are ready to support it.

