Mr. Musambachime (Zambia): On behalf of my
delegation, let me congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency for the month of October.
I also congratulate your predecessor, Ambassador
Levitte, and thank him for the manner in which he led
the Council in September.

My delegation wishes to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important meeting on
the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We also express our gratitude and appreciation for the
ninth report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC). We welcome the
recommendations contained in the report. We also wish
to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Ngongi, for his very important and useful
introductory statement. We commend the work of
MONUC in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

My delegation is encouraged to note that the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
remains favourable and that the ceasefire in the country
has been holding since January 2001. We commend the
parties, to whom we give credit for their commitment
to the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement and to the
realization of peace and stability not only in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, but in the region as
a whole.

My delegation commends the Republic of
Namibia for withdrawing all its troops from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We also welcome
the withdrawal of some troops by Uganda. My
delegation views the withdrawal of foreign troops from
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as the
separation and redeployment of troops, as very
significant progress in the overall efforts to bring peace
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We urge
those parties whose forces still remain in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to take the
necessary steps expected of them by the international
community - that is, to begin and accelerate
preparations for their withdrawal from the territory of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. This will
engender confidence and trust in the peace process.

We welcome the Secretary-General's
recommendation to the Security Council of the
authorization of the deployment of phase III of
MONUC in order to sustain the momentum in the
peace process. It is important that this is done as soon
as possible in order to avoid a vacuum, inertia and
distrust in the peace process.

The holding of the inter-Congolese dialogue is of
crucial importance; it is indispensable to the successful
implementation of the Lusaka Agreement. We
commend the facilitator, Sir Ketumile Masire, for his
efforts to ensure that the dialogue takes place. We urge
the Congolese parties to give Sir Ketumile their fullest
cooperation in this regard. In the same vein, we
reiterate the appeal to the international community to
continue providing the necessary financial and
logistical support to the facilitator to enable him to
carry his important task to a successful conclusion.

My delegation notes with regret that the long-
awaited meeting in Addis Ababa this month did not
produce the necessary results. We hope that issues
relating to representation and funding will be resolved
by the time the next meeting takes place in order for
the Congolese parties to concentrate on more
substantive matters relating to the future of the Congo.
We urge them to set aside their partisan and regional
interests and to demonstrate their continuing
commitment to the inter-Congolese dialogue in the
interest of their country and all the Congolese people,
who yearn for the peace that has eluded them for so
many years.

We are, however, pleased to note the eagerness
and readiness on all sides for the inter-Congolese
dialogue to be reconvened as soon as possible. It is in
this regard that my delegation would like to express
our deep thanks and appreciation to the Government of
the Republic of South Africa for the offer to host the
inter-Congolese talks next month and for its
commitment to bear the larger part of the cost. This is a
selfless sacrifice by the Government and people of
South Africa in the search for peace. It is our hope and
conviction that the Congolese parties, including all the
political parties and civil society, will seize that
opportunity to map out a new political order for their
country without further delay.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to
welcome the presence of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mr. Leonard She
Okitundu, who, in these very difficult times, has taken
the trouble to travel and be with us. We thank him most
sincerely for his comprehensive and detailed statement
to this Council on the situation in the Congo.

