Mr. Madani: It is indeed a privilege to have this
opportunity to speak to this body. I wish to thank the
Russian Federation for scheduling this important and
timely open debate during its presidency ofthe Security
Council, in conjunction with the high-level segment of
the General Assembly, on the settlement of conflicts

in the Middle East and North Africa and countering

terrorist threat in the region.

At the outset, let me align myself, as Secretary-
General of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
(OIC), with the statement delivered by His Excellency
Sheikh Sabah Khalid Al Hamad Al Sabah, First Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
State of Kuwait, in Kuwait's capacity as the Chair of the
OIC Ministerial Council.

As a committed and strategic partner of the United
Nations system and of the international community, the
OIC exerts every possible effort to bring remedies to the
intertwined and daunting challenges the Middle East
and North Africa region faces. We sincerely believe
that, while we assume responsibility as the international
community to provide solutions and remedies, we
can only be on a better footing if we can honestly
and properly diagnose the historical backgrounds,
roots causes and dynamics that have brought about
all the disasters and failures that we have to deal with
today. We must analyse whether the international and
regional peace and security mechanisms are capable of
overcoming today's hurdles.

The remnants of colonialism, ill-conceived Cold
War strategies, letting the Palestinian people suffer
the consequences of an unjust and illegal occupation,
and the invasion of Iraq, which devastated the social
fabric of the country with dangerous regional fallouts,
all created a climate whereby the region is unable to
invest in human capital. Millions of Iraqis sought haven
andjobs outside of Iraq long before we heard of Daesh.
The region's resources have been spent on the purchase
of arms, to the great satisfaction of those trotting the
globe on behalf of the arms industries.

The paralysis in the region, the absence of a
paradigm among its countries for peaceful coexistence
and the intellectual malaise that took over a Muslim
world intent on regurgitating, instead of reinvigorating,
its traditions, cultural expressions and intellectual
discourse, coupled with the absence of international
collective political will to tackle the conflicts in the
Middle East, and what seems to be, if the members
allow me to say, chronic divisions within the Council,
have allowed such menaces in the region to continue
and reach the proportions we are here to contemplate
today. Therefore, where should we look for a way out?
Those who see Islam as the source of division and
violence and search for a core a structure within Islam
that lead Muslims, just because they are Muslims,
to division and violence, simply ignore history and
the story of the great Muslim civilization. They also
overlook a century full of wars and ethnic conflicts and
alienation, which we all carry as a heavy inheritance
of humankind where Muslims have been mostly the
victims. Also, those who make the assumption that this
region is self-destructive by nature gloss over the great
games or interests that play on the stage of the region,
a region that has rarely been left alone to develop and
mature and create its own institutions.

Instead of taking custody of the region, we must
address the multifaceted dimensions of its conflicts,
listen to its people and remember the hardship, the
recent history that led to what we have now in Iraq,
Syria and Libya. Within that context, the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation has initiated, is initiating and
will continue to initiate specific projects that focus on
such understanding in order to address the political
and socioeconomic contexts that bring forth conditions
conducive to conflict and the need to counter all types
of radical extremist discourse in order to delegitimize
the Violent and manipulative acts, whether they be
based on ideology or claims of cultural superiority.
They address also the underlying causes of sectarian
violence, the attempts to politicize the sectarian
differences and to put undue emphasis on sects as the
essence of identity - and also to always remember
and consider, in the history of all movements, whether
liberation movements or others, the potential of external
actors penetrating terrorist and extremist groups for the
purpose of serving their own political agendas.

Today is the day that finally the flag of Palestine
flies high at the United Nations premises. This jubilant
development is a reflection of the overwhelming majority
of the international community in support of the just
cause and inalienable rights of the Palestinian people,
without which radicalization, frustration, humiliation
and the sense of historic betrayal will remain deep in
the conscious of the region and its people.

