Mr. Moussa (spoke in Arabic): Mr. President, at
the outset, I should like to pay tribute to your wise
leadership of the difficult negotiations that led to the
convening of this meeting of the Security Council to
consider the situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories.

This situation has deteriorated, indeed, escalated
through the continued building of Israeli settlements as
well as the effect of such settlement activities on a
comprehensive peace settlement, between Israel and
Palestine, and also between Arab countries and Israel.

(spoke in English)

Two years ago, in September 2006, at the request
of the League of Arab States, the Council convened
with the goal of reviving the peace process which was
paralysed and ineffective. That meeting was held at the
ministerial level and recorded a clear consensus on the
necessity of reviving the peace process with the
express goal of establishing a viable Palestinian State
in the West Bank and Gaza, with, of course, East
Jerusalem as its capital.
3
The meeting also recorded unanimous support for
reviving peace negotiations aimed at reaching a
comprehensive peace that would put an end to the
occupation of the Arab lands and lead to the
establishment of normal relations between Arabs and
Israelis so that both sides can live in peace and
security.

That initiative marked the second peace proposal
that the Arab side had undertaken after the Arab
initiative of 2002. Our efforts led to the revival of the
peace process. This time we were heeded by the
current United States Administration, and hence came
the invitation to the Annapolis Conference where four
objectives were underlined.

The first objective was the reaffirmation of
President Bush's promise to have a viable Palestinian
State established by the end of this year, 2008. The
second objective was the resumption of active
negotiations between the Palestinians and the Israelis.
The third was to achieve an immediate and complete
halt of settlement activity, as was very clearly specified
in the Road Map. The fourth objective was to achieve a
comprehensive peace that includes all three tracks:
Palestinian, Syrian and Lebanese. I would have hoped
that both Syrians and Lebanese would have had a voice
today at this meeting.

Regrettably, most of those objectives have not
been attained. First of all, three months are left in 2008
and there is no evidence that the establishment of the
promised Palestinian State is anywhere near. Secondly,
negotiations have not produced any agreement.
Nothing has been written or formally proposed. The
Israeli side has completely refused to put anything into
written form. So, the result of those negotiations
remains in the negative realm.

This confirms the absence of political will on the
Israeli side to accept the prospect of a real and viable
Palestinian State on an equal footing with Israel. It
seems that the objective is to resort to sessions of
photo opportunities and protracted meetings as a
substitute for the proactive and productive negotiations
that are required for achieving peace.

The continuation of this situation will have
serious negative repercussions on regional security as
well as on the prospect of a comprehensive Arab-Israeli
peace, which is the goal of the Arab side.
Furthermore, while the Palestinian and Israeli
representatives were engaged in those sessions, the
Israelis were busy building settlements and changing
the demographic composition and geographic character
of the Palestinian territories, thus rendering the
negotiations irrelevant.

Thirdly, as for the understanding in Annapolis
that settlement activity shall stop, that the so-called
outposts shall be removed, that hundreds of the
roadblocks that make the daily life of the Palestinian
miserable shall be lifted: not one of those commitments
has been honoured. Not one. It should be noted that
those commitments were part of the first phase of the
Road Map.

As for the comprehensive nature of the peace
process, and although we follow with interest the
current Syrian-Israeli indirect talks under Turkish
auspices, many of us do not really entertain much hope
of achieving significant progress, because of the same
reasons: Israel's refusal to assume the responsibilities
of peace and its greed for territory and settlements.

We came to the Council today to underscore that
the consolidation and escalation of the settlement
policies and practices in the occupied territories have
reached a point at which they are capable of killing any
hope for a viable Palestinian State. How can we expect
a viable State in territories dissected by illegal
settlements, threatened by violent settlers, and divided
by roads dedicated to settlers and settlements alone, at
the expense of Palestinian territorial integrity,
adjacency and economic and social viability? How can
we expect a viable State with the continued Israeli
practices in and around Jerusalem, including
excavations at the holy sites, and at Bab el-Mughrabi
in particular, and other construction projects around
Al-Aqsa Mosque, in clear violation of international
law, including humanitarian law and the Fourth Geneva
Convention?

We see the hopes for a fair peace evaporating
because of the lack of intent and political will of the
Israeli political elite and ruling class. We see prospects
for a viable Palestinian State diminishing because of
the irresponsible and frantic policy of building
settlements. Settlements are entirely illegal.
Unfortunately, that Israeli policy has been allowed to
come into being and to continue unabated by the
immunity given to Israeli practices vis-a-vis
international law and protected by complacency.
We came to the Council to caution and warn that
the current situation cannot lead to anything but chaos,
the unleashing of violence, the promotion of hatred and
the disappearance of the remaining vestiges of the
spirit of peace. I wish to stress before this Council that
the settlement activities in the occupied territories have
made the Palestinian State a mere mirage that serves as
a moving carrot offered to the Arabs to keep running
after until they discover the illusion and that there is no
place for a Palestinian State. That sinister scenario has
made some in several circles start looking for
alternatives to the dream of the two-State solution.

Having outlined the aforementioned, I wish to
reiterate that we, the Arab community of nations,
continue until now to abide by the terms of our peace
initiative. We continue to offer the hand of peace to the
Israelis. We invite the Israeli people, who should be
stakeholders of peace like all of us on the Arab side, to
reconsider and revisit the Arab offer of peace contained
in the Arab peace initiative that was formally presented
to the Government of Israel not so long ago by the two
representatives of the League of Arab States, the
foreign ministers of Egypt and Jordan. We call on the
Israeli people again, as stakeholders of peace, to
mobilize against the destructive settlement policy. We
call on them to have faith in peace as the gateway to
security and prosperity, and for stable existence and
coexistence with the Arab world.

Finally, we need no more bloodshed. We need no
more occupation. We need no more settlements and no
more civilian casualties. What we need is more
seriousness in tackling the Arab-Israeli conflict. What
we need is an honest broker and honest brokering to
lead the work.

Let me end by stating that, in the coming several
weeks, if our efforts to rescue the peace process do not
succeed and should prove to be an exercise in futility,
we shall come to the Security Council again for action.
The Council is owned by the international
community- by all of us - and cannot remain
indifferent or shirk its responsibilities as the principal
organ of the United Nations responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security. It is
the responsibility of the Council to protect the
legitimate rights of peoples, and in this case the
legitimate rights of the Palestinian people. Any
hesitation by the Council would open the door for other
venues to be probed. We shall no longer follow
illusions, believe promises or tolerate insults to our
intelligence and to our self-respect.

