Mr. Mwakawago (United Republic of Tanzania): I
am most grateful for the opportunity to address the Security
Council. Let me begin, Sir, by extending to your country
my delegation's sincere congratulations on Botswana's
assumption this month of the presidency of a Council that
is about to take a very important decision on the situation
in Angola. Tanzania is confident that under your and your
Ambassador's able leadership the Council will succeed in
discharging its onerous responsibilities for international
peace and security. I should also like to extend our
appreciation to your Ambassador's predecessor, Ambassador
Emilio Cardenas of Argentina, for the fine work he did
during January.

For more than 30 years, peace has eluded the people
of Angola. The devastating impact of the war on the
people's lives and on the country's economic and social
infrastructure has been immense, claiming the highest
casualty rate of any conflict in the world - 1,000 deaths
daily. As a result, hundreds of thousands have perished,
thousands have been crippled for life, and nearly
3.5 million people have been displaced, made refugees or
orphaned. At the same time, most of Angola's useful land
has been turned into a wide expanse of dangerous
minefields.

It is against this backdrop that the international
community has always applauded any move, especially
since the Bicesse Accords, that appeared to promise the
people of Angola some respite and an opportunity for
peace. Therefore, the signing of the Lusaka Protocol on
20 November 1994 must rightly be seen as the culmination
of the arduous and protracted efforts of the international
community in support of the negotiating process aimed at
bringing about a lasting peace in Angola.

The Security Council meets today to follow up on the
progress made since the adoption of Security Council
resolution 966 (1994) of last December, two months ago
today. Fortunately, unlike in the past, the current report of
the Secretary-General (S/1995/97 and Add.1) bears good
tidings on Angola. This is a refreshing departure from the
all-too-familiar gloomy political and military picture
painted of the Angolan situation. Even with a measure of
guarded optimism, it is the view of the Secretary-
General that there is - and I quote -

"improved cooperation on the ground with troops of
the Government of Angola and the Uniao Nacional
para la Independencia Total de Angola (UNITA)".
(S/1995/97, para. 3)

The Secretary-General's observations were
reaffirmed today by Mr. Venancio de Moura, External
Relations Minister of Angola, when he made his
important statement in this Chamber. It is clear that the
people of Angola are tired of war and very much want to
give the Lusaka Protocol a chance so that they can at last
live in peace and engage in national reconciliation and the
reconstruction of their rich country.

In this connection, Tanzania commends most warmly
the Government of Angola for persistently seeking to
negotiate in good faith and for offering to contribute in
kind towards an expanded United Nations presence in
Angola. Indeed, we have come this far in the Angolan
peace process largely because Luanda has been very
accommodating. We equally welcome on board UNITA
forces which, like the Government, have indicated their
commitment to full respect for and implementation of the
Lusaka Protocol, the Bicesse Accords and the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council. We hope that there
will be no backtracking along this path.

The very presence in our midst of the Organization
of African Unity (OAU) ministerial delegation is a firm
demonstration of Africa's solidarity with the people of
Angola and of its desire to contribute to the peace
process. This is also an opportune moment to reaffirm
that the climate in Angola is inexorably headed towards
a lasting settlement and that Africa looks forward to
peace at last in southern Africa. The examples of South
Africa and, more recently, Mozambique should augur well
not only for Angola but also for all theatres of conflict in
the continent.

Tanzania could not agree more with the positive
thrust of the Secretary-Generals report, and particularly
with the last chapter, which describes the signing of the
Lusaka Protocol as

 

"a critical turning point in the Angolan peace
process." (5/1995/97, para. 54)

The Angolan parties on the ground are doing their utmost
to ensure that the cease-fire holds. The Heads of the
Angolan armed forces and the UNITA forces have since the
cease-fire regularized their contacts and are pledged to
cooperating with and assisting the third United Nations
Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III). The long-
awaited meeting between President Eduardo dos Santos and
Jonas Savimbi should also go a long way towards assuring
the international community of the entire Angolan people's
resolve to pursue the peace process.

N ow that it is clear that everything is almost in place
in Angola - as is so eloquently stated in the Secretary-
General's report - the international community owes it to
itself and to the long-suffering people of Angola to
immediately take prompt and effective action to consolidate
the process. In this connection, my delegation would like to
express the hope that the Council will endorse the
recommendation of the Secretary-General that a new United
Nations operation in Angola - UNAVEM. III - should
take over from UNAVEM. II without any further delay and
with the commensurate mandate and strength, as well as the
necessary resources.

Allow me to conclude with a word of appreciation to
the Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, and to
his indefatigable Special Representative, Mr. Alioune
Blondin Beye, for their perseverance in efforts to find a
workable solution to the long-standing question of Angola.
It is my delegation's hope that their efforts, along with
those of the entire United Nations system, will not diminish
as the international community mobilizes support for
UNAVEM. III, with its heavy political, military and
humanitarian responsibilities. The role of Zambia and the
observer States - Portugal, the Russian Federation and the
United States of America - in facilitating the Lusaka talks
also deserve our unalloyed commendation.

