Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank you, Mr. President, for
convening today's meeting on the important subject
of strengthening triangular cooperation among the
Security Council, troop- and police-contributing
countries and the Secretariat on issues related to
peacekeeping activities.

We thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, Force Commander Lieutenant General
Gyllensporre of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
and Ms. Novosseloff, independent consultant from
the Brian Urquhart Center for Peace Operations of
the International Peace Institute, for their briefings
and views.

It is indeed difficult to overstate the importance
of triangular cooperation. It plays a significant and
defining role in the practical effectiveness of United
Nations peacekeeping as it brings together the key
players involved in setting tasks, planning, managing
and carrying out United Nations peacekeeping
operations. The key platform of the United Nations
system for implementing such cooperation is the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations (C-34). It is
unique in its representativeness. It is within the Special
Committee that members of the Security Council
and troop- and police-contributing countries develop
common approaches to the parameters of peacekeeping
activities and engage in interactive dialogue with the
Secretariat on current issues.

A sine qua non for reaching the necessary level
of trust among all interested parties is ensuring
transparency and observing in practice the consensus
agreements reached in intergovernmental formats.
For example, it is the recommendations and decisions
adopted by the C-34 that should guide the Secretariat
and missions on the ground in discharging their
executive functions. That covers the textbooks,
concepts, guidelines and other documents developed
by the Secretariat.

With those objectives, it is also important to
observe the division of labour within the United Nations
system among the structures that define the functional
modalities of peacekeeping operations to ensure that we
do not impede the Special Committee in its mandate of
considering common issues in the area ofpeacekeeping.
To that end, the Security Council, as the organ endowed
by the Charter of the United Nations with responsibility
for preventing threats to international peace and
security certainly plays the primary role in designing

the mandates for United Nations peacekeeping
operations in each specific country.

We advocate putting into practice the proposals for
promoting triangular cooperation outlined in the reports
of the C-34. We believe that peacekeeping mandates
and the conceptual know-how of the Secretariat should
correlate with the opinions of troop-contributing
countries (TCCs), police-contributing countries (PCCs)
and host countries. That, in turn, will allow us to have an
accurate interpretation of the objectives set to avoid the
possible overburdening of mandates and, in so doing,
increase the effectiveness of their implementation. In
that context, we note the opportunity to increase the
effectiveness of triangular cooperation by involving the
host countries, which bear the main responsibility for
protecting civilians, guaranteeing the political process,
removing reasons for crisis and engaging in post-
conflict reconstruction.

As practice has shown, in countries where there is
active cooperation based on mutual respect between
missions and the State, there is a precondition for the
effective achievement of objectives. TCCs and PCCs
also play a defining role in guaranteeing effective
United Nations peacekeeping operations as it is the
Blue Helmets they send who are called on to fulfil the
objectives set by the Security Council. Their opinion
and the timely information they can provide from the
area of operations are indeed very important. The
experience garnered also enhances the institutional
memory of the United Nations system and provides
lessons for the future. We therefore reiterate the value
of the meetings held among the Security Council,
TCCs and PCCs before the mandate of a peacekeeping
mission is extended.

We also note that the potential of the Military
Staff Committee remains underestimated. Pursuant to
Article 47 of the Charter, the Committee shall be called
upon to advise and assist the Security Council on all
questions relating to the Security Council's military
requirements. We believe that it would be logical to
consider more closely ways of utilizing the analytical
capacities and practical assistance that the Military
Staff Committee can provide. A useful element is
the practice of conducting country visits to United
Nations missions, following up with a report with
recommendations for the Security Council and inviting
military representatives of the elected members of the
Council to take part in the meetings of the Military
Staff Committee. We also believe it important that
the authority of the Military Staff Committee be
reconfirmed and that the Secretariat provide it with all
the necessary assistance in its activities involving the
maintenance of international peace and security.

