Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): First,
I thank you, Madam President, for the kind words of
welcome and assure you of China's close cooperation.

I thank Mr. Zarif, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his briefing. I have listened
carefully to the statements made by His Excellency
Mr. Mrkic', Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and
Mr. Hoxhaj.

China respects the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Serbia and understands its legitimate
concerns with regard to the question of Kosovo.

Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) forms the
important legal basis for the settlement of the question
of Kosovo. China believes that, in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and under the framework of resolution 1244
(1999) and international law, all parties should seek a
mutually acceptable settlement plan through dialogue
and negotiation. It remains the best and only option for
resolving the Kosovo question.

China appreciates Serbia's active efforts to seek
a political settlement of the question of Kosovo. My
country welcomes the substantive results achieved in
the high-level political dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina. We encourage both parties to continue the
process of pragmatic, constructive dialogue aimed at
achieving a lasting settlement of the question of Kosovo
and maintaining peace and stability in the region of the
Balkans and in all of Europe.

At present, the political and security situation in
Kosovo is showing a positive trend. However, the
situation in northern Kosovo is tense. All parties
concerned should effectively protect the legitimate
rights and interests of all ethnic communities in
Kosovo and actively promote national reconciliation.
They should take a cautious approach to resolving
differences in the context of the dialogue in order to
avoid any action that could complicate or exacerbate
the situation.

China commends the work carried out by the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) under the leadership of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Zarif and
supports the continued efforts of the Mission to
implement the Council's mandate.

We hope that UNMIK, the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo and the Kosovo Force can
strengthen coordination and cooperation in order to
play a positive role in promoting the settlement of the
question of Kosovo.

