Mr. Barriga (Liechtenstein): Liechtenstein
warmly welcomes your initiative, Madam President, to
hold an open debate on the issue of strengthening
international law. In our View, the work of the United
Nations in that area must be strongly reinforced. It was
in that spirit that Liechtenstein, together with Mexico,
recently submitted a request to include the item "The
rule of law at the international and national levels" in
the agenda of the General Assembly. While the General
Assembly is the appropriate place for a broad
discussion and recommendations on how the United

06-4010]
Nations can strengthen the rule of law, the Security
Council also has an important role to play in that
respect.

In our view, the best way for the Security Council
to promote international law and the rule of law is to
lead by example. During this debate we do not want to
venture into the legal question of the extent to which
the Council is bound by rules of international law. We
would, however, submit that it is a wise policy choice
for the Council to respect and promote international
law, in particular in the following four areas.

The first area has to do with respecting human
rights when taking action that has a direct impact on
the rights of select individuals. That applies most
prominently in the area of those targeted sanctions that
go beyond a specific country situation and are open-
ended and preventive in nature, such as the sanctions
against the Taliban and Al-Qaida. Procedural rights,
such as the right to be heard and the right to review,
serve the main purpose of ensuring that the persons
listed do indeed belong on a given list. Improving the
accuracy and credibility of the lists in turn facilitates
implementation by Member States. Once an accurate
listing and delisting procedure is in place, those
rightfully listed will still enjoy a number of substantive
rights, which are mainly addressed by what are at
present called humanitarian exemptions.

There is today a widely shared perception that the
Council must urgently improve the procedural rights of
listed persons and entities. Under the current
guidelines, a listed person merely has the right to ask
the State of residence or citizenship to ask the relevant
committee to revoke the listing. The right to ask,
however, without the right to any kind of response, is
not a procedural right. It is merely a reflection of the
right to freedom of expression and does not satisfy
basic guarantees of due process.

Secondly, as to respecting its "constitution", it is
the United Nations Charter which, similar to a national
constitution, determines the competences and the
division of work between the main organs. The
Security Council has in recent years continuously
expanded its activities, in particular in addressing
terrorism as a threat to international peace and security.
We do appreciate and agree with the active role taken
by the Council in many of those areas. At the same
time, such activities must always be based on a clear
Charter competence and they should not be undertaken

at the expense of the balance between the main organs.
The draft resolution on the working methods of the
Security Council, submitted to the General Assembly
by my country, together with Costa Rica, Jordan,
Singapore and Switzerland, is an attempt to strengthen
that balance. The Security Council should be
particularly sensitive to the General Assembly's
prerogatives as the United Nations prime legislative
organ.

Thirdly, with respect to cooperating with
international legal bodies, in particular the
International Criminal Court (ICC), the Security
Council has in the past been actively engaged in the
fight against impunity for the worst crimes of concern
to the international community, mainly using an ad hoc
and selective approach, but setting important
precedents. Today, the world possesses a legal tool of a
permanent nature and universal aspiration: the
International Criminal Court. The Council has already
used the ICC as a tool in dealing with conflicts by
referring the situation in Darfur to the Prosecutor of the
ICC. We would like to encourage the Council to
continue to consider the ICC as a policy option, where
appropriate. Referrals to the ICC must, however, be
accompanied by sustained political support by the
Council through all phases of the judicial proceedings
and must, in some situations, be accompanied by other
substantive measures.

Fourthly and finally, with regard to promoting
both peace and justice in post-conflict situations, the
Security Council has fully acknowledged the vital
importance of promoting justice and the rule of law in
post-conflict societies. The Peacebuilding Commission
is also expected to devote much attention to that issue.
While we appreciate the progress at the conceptual
level, more must be done to increase the operational
activities in that area. The further strengthening of rule
of law components in peacekeeping missions is one
important element in that regard.

Furthermore, the Council should at all times
underline that what is sometimes called the "peace
versus justice" dilemma may be a dilemma for those
having committed atrocious crimes, but not for the
international community. There can be no permanent
amnesties for genocide, crimes against humanity and
war crimes. The possibility of amnesties must
effectively disappear as a bargaining option for such
criminals, just as much as they cannot request that the
clock be turned back. Each ratification of the Rome

Statute of the International Criminal Court represents a
step towards the worldwide eradication of that option.
That in turn relieves Governments and other actors
negotiating peace agreements from the pressure to cave
into demands for amnesty, as they cannot promise what
international law effectively prohibits. Both the
Security Council and the Secretary-General, in their
activities aimed at preventing and ending conflicts,
should continue to strengthen that important principle.

In closing, we would like to thank you again,
Madam, for your leadership in bringing this issue to
our attention, and express our hope that the Council
itself will also fully live up to its role as a prime
stakeholder in the promotion of international law and
the rule of law.

