Mr. Bennouna (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on
Syria's assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. We are fully confident that you
will discharge your functions successfully.

I also take this opportunity to pay a tribute to
Ambassador Kishore Mahbubani for his efficient
stewardship of the Council last month.

The Security Council is once again considering
the situation in the occupied Palestinian territories and
the means necessary to ensure the implementation of
its relevant resolutions. The Council is meeting against
the overwhelming backdrop of fast-moving events that
are generating further concern and fear in the
international community for the future of that region
and its peoples. Whenever some semblance of calm
emerges, the logic of force reimposes itself in the
absence of genuine will on the part of the Israeli
Government to break the cycle of violence and
reprisals. This has delayed the development of the
sincere initiative that has been proposed to revive hope
for peace and security in the Middle East.

Once again, Israeli forces have reoccupied
Palestinian territories from which they withdrew only
yesterday, beginning with the city of Ramallah, in
order to sow terror and destruction; to round up and
displace anyone indiscriminately; and to foment
despair and frustration and make the lives of
Palestinians an intolerable hell. The shopkeeper cannot
open his store; the worker cannot work for his
livelihood; the student cannot go to school; the patient
cannot secure medicine or medical treatment.

All these practices hearken back to the tragic and
painful events that overwhelmed the occupied
Palestinian territories less than two months ago,
especially in the Jenin refugee camp, concerning which
we continue to await the Secretary-General's report
assessing responsibility for the violations committed by
the Israeli forces against Palestinian civilians. The
almost daily tragedies in the Middle East remain linked
to the reality of the occupation that Israel continues to
impose, in flagrant violation of international
humanitarian law, especially the Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Times
of War. Unless and until the Israeli Government is
convinced of that fact and complies accordingly, the
lives of innocent civilians in Palestine and Israel will
remain the targets of violence and the impulse for
revenge. It is the duty of us all to end that cycle.

Since coming to power, the Israeli Government
has followed a pattern of behaviour aimed at
undermining the Palestinian Authority, at torpedoing
the prospects for the establishment of a Palestinian
State and at removing itself from the internationally
accepted peace framework. These aims have prompted
the Israeli Government to insinuate that the territories
occupied by Israel are disputed and no longer occupied
lands from which it must withdraw. Such logic betrays
the true intentions of the Government of Israel and the
extent to which it flouts international will and the
authority of the Security Council.

The Council has time and again emphasized the
need for Israel to withdraw from occupied Arab
territories on the basis of resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973) and 1397 (2002), the foundations of a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace in the region. More
than ever before, the Council must strive in earnest to
impose respect for its resolutions by Israel in order to
allay the impression that Israel is above the law.

It is a strange irony that the Palestinian Authority
should be called upon to control security, avert acts of
violence and undertake constitutional reforms while
being confined to its headquarters and targeted by
shells, while its President is insulted and its ministers
are prevented from performing their official functions.
The security and interests of Israel will not be attained
by besmirching the credibility of the Palestinian
Authority and undermining its status. Quite the
contrary, the Authority must be respected and treated as
a full partner in peace-building. If the Authority is to
perform that role, the international community must
provide the urgent and necessary assistance to reverse
the destruction caused by Israel, to revive the
Palestinian economy and to strengthen its infrastructure
so as to meet the Palestinian people's basic needs.

Despite these long odds, the Palestinian Authority
has acted in good faith in condemning acts of violence
against Israeli civilians and in arresting suspects
implicated in such operations. Most recently, some
structural reforms have been undertaken within the
Palestinian Authority, including the constitution of a
new Palestinian Government. The Arab side has also
submitted its vision, as embodied in the initiative of
Crown Prince Abdullah of the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia, which was embraced by the Arab summit in
Beirut. Arab leaders have acted subsequently to end the
violence and to ensure negotiations.

Morocco has always acted in line with its values
and convictions to combat terrorism and to condemn
acts of terror in all their forms and regardless of the
justification put forward. We have said all along that
the end in no way justifies the means and that the
harming of civilians, be they Palestinians or Israelis, is
a source of grief to all mankind. At the same time and
in the same vein, however, we have said that ending
terrorism will require, above all, an end to Israel's
occupation of Palestinian and other Arab territories; the
resumption of negotiations; and compliance with the
principles and framework of the peace process,
especially the principle of land for peace.

In an effort to calm the situation and to revive
hope in the peace process, His Majesty King
Mohammed VI of Morocco, the Chairman of the
Jerusalem Committee, has striven to contain the crisis
and to urge the parties to resume dialogue and to
develop the most appropriate framework for
negotiations.

Against that backdrop, Morocco has supported
the concept of an international conference and has
expressed its willingness to cooperate with all parties
concerned to create the conditions for a successful
conference. Morocco also welcomes the contributions
made in this respect by the United States, the European
Union, Russia and the Secretary-General, all of whom
are strongly backing the Middle East peace process.

We consider that the time has indeed come to
move forward, to give clear form to the proposals and
to rally international support for implementing them in
order to establish the peace we all desire, on the basis
of Israel's withdrawal from all territories occupied
since 1967, of the establishment of a Palestinian State
with Jerusalem as its capital and of the restoration to
Syria and to Lebanon of their occupied territories.

