Mr. Blix: For nearly three years, I have been
coming to the Security Council to present the quarterly
reports of the United Nations Monitoring, Verification
and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC). They have
described our many preparations for the resumption of
inspections in Iraq. The twelfth quarterly report
(S/2003/232, annex) is the first that describes three
months of inspections. They come after four years
without inspections. The report was finalized 10 days
ago, and a number of relevant events have taken place
since then. Today's statement will supplement the
circulated report on these points in order to bring the
Council up to date.

Inspections in Iraq resumed on 27 November
2002. In matters relating to process, notably prompt
access to sites, we have faced relatively few
difficulties - and certainly far fewer than those that
were faced by the United Nations Special Commission
(UNSCOM) in the period 1991 to 1998. This may well
be due to the strong outside pressure.

Some practical matters which were not settled by
the talks that Mr. ElBaradei and I had with the Iraqi
side in Vienna prior to inspections or in resolution
1441 (2002) have been resolved at meetings which we
have had in Baghdad. Initial difficulties raised by the
Iraqi side about helicopters and aerial surveillance
planes operating in the no-fly zones have been
overcome. That is not to say that the operation of
inspections is free from friction but at this juncture we
are able to perform professional no-notice inspections
all over Iraq and to increase aerial surveillance.

American U-2 and French Mirage surveillance
aircraft already give us valuable imagery,
supplementing satellite pictures, and we expect soon to
be able to add night vision capability through an
aircraft offered to us by the Russian Federation. We
also expect to add low-level, close-area surveillance
through drones provided by Germany. We are grateful
not only to the countries which place these valuable
tools at our disposal, but also to the States, most
recently Cyprus, which have agreed to the stationing of
aircraft on their territory.

Iraq, with a highly developed administrative
system, should be able to provide more documentary
evidence about its proscribed weapons programmes.
Only a few new documents of this type have come to
light so far and been handed over since we began
inspections. It was a disappointment that Iraq's
declaration of 7 December 2002 did not bring new
documentary evidence. I hope that efforts in this
respect, including the appointment of a governmental
commission, will give significant results. When
proscribed items are deemed unaccounted for, it is,
above all, credible accounts that are needed - or the
proscribed items, if they exist.

Where authentic documents do not become
available, interviews with persons who may have
relevant knowledge and experience may be another
way of obtaining evidence. UNMOVIC has names of
such persons in its records, and they are among the
people whom we seek to interview. In the past month,
Iraq has provided us with the names of many persons
who may be relevant sources of information, in
particular persons who took part in various phases of
the unilateral destruction of biological and chemical
weapons and proscribed missiles in 1991.

This provision of names prompts two reflections.
The first is that, with such detailed information existing
regarding those who took part in the unilateral
destruction, surely there must also remain records
regarding the quantities and other data concerning the
various items destroyed.

The second reflection is that, with relevant
witnesses available, it becomes even more important to
be able to conduct interviews in modes and locations
which allow us to be confident that the testimony
provided is given without outside influence. While the
Iraqi side seems to have encouraged interviewees not
to request the presence of Iraqi officials - so-called
minders - or the taping of the interviews, conditions
ensuring the absence of undue influences are difficult
to attain inside Iraq. Interviews outside the country
might provide such assurance. It is our intention to
request such interviews shortly. Nevertheless, despite
remaining shortcomings, interviews are useful. Since
we started requesting interviews, 38 individuals have
been asked for private interviews, of which 10 have
accepted under our terms - seven of them during the
past week.

As I noted on 14 February, intelligence
authorities have claimed that weapons of mass
destruction are moved around Iraq by trucks and, in
particular, that there are mobile production units for
biological weapons. The Iraqi side states that such
activities do not exist. Several inspections have taken
place at declared and undeclared sites in relation to
mobile production facilities. Food-testing mobile
laboratories and mobile workshops have been seen, as
well as large containers with seed-processing
equipment. No evidence of proscribed activities has so
far been found. Iraq is expected to assist in the
development of credible ways to conduct random
checks of ground transportation.

Inspectors are also engaged in examining Iraq's
programme for remotely piloted vehicles. A number of
sites have been inspected, with data being collected to
assess the range and other capabilities of the various
models found. Inspections are continuing in that area.

There have been reports, denied from the Iraqi
side, that proscribed activities are conducted
underground. Iraq should provide information on any
underground structure suitable for the production or
storage of weapons of mass destruction. During
inspections of declared or undeclared facilities,
inspection teams have examined building structures for
any possible underground facilities. In addition,
ground-penetrating radar equipment was used in
several specific locations. No underground facilities for
chemical or biological production or storage have been
found so far.

I should add that, both for the monitoring of
ground transportation and for the inspection of
underground facilities, we would need to increase our
staff in Iraq. I am not talking about a doubling of staff.
I would rather have twice the amount of high-quality
information about sites to inspect than twice as many
expert inspectors to send.

On 14 February I reported to the Council that the
Iraqi side had become more active in taking and
proposing steps which potentially might shed new light
on unresolved disarmament issues. Even a week ago,
when the current quarterly report was finalized, there
was still relatively little tangible progress to note;
hence the cautious formulations in the report before the
Council.

As of today, there is more. While the Iraqi side
tried to persuade us during our meetings in Baghdad
that the Al Samoud 2 missiles that they have declared
fall within the permissible range set by the Security
Council, the calculations of an international panel of
experts led us to the opposite conclusion. Iraq has since
accepted that these missiles and associated items must
be destroyed and has started the process of destruction
under our supervision. The destruction undertaken
constitutes a substantial measure of disarmament-
indeed, the first since the middle of the 19905. We are
not watching the breaking of toothpicks. Lethal
weapons are being destroyed. However, I must add that
the report I have today tells me that no destruction
work has continued today. I hope that this is a
temporary break.

Until today, 34 Al Samoud 2 missiles -
including four training missiles, two combat warheads,
one launcher and five engines - have been destroyed
under UNMOVIC supervision. Work is continuing to
identify and inventory the parts and equipment
associated with the Al Samoud 2 programme. Two
"reconstituted" casting chambers used in the
production of solid propellant missiles have been
destroyed and the remnants melted or encased in
concrete. The legality of the Al Fatah missile is still
under review, pending further investigation and
measurement of various parameters of that missile.
More papers on anthrax, VX and missiles have recently
been provided. Many have been found to restate what
Iraq has already declared, and some will require further
study and discussion.

There is a significant Iraqi effort under way to
clarify a major source of uncertainty as to the
quantities of biological and chemical weapons that
were unilaterally destroyed in 1991. A part of this
effort concerns a disposal site that was deemed too
dangerous for full investigation in the past. It is now
being re-excavated. To date, Iraq has unearthed eight
complete bombs, comprising two liquid-filled intact R-
400 bombs and six other complete bombs. Bomb
fragments have also been found. Samples have been
taken. The investigation of the destruction site could,
in the best case, allow a determination of the number of
bombs destroyed at that site. It should be followed by a
serious and credible effort to determine the separate
issue of how many R-400-type bombs were produced.
In this, as in other matters, inspection work is moving
forward and may yield results.

Iraq proposed an investigation using advanced
technology to quantify the amount of unilaterally
destroyed anthrax dumped at a site. However, even if
the use of advanced technology could quantify the
amount of anthrax said to be dumped at the site, the
results would still be open to interpretation. Defining
the quantity of anthrax destroyed must, of course, be
followed by efforts to establish what quantity was
actually produced.

With respect to VX, Iraq has recently suggested a
similar method to quantify a VX precursor stated to
have been unilaterally destroyed in the summer of
1991.

Iraq has also recently informed us that, following
the adoption of the presidential decree prohibiting
private individuals and mixed companies from
engaging in work related to weapons of mass
destruction, further legislation on the subject is to be
enacted. That appears to be in response to a letter from
UNMOVIC requesting clarification of the issue.

What are we to make of these activities? One can
hardly avoid the impression that, after a period of
somewhat reluctant cooperation, there has been an
acceleration of initiatives from the Iraqi side since the
end of January. This is welcome, but the value of these
measures must be soberly judged in the light of how
many question marks they actually succeed in
straightening out. This is not yet clear.

Against this background, the question is now
asked Whether Iraq has cooperated "immediately,
unconditionally, and actively" with UNMOVIC, as
required under operative paragraph 9 of resolution
1441 (2002). The answers can be seen from the factual
descriptions that I have provided. However, if more
direct answers are desired, I would say the following.
The Iraqi side has tried on occasion to attach
conditions, as it did regarding helicopters and U-2
planes. Iraq has not, however, so far persisted in
attaching these or other conditions for the exercise of
any of our inspection rights. If it did, we would report
1t.

It is obvious that, while the numerous initiatives
that are now being taken by the Iraqi side with a view
to resolving some longstanding open disarmament
issues can be seen as active or even proactive, these
initiatives, three to four months into the new
resolution, cannot be said to constitute immediate
cooperation, nor do they necessarily cover all areas of
relevance. They are nevertheless welcome, and
UNMOVIC is responding to them in the hope of
solving presently unresolved disarmament issues.

Members of the Council may relate most of what
I have said to resolution 1441 (2002), but UNMOVIC
is performing work under several resolutions of the
Security Council. The quarterly report before members
is submitted in accordance with resolution 1284
(1999), which not only created UNMOVIC, but also
continues to guide much of our work. Under the
timelines set by that resolution, the results of some of
this work is to be reported to the Council before the
end of this month. Let me be more specific.

Resolution 1284 (1999) instructs UNMOVIC to
"address unresolved disarmament issues" and to
identify "key remaining disarmament tasks", and the
latter are to be submitted for approval by the Council in
the context of a work programme. UNMOVIC will be
ready to submit a draft work programme this month, as
required.

UNMOVIC, UNSCOM. and the Amorim panel
did valuable work to identify the disarmament issues
that were still open at the end of 1998. UNMOVIC has
used this material as starting points but has analysed
the data behind it and data and documents since 1998
to compile its own list of unresolved disarmament
issues, or, rather, clustered issues. It is the answers to
these issues that we seek through our inspection
activities. It is also from the list of these clustered
issues that UNMOVIC will identify key remaining
disarmament tasks. As noted in the report before
members, this list of clustered issues is ready.
UNMOVIC is required to submit only the work
programme with the key remaining disarmament tasks
to the Council. As I understand, several Council
members are interested in the working document with
the complete clusters of disarmament issues, and we
have declassified it and are ready to make it available
to members of the Council on request. In this working
document - which may still be adjusted in the light of
new information- members will get a more up-to-
date review of the outstanding issues than in the
documents of 1999, to which members usually refer.
Each cluster in the working document ends with a
number of points indicating what Iraq could do to solve
the issue. Hence, Iraq's cooperation could be measured
against the successful resolution of issues.

I should note that the working document contains
much information and discussion about the issues that
existed at the end of 1998, including information that
came to light after 1998. It contains much less
information and discussion about the period after 1998,
primarily because of a paucity of information.
Nevertheless, intelligence agencies have expressed the
view that proscribed programmes have continued or
restarted in this period. It is further contended that
proscribed programmes and items are located in
underground facilities, as I mentioned, and that
proscribed items are being moved around Iraq. The
working document does contain suggestions on how
these concerns may be tackled.

Let me conclude by telling members that
UNMOVIC is currently drafting the work programme
that resolution 1284 (1999) requires us to submit this
month. It will obviously contain our proposed list of
key remaining disarmament tasks; it will describe the
reinforced system of ongoing monitoring and
verification that the Council has asked us to
implement; it will also describe the various subsystems
that constitute the programme- for instance, for
aerial surveillance, for information from Governments
and suppliers, for sampling and for the checking of
road traffic.

How much time would it take to resolve the key
remaining disarmament tasks? While cooperation can,
and is, to be immediate, disarmament and, at any rate,
the verification of it, cannot be instant. Even with a
proactive Iraqi attitude induced by continued outside
pressure, it would still take some time to verify sites
and items, analyse documents, interview relevant
persons and draw conclusions. It would not take years,
nor weeks, but months. Neither Governments nor
inspectors would want disarmament inspection to go on
forever. However, it must be remembered that, in
accordance with the governing resolutions, a sustained
inspection and monitoring system is to remain in place
after verified disarmament, to give confidence and to
sound an alarm if signs were seen of the revival of any
proscribed weapons programmes.

