Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes you, Sir, to New York to preside over this
open debate. I thank Secretary-General Guterres for his
briefing. China has listened carefully to the statements
by the Archbishop of Canterbury and Ms. Qadeem.

At present, although the international environment
is stable overall, the landscape is dotted with hotspot
issues that involve complex, historical, territorial,
religious and ethnic factors. Traditional and
non-traditional security threats are interconnected. We
are meeting at a time when the Secretary-General is
actively promoting the reform of the United Nations
peace and security architecture, which prioritizes
preventive diplomacy. Against such a backdrop, it
is of critical importance for the Security Council to
spotlight mediation and the settlement of disputes. The
Charter of the United Nations calls for the peaceful
settlement of disputes through political and diplomatic
means. It is also the best approach to achieve the long-
term settlement of hotspot issues. Chapter I of the
Charter clearly states that the purpose of the United
Nations is to maintain international peace and security
and to bring about by peaceful means adjustment
or settlement of international disputes or situations.
Chapter VI states that mediation is one of the tools for
the peaceful settlement of disputes, and that it is also an
important means for the prevention and the resolution
of conflict. The international community therefore
should strengthen preventive diplomacy and support
relevant United Nations work in the area of mediation. I
would like to make the following comments.

First, it is necessary to adhere to the purposes
and principles of the Charter. The maintenance of
international peace and security is the central purpose
of the Charter. It is also the primary responsibility of
the Security Council. The United Nations should play a
central role in the prevention of conflict and strengthen
its mediation activities by fully availing itself of Chapter
VI. The relevant mediation work should be based on
respect for national sovereignty and non-interference in
the internal affairs of others. The consent of the parties
concerned must be secured beforehand, and their will
must be fully respected.

Secondly, the goal should be to achieve cooperation
and ensure that every party has something to gain
during the mediation process. Mediators and the parties
to conflict should embrace a vision of a shared future
for humankind and espouse a new security concept that
is shared, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable.
It is important for the parties to tackle difficult security
issues through dialogue and negotiations, while
working in a manner to achieve mutual benefits and
cooperation. It is essential to accommodate and respect
each party's security concerns and the right to agree to
disagree so as to find a peaceful settlement to disputes
and jointly build a secure world.

Thirdly, it is necessary to strengthen cooperation
and work in synergy. As the most universal,
representative and authoritative international
organization, it incumbent on the United Nations to
play a vital role in the peaceful settlement of disputes.
The Security Council, as the core of the international
collective security system, should be actively engaged
in the peaceful settlement of disputes through political
and diplomatic means and provide political support
for, and the guidance to, such work and activities. It
is important for the United Nations to fully use the
unique influence of the Secretary-General and the
highly professional nature of the Secretariat to mediate
disputes through the deployment of the Secretary-
General's special representatives and envoys. Regional
organizations such as the African Union enjoy unique
advantages when mediating disputes in their regions,
and should receive more support for their roles in
this area.

Fourthly, an integrated approach with an eye for
the long term is essential. Rather than focusing merely
on immediate concerns, mediation should include
conflict-prevention, peacekeeping, peacebuilding
and long-term-development efforts. We must take a
targeted approach to formulating and implementing
plans for mediation by combining various means
and methods. Peace and development complement
each other, so we should implement the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and establish a vision
for global governance based on shared discussion,
joint efforts and mutual benefits. We must also help
developing countries to enhance their ability to achieve
self-development so that we can achieve development
for all and promote durable peace.

China is a builder and defender of world peace.
We uphold the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and support the Organization
in playing an important role in international affairs,
for example by promoting the peaceful settlement of
disputes through dialogue and negotiations and building
new international relationships with cooperation
and a win-win mindset at their core. In the past few
years China has participated actively in mediating
international and regional hotspot issues and in related
political processes. We have offered solutions and
promoted the establishment of various mechanisms,
playing an important role in resolving problems such as
the nuclear issue in the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea through political and diplomatic means.

The Chinese Government has appointed special
envoys for East Africa and the Middle East who have
visited relevant crisis areas, participated in international
conferences, taken part in international mediation
efforts and encouraged the parties involved in such
crises to engage in negotiation and consultation with
positive outcomes. Through the China-United Nations
Peace and Development Fund, we have supported
various mediation mechanisms, including the High-
level Advisory Board on Mediation. Together with
the rest of the international community, we are ready
to continue to mediate disputes and conflicts in order
to contribute more effectively to the maintenance of
international peace and security.

