Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I,
too, would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK), Mr. Farid Zarif, for his briefing. I welcome
His Excellency Mr. Aleksandar Vucie, Prime Minister
of Serbia, and His Excellency Mr. Hashim Thaci,
Prime Minister of Kosovo, and thank them for their
contributions.

We welcome the fact that the security situation in
Kosovo remained calm and stable during the period
since our most recent debate in the Security Council
(see S/PV.7257), including in the four Serb-majority
municipalities in the north of the country. Another
positive fact is that Serbia and Kosovo have continued
the process ofnormalizing their relations at the technical
level through the dialogue facilitated by the European
Union pending the formation of the new Government of
Kosovo following the elections of 8 June.

We encourage those newly elected to establish
as soon as possible conditions for the resumption of
the high-level dialogue facilitated by the European
Union. Recent progress in the talks between the two
parties that received the most votes in the elections
offer the hope that a Government supported by a stable
majority in Parliament will be formed shortly. It is the
responsibility of those newly elected to show a spirit of
compromise and to give priority to the national interest
and respect for Kosovo's Constitution above and beyond
other considerations.

Luxembourg welcomes the important steps taken
by the Kosovo police and security agencies to contribute
to the fight against the global problem of violent
extremism. I am speaking in particular of the measures
taken to prevent Kosovo's citizens from participating
in conflicts abroad. We encourage the new Parliament
to make the adoption of the draft bill prohibiting the
participation of Kosovars in armed conflict outside
Kosovo one of its priorities.

Other priorities that await those newly elected, in
addition to the 2015 budget, include the establishment of
a specialist court to follow up on the work ofthe Special
Investigative Task Force of the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo on the allegations set out in
the report by Dick Marty. That court will prosecute the
perpetrators of any crimes committed while allowing
those wrongly accused to prove their innocence.

With respect to the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), given that some
delegations referred to the allegations of corruption
against EULEX judges, I would like to emphasize
that we have full confidence in the ability of Jean Paul
Jacque, the independent expert appointed 10 November
by High Representative of the European Union
Federica Mogherini to shed light on those allegations.
These allegations should not be used to undermine
the important role that EULEX continues to play in
strengthening the rule of law in Kosovo.

The imminent formation of the new Government in
Kosovo should be followed by an immediate resumption
of high-level dialogue facilitated by the European
Union in order to ensure the full implementation of
the historic agreement concluded on 19 April 2013. In
that regard, special attention needs to be given to two
points: the establishment ofa community/association of
Serb-majority municipalities and the full dismantling
of parallel structures, in particular security structures.

The process of normalizing relations between
Belgrade and Pristina under the auspices of the
European Union has permanently changed the nature
of relations between Serbia and Kosovo. Gradually, as
the two countries advance along the path of European
integration, United Nations involvement in the field will
become less and less relevant. We encourage the United
Nations to adjust its presence to the lasting stabilization
of the situation in Kosovo, as the European Union has
done, inter alia, by reconfiguring EULEX. It would
also be appropriate to review the Security Council's
reporting and meetings cycle devoted to the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo.

To conclude, while our Security Council mandate
is nearing completion, I would like to take this
opportunity to encourage again the leaders of Serbia
and Kosovo to continue to demonstrate the political will
and courage needed to achieve reconciliation between
their countries and bring them closer to the European
Union. Kosovo and Serbia can continue to count on the
active support of Luxembourg to realize their European
future.

