Mr. Fulci (Italy): The resolution just adopted on Haiti
is another building-block in the beginning of a new phase
of political, social and economic development in that
country. The United Nations Mission in Haiti (UNMIH)
will be deployed in accordance with the timetable and the
procedures suggested by the Secretary-General, and,
consequently, the mandate of the Multinational Force will
terminate by 31 March. This will be the next decisive
step on the road to recovery from the crisis that exploded
when military leaders illegally seized power in
Port-au-Prince.

The first step was the intervention of the
Multinational Force, which liberated the Haitian people
from the military regime and made possible the return of
their constitutional leader, President Aristide. The fact that
the dictators were forced to leave the country without
armed resistance or bloodshed was also an undeniable
accomplishment for all those who made this outcome
possible.

Democracy is back in Haiti; security has increased
considerably; the human rights situation has improved;
and preparations are already under way for the legislative
elections to be held, hopefully, before summer. But, as
the Secretary-General's report points out, these
achievements cannot be considered irreversible. It appears
that a large number of weapons continue to plague the
country. This is why, quite rightly, operative paragraph 11
of the resolution urges the Government of Haiti to
establish without delay an effective police force and to
improve the functioning of its judicial system.

Thus, the priority is the establishment of the new
police force. Although not explicitly mentioned in the
resolution, it seems to us, on the basis of the
Secretary-General's report, that a second priority is that
of restructuring the armed forces, which were at the root
of the problems. Another important factor will be the
election of the new Parliament, to be followed in
February of next year by the presidential elections. Last
but not least, a strong, sincere commitment from the
international community is needed to assist and support
institutional, social and economic development, which, in
the end, remains the prerequisite to the promotion and
consolidation of peace. In this regard, I would like to ask
the Ambassador of Haiti, Mr. Fritz Longchamp, to assure
his Government and his countrymen that, as always, they
can rely on my country, Italy.

If all goes well, Haiti will soon become another
United Nations success story. Our sincere appreciation
and gratitude go to all those who have made and will
make possible this welcome turn of events.

 

