Mr. Abdelsalam (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I should also like to congratulate your
predecessor, the representative of Ghana, on his
presidency for the previous month.

First of all, I would like to confirm a basic truth,
namely, that the Government of the Sudan has always
been fully interested in establishing constructive
cooperation and objective dialogue with the United
Nations in order to ensure peace and stability, for the
Sudan has been active and committed in this
Organization since it became a member. It played
recognized roles within the circles where it was a
direct member, including the African Union (AU), the
League of Arab States (LAS) and the Organization of
the Islamic Conference (OIC). It therefore has a
number of responsibilities and commitments vis-a-vis
this Organization.

It is clear that the Sudan is currently host to one
of the largest United Nations peacekeeping missions,
which was deployed in the Sudan on the basis of an
agreement between the two parties within the context
of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement. The
Government of the Sudan is the first party to that
Agreement. Dialogue and interaction with the United
Nations was, then, governed by the principles of the
Charter and respect for sovereignty. At that time, there
was no need for the Security Council to hold such
continuous meetings. However, with regard to the
Council's approach to the situation in Darfur, things
have proceeded down a different path characterized by
an imbalanced scale of justice and the lack of the
criteria for credibility. There are many testimonies to
that, of which we can cite the following.

First of all, all Council members are fully aware
of the enormous obstacles that faced the latest rounds
of the Abuja peace talks - and no one can deny the
seriousness or the flexibility of the Government of the
Sudan, which was committed to both the success of the
negotiations and the achievement of agreement. The
Council is also aware of the fact that the Sudanese
Government delegation frequently remained at the
negotiating table, while the armed movements
boycotted the meetings repeatedly. Besides, no one can
ignore the concessions made by the Government of the
Sudan, without which this agreement would never have
been reached. However, the Council's first presidential
statement had no words of praise whatsoever for the
role of the Government, not even a strong message
warning the parties which did not sign the Agreement.

Secondly, before the Darfur Peace Agreement
entered into force, there were calls for the deployment
of international forces, which is not stipulated by the
Agreement. The Security Council and the African
Union Peace and Security Council issued two
statements in support of the Agreement, in which they
called on the parties which did not sign the Agreement
to do so. They also threatened to impose sanctions
against those trying to undermine the Agreement.

Shortly after the signing of the Agreement, those
who rejected it announced the setting up of the so-
called National Salvation Front, which treacherously
attacked the town of Hamrat es-Sheikh in the north of
Kurdufah, and openly declared that the objective of the
attack was the abortion of the Darfur Peace Agreement.
Seeing that we used to believe that the Security
Council was eager to protect and implement the
Agreement and, above all, to safeguard its own
credibility and implement its resolutions - especially
1591 (2005), which stipulated imposing sanctions on
all those who hinder the Peace Agreement - we
submitted to the Council a documented complaint
containing the names of the perpetrators. A copy of the
complaint was also sent to the Chairman of the
sanctions Committee set up under that resolution. What
happened? Two months after the complaint, the
Council has not yet made the slightest pronouncement
on it.

Thirdly, in July, on the sidelines of the Banjul
summit of the African Union, the President of the
Republic met with the Secretary-General of the United
Nations. They agreed on a plan to implement the
Darfur Peace Agreement. The Sudanese Government
presented a comprehensive and detailed plan to address
the situation in Darfur on the basis of the Agreement.
That plan includes clear, precise and well-defined
guidelines covering all the various political, security,
humanitarian and social aspects. We submitted the plan
to the Security Council in the hope that it would be
considered and recognized as a genuine national effort
to address the situation in Darfur wisely and
thoughtfully, taking all requirements into account.

But what happened? The Security Council has not
even considered calling a meeting to examine that plan,
knowing that some members of the Council have
requested a meeting on the plan.

Fourthly, the Government of the Sudan was
invited once again to attend the high-level meeting of 8
September. It promised to participate, but it made an
official request to the Council to postpone the meeting
and to ensure that no measure would be taken before
then, in order to ensure that the Sudanese Government
could participate with a high-level delegation, because
it was keen to fulfil all requirements for serious
dialogue with the Council on this issue. It was
surprised, however, that the Security Council ignored
its request, refusing even to listen to us. Instead, it held
its meeting as planned and adopted resolution 1706
(2006).

At the meeting on the Sudan on 28 August, at
which the draft text of resolution 1706 (2006) was
discussed in the absence of the Sudan, certain
comments and erroneous conclusions were made, and
they formed the basis of the resolution. I should like to
comment on that information.

Some mentioned that the Sudan refused to attend
the meeting. That is not true. The Sudan made highest-
level contact, between the President of the Republic
and the Secretary-General, during which it requested
that the meeting be postponed so that we might further
prepare for it and consult with the three regional
organizations invited to the meeting. The Secretary-
General promised to forward that request to the
President of the Council.

We followed up by sending a letter to the
President of the Council requesting that the meeting be
postponed in order to allow us to participate actively
and fruitfully, but our request was, unfortunately, not
granted. We believe that if the Council had agreed to
postpone the meeting it would not have adopted the
resolution, which was based on a mistaken conclusion.
We wish the meeting could have been held before the
resolution was adopted.

Secondly, it was said during the meeting that the
Darfur Peace Agreement was on the verge of collapse.
Yet no one asked why that was so. Some spoke of
growing violence in Darfur, the targeting of
humanitarian organizations and attacks on African
Union forces. Yet no one mentioned who the
perpetrators were. Moreover, the criminal act of the
National Salvation Front was not condemned. Now,
when the Government exercises its legitimate right of
self-defence, some speak out about "military
escalation" and state that the Darfur conflict will not be
settled militarily. Where were those voices when the
Sudanese Government was being attacked? What kinds
of verdicts are being handed down? Laxity in
condemning such aggression encourages the aggressors
to continue their attacks, not only against the
Government, but also against the forces of Minni
Arkoy Minawi - who was a signatory of the
Agreement - and against African Union convoys and
humanitarian personnel. We all know that this is so.

Thirdly, with regard to the Government's plan to
restore stability and protect civilians in Darfur, the
discussion focused on military and security aspects and
was based on misunderstandings and erroneous
conclusions. Had the Government of the Sudan been
consulted on these issues, the Council would not have
adopted a resolution based on flawed speculation. The
Darfur Peace Agreement addresses the integration of
4,000 members of Darfur movements into the Sudanese
Armed Forces; every three soldiers of the existing
Sudanese Armed Forces would be matched with one
from among the movements. All would be deployed in
Darfur. A simple calculation shows that the overall
force in Darfur would amount to 16,000 troops. Six
thousand would be deployed between 1 August and 30
September and the remaining 10,000 between 31
October and 31 December 2006.

How can one talk about violations of the Darfur
Peace Agreement or an alleged military escalation?
During the same period, according to the plan, 3,348
African Union troops would also be deployed. How
can it be said that these forces were ignored? The
Comprehensive Peace Agreement clearly stipulates that
the United Nations Mission in the Sudan is deployed in
southern Sudan and other regions affected by the war
in the south. There is no such reference in the Darfur
Peace Agreement.

In adopting resolution 1706 (2006), the Security
Council deliberately took hasty measures without
preparing the political context with all parties involved
in the issue, foremost among them the Sudanese
Government, which is the party principally concerned
and which firmly believes that this dialogue is a one-
way, unilateral dialogue. By acting hastily, the Council
chose a confrontational approach, but the Government
of the Sudan is always ready to engage in dialogue on
this issue, in which it is the main interested party. We
will keep the doors open to unlimited and
unconditional cooperation with the international
community and all peace-loving countries, in
conformity with all principles and practices that
respect its sovereignty and independence and that take
account of its people's specific characteristics, values
and heritage. A lasting peace in Darfur is and will
always be a strategic objective of our Government and
the overriding will of our people. We will pursue our
current efforts to implement the Darfur Peace
Agreement and will not rest until peace and security
are restored throughout Darfur.

