Mr. Dauth (Australia): My prepared remarks
invite me, in my first paragraph, to acknowledge the
presence in the Chamber of Mr. Xanana Gusmao and
Mr. Mari Alkatiri, but unfortunately the arrangements
today for non-members to speak do not allow me to
commence my remarks in that way. I have to say that
this is disappointing to my country, particularly given
the contribution we have made in respect of East
Timor, that we are getting what I regard as a less-than-
appropriate opportunity to participate in the Security
Council debate about East Timor. I am sorry to make
that remark, but I do regret that the organization of
Council business today has led to this result.

The successful presidential election in East Timor
on 14 April was a major step in the final stages of East
Timor's transition to independence. Our consideration
of East Timor in the Security Council today, and the
decisions to be taken by Council Members in the
coming weeks, are further critical elements of this
process. These decisions will have a direct and
significant impact on the international community's
continuing role in East Timor and on the long-term
future of the new nation.

I thank the Secretary-General for his presence
this morning, and I particularly thank my friend
Assistant Secretary-General Annabi for his
comprehensive briefing on the Secretary-General's
report. The report shows how far East Timor's
transition has come. While much remains to be done,
the United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET) has built a sound foundation for an
effective, viable and democratic independent nation.
This is due in no small part to the enormously valuable
and tireless contribution of the Secretary-General's
Special Representative, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello. I
take this opportunity again to extend to him personally,
and to all members of UNTAET, Australia's thanks for
their dedication to laying the groundwork for the future
independent East Timor.

Turning to the future, the Secretary-General's
report underlines that at independence a number of
critical elements of the new State of East Timor will
remain fragile. Without a continued international
presence and commitment, the progress achieved so far
will be at risk.

The Secretary-General has presented us with a
comprehensive, practical and responsible plan for a
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET) after independence. If it is carefully
implemented, this plan, which Australia fully endorses,
will provide the best possible chance for a stable,
democratic and effective independent East Timor.

Australia supports the Secretary-General's
recommendations for a successor Mission covering the
four key components of peacekeeping, civilian police,
a Civilian Support Group and an Office of the
Secretary-General's Special Representative, and funded
from assessed contributions. We also support the
Secretary-General's clear exit strategy, which
envisages the progressive downsizing of all core
components over a two-year period, against the
achievement of clear milestones.

With regard to the security components of the
new mission - and this is a point that I particularly
wanted to stress today in, as I said, more
comprehensive circumstances than the ones in which I
find myself speaking - we appreciate the Secretary-
General's advice that discussions are under way to
finalize plans for command and control of the security
forces in East Timor after independence. We strongly
support the continued constructive work to develop, in
as precise detail as possible, these arrangements. We
also believe that it is critical to continued international
confidence in East Timor that the arrangements operate
in accordance with the standard United Nations
procedures, and that the new Government approach this
particularly sensitive area of administration in a highly
cooperative spirit. If they do not do so, there is a
significant risk that international support for the
fledgling State will erode.

The successor mission in East Timor must not
operate in isolation from the broader international
effort to assist East Timor. We therefore welcome the
Secretary-General's description of the relationship
between UNMISET, the wider United Nations system
of agencies, funds and programmes, and the national
development plan of the East Timor Government. This
coordinated approach will lay the basis for East
Timor's eventual transition to a normal development
situation, with long-term needs assisted by United
Nations agencies and other donor assistance.

Realization of that goal will depend not only on
assessed funding for the duration of the successor
mission, but also on sustained long-term support from
the international community. For its part, Australia has
made a significant contribution. In addition to our
share of assessed contributions, we have spent $1.4
billion (Australian) on our military contribution from
July 1999 to June 2001, and we have committed $150
million (Australian) for the four years from July 2000
to help with reconstruction and development in East
Timor.

Continued international support will be critical to
protect the considerable investments made so far and to
promote East Timor's long-term development. In
addition, as the Secretary-General has stated in his
report, the achievement of key milestones during the
coming two years will be greatly accelerated by strong
donor support, particularly in the critical areas of
establishing the border and customs service, resourcing
and equipping of police and military institutions and
the establishment of an adequate justice system. The
more that international donors can support these key
steps, the faster the successor Mission will be able to
achieve its milestones, and the more efficiently the
United Nations presence can be reduced. Australia will
continue to do its part both through the United Nations
and bilaterally, to support East Timor's transition and
future development. We urge our fellow Member States
to do likewise.

The Secretary-General's recommendations for
UNMISET provide the details and strategic planning
required to enable an effective transition from
UNTAET to the post-independence period. We urge the
Security Council to use this information to make sound
decisions on a solid and comprehensive mandate for
the successor mission that will guide East Timor
through its first two years of independence.

We have in our grasp all the makings of a United
Nations success story. The Security Council is in a
position to maximize the chances for a stable and
viable future for East Timor and its people. We must
not let these opportunities pass us by.

