Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I join others in
welcoming Special Representative Tanin back to New
York. I thank him for presenting the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2016/407) and for his briefing
today. I also welcome First Deputy Prime Minister
Dacie and Ambassador Citaku to the Council and I
thank them for their statements.

It has been less than three months since we last
discussed Kosovo in this Chamber (see S/PV.7637),
but in that short space of time we have continued to
see welcome progress in Kosovo. Yes, clear challenges
remain, but the decision to welcome Kosovo into the
Union of European Football Associations and the
Federation internationale de Football Association last
week both show that there is growing confidence in
Kosovo among the international community.

The onus now is on the Kosovo authorities to seize
this momentum to address the challenges ahead. To do
so they will have to escape the fractious and divided
politics that have characterized part of this reporting
period. Violent protests and violent disruptions of
parliamentary business have no place in any democracy
in any part of the world. We therefore welcome the public
commitment of the new President, Hashim Thaci, to
dialogue and to reaching out to minorities and bringing
communities together. We hope that commitment
will deliver real progress in those areas. The United
Kingdom looks forward to seeing all political leaders
in Kosovo making that pledge.

This is precisely the moment for Kosovo to unite
to tackle the big issues of the day, such as organized
crime, corruption and issues concerning the rule of law.
The swift ratification of the host State agreement on
the specialist chambers shows that it can be done. It
sent a powerful message about tackling impunity and
addressing the past. We also fully support Kosovo's
bid to join Interpol, not just for the sake of further
integration into the international system but for the
practical benefits that membership would bring.

Despite the protests, the Secretary-General's report
(S/20l6/407) makes it clear that the overall security
situation, including in non-majority communities,
remained stable throughout the reporting period. That
is positive. Worrying incidents have continued, such
as the recent regrettable attack on a Serbian television
crew in Pristina, and they are a further demonstration
of the need for increased outreach and the importance
of building a more inclusive society. But we should
not confuse acts of criminality with a more systemic
problem. We should all rather look to the future, for
Kosovo and the region.

Prospective membership in the European Union
(EU) offers the greatest opportunity for stability and
prosperity for the region. Rather than seizing on isolated
incidents of ethnic tension, the Security Council would
serve the people ofthe region much better by discussing
the support we can offer them to help them realize their
EU ambitions. Sadly, it is clear that more progress must
be made on the EU-facilitated dialogue if normalized
relations are to become a reality. Leaders in both Serbia
and Kosovo must recognize that it is not enough just
to commit to implementing agreements reached in the
dialogue; they must deliver them, too, and stop putting
further barriers in the way of their implementation.

Let us therefore call on both sides to step up their
engagement in the dialogue and start delivering for
the people in both their countries. For it is Brussels,
not New York, that will shape the future of Kosovo.
As such, we welcome the proposed reductions in the
budget and personnel of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo. It is clear that the
Mission should be doing less, not more. In keeping
with that approach, we reiterate our view that it is long
past time to reduce the frequency of these meetings.
We also support a reduction in the frequency of the
Secretary-General's reports. They are useful tools,
but the latest one, received just over two months after
the previous Council meeting, repeats a great deal of
information from the previous reporting period relating
to the Stabilization and Association Agreement and
the protests in Parliament, to name only two issues.
Reports every six months would end that repetition and
give the Special Representative and his team more time
for in-depth analysis.
Ultimately, however, it is the actions outside
this Chamber that will speak louder than the words
uttered within it - actions such as the European
Commission's recent recommendation to grant Kosovo
visa liberalization; UEFA and FIFA's acceptance of
Kosovo into their fold; the participation of Kosovo's
athletes in the Olympic Games later this year; and the
entry into force last month of Kosovo's Stabilization
and Association Agreement. Such actions demonstrate
that the discussions in this Chamber exist in a vacuum,
a bygone era in which Kosovo's independence,
sovereignty and very existence are still questioned. We
need only look at the news from last week to see that
that era is long over. The world and Kosovo are moving
on without us.

