Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We welcome the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2366 (2017) establishing the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia to
verify the implementation of the Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace between the Government of Colombia and
the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia
(FARC). We express appreciation to the penholder for
its efforts in drafting and facilitating the negotiation
on this important resolution and we are pleased to
have co-sponsored it. Ensuring the continued and
united support of the Council will be critical for the
success of the Mission and the implementation of the
Peace Agreement.

Let me take this opportunity to express our
congratulations to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Colombia, who is at this meeting today for the adoption
of this important resolution, for the remarkable progress
that her country has achieved so far with regard to
turning the corner against conflict and embarking on
a path to sustainable peace. We commend the United
Nations Mission in Colombia for all the good work it
has been doing in support of those efforts.

Just a week ago, we had the opportunity to
discuss the situation in Colombia and we welcome
the important and historic milestone that the country
has reached in implementing the Peace Agreement
with the completion of the laying down of individual
weapons held by the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia and their return to the United Nations for
registration and storage. This significant development,
alongside the holding of the bilateral ceasefire and
cessation of hostilities between the Government and
FARC, strengthen our optimism for lasting peace in
the country.

Once again, we commend both the Government
and FARC for their political will and commitment to
advancing the implementation of the Peace Agreement.
Of course, we understand that this is only the beginning
of a long and arduous process and there are difficult
issues that lie ahead, including the implementation of the
amnesty law, the reintegration of the FARC combatants
to civilian life and the implementation of personal and
collective security and protection measures and others.
We also recognize the potential complication ahead in
relation to the upcoming general elections due to take
place in May 2018. Therefore, it is imperative that the
parties continue to stay the course and the positive
momentum generated recently is sustained to achieve
the difficult transition to peace. In this regard, the role
of the United Nations Mission in Colombia continues
to be critical to further consolidate the gains of the
Peace Agreement. That is why we have supported the
establishment of a second United Nations mission upon
the completion of the mandate of the current Mission.

Finally, we want to reaffirm our continued support
to the full implementation of the Colombian Peace
Agreement and express our solidarity with the people
and Government of Colombia as they continue their
efforts to make the transition towards sustainable peace.

