Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Iwould
like to thank Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative
for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for his briefing on what
is taking place in that country, as well as for the very
serious and devoted way in which he is carrying out his
responsibilities.

At the outset, Colombia recognizes the fact that
reaching a political agreement in any circumstances
requires effort and commitment. The situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina is a special case, in which
the international community has helped the parties to
overcome obstacles and to reach significant agreements
aimed at reaching a lasting and peaceful solution. It
is therefore worrisome to note a deterioration in the
political situation and a reverse in strengthening the
Euro-Atlantic agenda, as reflected in the report of the
Secretary-General (see S/2012/8l3).
Our delegation believes that it is of the greatest
importance that the parties renew their commitment
to the Dayton Agreement and work in the same spirit
that enabled them to reach agreements in the past. It is
to be hoped that the entities and their political leaders
eschew inflammatory rhetoric, as it jeopardizes the
stability of the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
unnecessarily threatens the progress made on the
Euro-Atlantic agenda. Language calling for the break-up
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and acts that undermine its
rule of law are not an appropriate response to the effort
that its own people and the international community
have devoted to that process. Instead, the Federation
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Republika Srpska
must work constructively and pay particular attention
to major issues, such as the economic and social
challenges that they face.

With regard to events such as the Srebrenica
genocide, acknowledged by the International Court of
Justice and the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, we call for reconciliation and for
any demonstration regarding such events to seek to heal
wounds and to move towards mutual forgiveness.

We note positively the dialogue on justice promoted
by the European Union. We trust that the local leaders
of both entities will take that opportunity to discuss
judicial matters constructively and to thereby help
strengthen the rule of law in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Finally, Colombia once again reiterates its support
for the Dayton Agreement on the establishment of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the decisions ensuing
from that Agreement. We underscore the importance of
the strict implementation of the Agreement within the
context of its annex 10.

For Colombia, the United Nations bears the
responsibility of cooperating in the process that is
under way. However, equally, the parties should
cooperate with the High Representative, whose Office
must continue its work until the goals and conditions
of the 5+2 agenda are met. I wish to underscore the
important role of the multinational stabilization force
in strengthening Bosnia and Herzegovina's future.
Colombia supports the extension of its mandate.

I do not wish to conclude without welcoming and
expressing every good wish to the Ambassador of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, who is here with us at this
Security Council meeting.

