The President (spoke in French): After
consultations among members of the Security Council,
I have been authorized to make the following statement
on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council recalls the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, and reaffirms its commitment to the
pacific settlement of disputes, including through
mediation, in conformity with the Charter of the
United Nations, in particular Chapter VI. The
Council recalls all its relevant previous
statements and resolutions.

"The Security Council underlines the
importance of mediation as a means of pacific
settlement of disputes, and encourages the further
use of this mechanism in the settlement of
disputes. The Council reaffirms the crucial role of
the United Nations in this regard.

"The Security Council affirms that, as the
organ with the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security,
it has a responsibility to promote and support
mediation as an important means for the pacific
settlement of disputes.

"The Security Council emphasizes the
importance of the actions undertaken by the
Secretary-General, in using his good offices and
his representatives, special envoys, and United
Nations mediators in promoting mediation and in
the pacific settlement of disputes. The Council
takes note of the establishment of the Department
of Political Affairs Mediation Support Unit,
which provides expertise for supporting the
mediation efforts of the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to continue to ensure that
mediation processes conducted by or under the
auspices of the United Nations are guided by the
purposes and principles of the Organization and
that mediators are experienced, impartial, have a
good knowledge of all the stakeholders, facts and
circumstances of any dispute to which they have
been assigned, and are provided with the
necessary support and flexibility to approach
mediation according to the specificities of the
disputes; to this end, the Council encourages the
Secretary-General to consider ways to strengthen
the Secretariat's capabilities.
"The Security Council notes the important
contribution of regional and subregional
organizations, civil society and other stakeholders
to the pacific settlement of disputes, in particular
through mediation, and commends them for their
efforts. The Council is resolved to strengthen
United Nations support to such mediation efforts
through improved cooperation, in particular in
Africa; the Council encourages other bilateral and
multilateral partners to do likewise.

"The Security Council underlines the
importance of engaging the potential and the
existing capacities and capabilities of regional
and subregional organizations in mediation
efforts, and welcomes the promotion of regional
approaches to the pacific settlement of disputes.

"The Security Council notes that women
have an important role to play in the settlement of
disputes, stresses the importance of their equal
participation and full involvement in all efforts
for the maintenance and promotion of peace and
security, and calls upon the Secretary-General of
the United Nations and the heads of regional and
subregional organizations to take into account the
gender aspect during mediators' selection, as well
as the approach and perspective that women can
render in mediation processes.

"The Security Council highlights the
importance of considering peacebuilding and
recovery requirements in the mediation process to
help build the foundations for sustainable peace,
and stresses that the Peacebuilding Commission
has a role to play in the promotion of mediation.

"The Security Council emphasizes the need
to ensure the coherence of mediation processes
08-51564
by or under the auspices of the United Nations,
through the improved coordination of efforts with
others actors, including regional and subregional
organizations, in order to enhance the
effectiveness of international efforts.

"The Security Council also stresses that no
mediation initiative can be viable without
ownership and full involvement of all relevant
parties to the dispute throughout the process. The
Council reaffirms that conflict prevention and
pacific settlement of disputes should be at the
core of mediation efforts.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to submit, within six months of
the adoption of this statement, a report on
mediation and its support activities, which takes
into account experiences of the United Nations
and other key actors, and makes
recommendations for enhancing the effectiveness
of United Nations mediation."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2008/36.

I would like to thank all the participants for their
contributions to this meeting. My thanks go
particularly to all the heads of State or Government,
ministers and other representatives, and to the
Secretary-General.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on the
agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.20 p.m.
23
