Mr. McLay (New Zealand): I join others in
thanking Mr. Jose' Luis Guterres, Deputy Prime
Minister of Timor-Leste, and Mr. Atul Khare, Special
Representative of the Secretary General, for their
presentations today, as well as the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2009/504) on the situation in Timor-
Leste. We particularly acknowledge Mr. Khare's role in
overseeing the progress we are reviewing today, and
we wish him well for the future.

For 10 years, New Zealand has been pleased to
work with Timor-Leste, successive United Nations and
international missions and other bilateral partners, and
is proud of the role it has played in helping to build
that new nation. We appreciate the comments by
various Council members acknowledging that role. We
are committed to continuing our assistance and fully
support a continued mandate for the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT).

We have heard today of the considerable progress
that has been made in Timor-Leste since we last met.
The country is calm. Peaceful, free and fair village
elections were very recently held, supported by the
United Nations. Slowly but surely, Timor-Leste's
institutions are growing in strength. There have been
relatively few security incidents this year, and those
that have occurred have been criminal in nature rather
than resulting from any breakdown in stability.

The Australia/New Zealand International
Stabilisation Force (ISF), is increasingly focusing on
capacity-building and development assistance. At the
same time, we recognize that the mere presence of that
Force, like that of the United Nations police, provides
a disincentive to those who might otherwise seek to
foment unrest.

The National Police Force of Timor-Leste
(PNTL) is taking back from the United Nations
responsibility for practical policing, district by district.
We will be watching with interest the resumption of
policing in Viqueque next month.
New Zealand continues to assist the PNTL in its
development through cooperation in community
policing. Our pilot projects in Becora prison in Dili and
in Suai in Covalima District are going well, and
progress is being made in working with the PNTL and
other United Nations police personnel to extend
community policing approaches to other areas. We
believe that community policing can significantly
contribute to promoting a peaceful and harmonious
society.

These are all positive developments. Together,
they are helping to create exactly the sort of
environment that the Government of Timor-Leste needs
if it is to succeed in taking on longer-term challenges,
including those identified by the Secretary-General.
There are the challenges of building the institutions of
statehood, developing effective and representative
systems of governance and creating credible
mechanisms for addressing justice and human rights
issues. There are also the challenges of creating a
strong economy and generating meaningful
employment, particularly for the young. We need to
support the Government in enabling the growth of a
private sector, because only that sector can provide the
many jobs needed in the future.

It is New Zealand's assessment that Timor-Leste
is entering a transitional period. We cannot yet be fully
sure that the current peace and calm equate to long-
term stability. The unexpected eruption of violence in
2006 reminded us of the danger of making that
calculation too early or too quickly. But it is equally
clear that the country is no longer in a state of crisis.
As the Timorese Government itself has put it, the
situation is moving from conflict to development.

This means that, while the support of the
international community is still required, the nature
and direction of that support may have to evolve and
change. It also means that we will increasingly need to
call on contributions - multilateral as well as
bilateral - from a wide range of international players
with different areas of skill and expertise.

The United Nations has a central role to play in
this changing environment. In our view, it must
continue to assist Timor-Leste to strengthen its national
institutions and work towards peaceful and credible
elections in 2012. But to ensure that it remains
effective, UNMIT must be allowed to evolve. It is vital
that the Mission remain responsive to the changing
environment in which it operates.

In that respect, the upcoming visit to Timor-Leste
of a United Nations technical assessment mission is
timely, and we look forward to its recommendations
regarding UNMIT's medium-term future. We do not
wish to speculate as to the likely outcome of the
mission, but we agree with the Secretary-General's
report that any adjustments in UNMIT police numbers
should be undertaken only in a gradual, step-by-step
manner that helps to maintain confidence in the current
stable security situation.

As one of the two partners in the International
Stabilization Force (ISF), we also believe that any
decisions made about UNMIT's future should continue
to recognize the close interlinking of United Nations
and ISF operations. The ISF is charged with providing
security to UNMIT, and it is vital that planning for the
future of those two core components of the
international security presence continue to be closely
coordinated.

New Zealand assures the Security Council of its
continuing support for and encouragement to the
leaders and the people of Timor-Leste and to Mr. Khare
and his UNMIT team. We thank the Council for its
ongoing support for Timor-Leste and Viet Nam for
presiding over today's discussions.

Amid the chaos and violence of 10 years ago, it
was hard to see the prospect of the new nation that is
emerging today. The security, social, economic and
governance challenges of the past decade have been
faced and largely met. Timor-Leste can now take up
with some confidence the further challenges of
developing the institutions of statehood and national
democratic, representative Government, of creating
credible mechanisms for ensuring justice and the
protection of human rights, and of building a strong
and sustainable economy. In the spirit of cooperation of
those 10 years, New Zealand shares and takes some
quiet pride in all those developments and in having
helped and supported the emergence of this new
member of the international family of free and
independent nations.

