Mr. Adechi (Benin) (spoke in French): I wish to
express our satisfaction at seeing you, Sir, presiding
over the work of the Council for the month of April
and to take this opportunity to express our appreciation
to Ambassador De La Sabliere and his team for the
remarkable work accomplished by the Council
presidency in the month of March.

I also wish to thank you, Sir, for the very useful
information you have just provided us on the very
encouraging results of the Berlin international
conference on Afghanistan. We have also listened
closely to Mr. Guehenno's briefing, and we are grateful
to him for it.

The ongoing laudable efforts of the new political
Afghan leadership undertaken since 2001 to ensure
vigorous implementation of the Bonn Agreement
deserve the international community's support. The
positive results emerging from the Berlin conference
are a tribute to Germany, the United Nations and many
donor countries. We particularly welcome the multiyear
nature of the pledges made by the donor countries on
that occasion, which will make it possible to sustain
the momentum of the excellent progress under way in
Afghanistan.

We are convinced that the Transitional Afghan
Government, which we congratulate for its honourable
efforts, will find, in soliciting the international
community, genuine encouragement to restore stability
and promote sustainable development in Afghanistan.

We commend the work plan endorsed at the
conference, which establishes a clear perspective on
channelling energy and creating the synergy necessary
to maximize the impact of diverse support that will
benefit Afghanistan. That plan has opened a long-term
field of work that requires momentum sustained by
consistent and coordinated follow-up action.

President Karzai's decision to hold presidential
and parliamentary elections in September, instead of
June, 2004 is a responsible choice. We welcome it, and
we urge the international community to support
preparation of that electoral process and to help create
the necessary transparent security conditions to confer
the requisite credibility on the electoral process. The
Afghan Government therefore has a major
responsibility in terms of disarming armed groups to
substantially improve the security situation. The issue
of disarmament is a prerequisite that must be addressed
in order to hold credible elections accepted by all and
to ensure the survival of the democratic political
process. The fight against drugs, we believe, is a key
challenge to be met to ensure the full reintegration of
Afghanistan in the family of nations. That reintegration
will not take place if the country's economy continues
to be dominated by drug cultivation and trafficking, on
which organized crime thrives. That is why we believe
that the Transitional Government is correct in making a
priority of its action and in putting its efforts into
cooperation with neighbouring countries.

We support the draft presidential statement,
introduced by Germany, and we are ready to work with
all stakeholders to assist the Afghan people in
continuing to pursue its path towards progress and
stability.

