Mr. Ri Tong 11 (Democratic People's Republic of Korea): Let me first commend you, Mr. President, for
having convened this very important meeting in a very
timely manner. Let me also thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for his briefing. I should like also to
associate the delegation of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea with the statement to be made by the
Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

Today we are witnessing another barbaric armed
invasion into the Gaza Strip by Israel, posing a great
threat to peace and security in the Middle East. This
ongoing armed invasion by Israel is characterized by
indiscriminate destruction and massive civilian killings,
giving rise to shock, outrage and condemnation on the
part of the international community.

In this regard, the delegation of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea would like to clarify its
position as follows.
First, Israel should immediately put an end to its
armed invasion into the Gaza Strip, as requested by the
international community. The Middle East, along with
the Korean peninsula, is one of the largest hotspots
in the world. The core issue in the Middle East is the
question of Palestine. Israel, since the first day of its
inception, following the end of the Second World War,
has been a country with a history of bloody aggression
and provocations against Palestine and Arab countries.
Israel's armed invasion should not be tolerated, and it
cannot be justified on any grounds. The more Israel
expands its armed invasion, based on ridiculous
arguments, as we saw this morning, the more Israel will
expose its true colours as an aggressor and a source of
threat and tension in the region, thereby inviting greater
condemnation from the international community.

Secondly, Israel should stop the indiscriminate mass
killing of civilians, as requested by the international
community. Under international law, mass civilian
killings are regarded as a crime against humanity and
a war crime.

Israel's indiscriminate mass civilian killings are
becoming ever more brutal because they are targeting
even young children, who are the happiness and future
of mankind.

The indiscriminate mass killings of civilians by
Israeli soldiers are becoming more savage because
they are targeting civilian hospitals. All of these
killings targeted at defenceless civilians should not
be tolerated, and the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea condemns Israel in the strongest terms.

Thirdly, the Security Council should carry out its
mission to ensure international peace and security, as
requested by the international community. The Council
is not a political tool to be used by one specific country
for its selfish needs and to abuse power. The question of
Palestine has now reached a very dangerous and critical
stage; all this is related directly to the behaviour of that
one country, the United States, a permanent member
of the Security Council. The United States has since
the beginning defended and supported Israel, pushing
it towards war, with the ridiculous argument we heard
this morning that Israel has the right to defend itself.
These kinds of acts on the part of the United States can
only have a destructive impact on the credibility of the
Security Council.

The establishment of the State of Palestine is the
inalienable right of its people. Giving support and
solidarity to the just struggle of the people of Palestine
to establish an independent State based on the pre-
1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, is
receiving support from an overwhelming international
majority, which no one can stop. The Government of
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea remains
consistent in its very strong support for the just struggle
of the people of Palestine. We urge Israel to stop all
of the illegal and unlawful military actions occurring
now in that part of the world and respond positively to
international demands.

