Mr. Qazi: I am honoured to present the third
report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph
30 of Security Council resolution 1546 (2004). The
report provides an update on United Nations activities
in Iraq since the Secretary-General's last report of 8
December 2004, including, in particular, the support
given by the United Nations to the electoral process
and the Independent Electoral Commission of Iraq. The
report is largely self-explanatory, and I will therefore
focus my remarks on the political process that has
developed since the elections and its implications for
the work of the United Nations in the coming months.

The Council has given the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) a firm mandate
to be implemented as circumstances permit. Since
taking up my functions, I have looked at how to
implement this mandate more effectively, as a discreet
facilitator and sounding board for ideas and approaches
that can further an inclusive political process.
Accordingly, I have met with Iraqi leaders and
representatives across the political spectrum in order to
understand their perspectives. In my discussions, I
have stressed that only the Iraqis themselves can find
viable and lasting solutions to their political problems.
I have emphasized the vital importance of gradually
building mutual trust among the various Iraqi political
entities through sustained dialogue, mutual
accommodation and confidence-building measures.

Following Iraq's historic elections, the convening
of the Transitional National Assembly on 16 March
and the election last week by the Assembly of a new
President and two Vice-Presidents are further
testimony of Iraq's progress towards a democratic
future. The election of the Presidency Council in
particular is a clear expression of the commitment of
Iraq's new leadership to working towards national
unity through peaceful democratic means. The quicker
the formation of the Transitional Government can be
completed, the sooner Iraq will move forward to the
next phase of its political transition.

The organization of three simultaneous elections
on 30 January was a formidable feat, matched by a
formidable statement of support from voters
throughout most of Iraq. While the overall registered
voters' turnout was healthy, particularly in the north
and south, there were significant regional variations. It
is a fact that, for whatever reason, in certain parts of
the country, too many Iraqis would not or could not
participate in the elections, whether as voters or as
candidates. As a result, certain groups - particularly
Sunni Arabs - have found themselves
underrepresented in the Transitional National
Assembly. Nevertheless, all the major parties,
including those that did not participate in the elections,
have engaged in intensive negotiations for the
formation of the Government and with regard to
participation in the constitution-making process. I hope
that the Iraqis will build upon this positive momentum
as they move on. It is important that no community
should feel alienated from the political process.

The road ahead presents both great opportunities
and serious challenges to the Iraqi people. The main
challenge is to consolidate national unity through
dialogue and reconciliation while preserving Iraq's
sovereignty, political independence and territorial
integrity. Regardless of religious and sectarian
backgrounds, it is in the interest of every Iraqi to
contribute to forging a broad political consensus on the
way forward. Iraqis are looking to their newly elected
leaders to exercise their responsibilities wisely and
efficiently in that regard.

The drafting of a national constitution provides a
historic opportunity for Iraqis to come together. With
the formation of their new Government, Iraqis have
demonstrated their capacity to make hard political
compromises in the national interest. I hope that that
spirit will continue to prevail throughout the
constitution-making process so that diverse
experiences and histories can translate into a shared
future. Failure to pursue further dialogue and
reconciliation would involve a higher price for the
parties concerned than would the compromises
necessary for reaching national consensus through
peaceful means.

Those who did not participate in the elections
now have the opportunity to agree on a platform and a
mechanism by which their concerns can be reflected in
the constitutional debate. They also face the need to
organize themselves and to mobilize their supporters to
vote in the constitutional referendum and in the
subsequent elections. No constituency should fear
becoming the new victims in a new Iraq. To the
contrary, each needs to be assured of playing its
rightful role as an integral and vital part of Iraqi
national life, sharing responsibilities and rewards with
their fellow Iraqis. The perceptions, concerns and
demands of those who feel left out will need to be fully
factored in if the political process is to contribute to
political stability.

Those parties who benefited the most from the
elections have already demonstrated foresight and
wisdom in articulating a policy of outreach and
inclusion, in counselling restraint in the face of
provocative acts of violence and in negotiating
mutually agreeable understandings for the formation of
a Transitional Government. Most important, they have
chosen to inscribe their action peacefully within a
national framework and in the common interest, with
all the concomitant responsibilities and opportunities
that that entails.

In that regard, I welcome the public assurances of
prominent leaders against pursuing a sectarian agenda
or imposing majoritarian views on issues in which all
Iraqis have a stake, including issues related to the
nature and character of the Iraqi State. In the period
ahead, it will be incumbent on the major parties to
ensure that the views and interests of minority
communities and civic groups are adequately
represented in the constitution-drafting exercise.

Political, security and economic challenges will
continue to confront Iraq. But if they are approached
on the basis of developing a national consensus, the
Transitional Assembly should succeed in creating a
new and stronger political framework in which all
Iraqis are enabled to contribute their skills and energies
to building and defending a democratic, pluralistic and
prosperous Iraq.

If properly conducted, the constitution-drafting
exercise will provide an opportunity for those who
have so far stayed away from the political process to
reconsider their options. It must also provide an
opportunity for Iraqi civil society, down to the grass-
roots level, to participate by providing critical input. A
constitution that emerges from such a process will not
be easily set aside and will serve generations to come.
Moreover, to the extent that the final document is the
product of nationwide discussions and compromises on
sensitive issues, it can only encourage the emergence
of a political culture and institutions of
accommodation, negotiation and progress.

The Transitional Government will have the
primary responsibility - indeed, the duty - to
facilitate an inclusive, participatory and transparent
constitution-making process. However, it behoves all
of Iraq's communities to make a genuine effort to reach
out to one another as Iraqis first and foremost and to
reconcile their differences within the realm of dialogue
and political competition.
In accordance with its mandate, the United
Nations stands ready to assist Iraq's sovereign and
independent constitution-making process and to
coordinate offers of international assistance, if it is so
requested. We shall do so in keeping with the priorities
of the Transitional Assembly and of any constitutional
bodies that the Assembly may establish.

I welcome the Security Council's reaffirmation,
in its last presidential statement on this issue
(S/PRST/2005/5), of the leading role of UNAMI in that
regard. Apart from the challenge of achieving national
reconciliation, the very limited time prescribed by the
Transitional Administrative Law for the remaining
steps in the political transition process - namely, the
drafting of a constitution and the holding of a
constitutional referendum and national elections - is a
challenge in itself. I am confident, however, that the
Iraqis will rise to the occasion, as they did for the last
election, and the United Nations will support them to
that end.

A credible political process offers the best
prospect for improving the security environment,
which continues to remain difficult in certain parts of
the country. Although there has been an apparent
reduction in the number of violent incidents since the
elections, the tactics and lethality of the insurgency
continue to evolve and remain a cause of concern. The
better and the faster Iraqi security forces can be
trained, the sooner they will be able to assume their
responsibilities and take charge of the country's
security.

As the report makes clear, the human rights
situation in Iraq continues to warrant close attention. It
is largely innocent civilian non-combatants who are
affected by violence and the use of force. In some
areas - notably in Fallujah and other places in Al-
Anbar - the population remains deprived of the
protection to which they are entitled under
international humanitarian law. Continuing reports of
detentions and the absence of adequate arrangements
for due process are issues that also need to be
addressed. In those areas of Iraq where security is
relatively stable, the authorities concerned should be
able to give greater attention to the protection of
human rights. My Human Rights Office will continue
to monitor the situation closely so that our efforts in
support of the restoration of the rule of law are at all
times rooted in an up-to-date understanding of the
human rights reality prevailing in Iraq.

Members of the international community can
provide critical support to Iraq's transition process by
stepping up their reconstruction and development
assistance, both through the International
Reconstruction Fund Facility for Iraq and bilaterally.
UNAMI is taking measures to improve its delivery
capacity while necessarily keeping the evolving
security situation in mind. UNAMI is also prepared to
play an enhanced coordinating role between donor
countries and organizations, on the one hand, and
designated Iraqi authorities, on the other. That will
help to improve the effectiveness of international
assistance in a range of fields, to the benefit of the
Iraqi people. Iraqis expect tangible political and
economic progress, particularly in terms of living
conditions, jobs and basic services. Even though the
time remaining before the next elections is short, the
Transitional Government needs to alleviate the daily
deprivations and dangers that frustrate and degrade the
lives of so many Iraqis and undermine the prospects for
a successful transition process.

An improvement in the overall security
environment is, as the report stresses, an essential
prerequisite for an expansion of United Nations
activities in Iraq. Almost without exception, Iraqi
interlocutors want the United Nations to assume
greater responsibilities and greater visibility in Iraq. I
know that that is a view shared by many in the Security
Council also.

We have already opened liaison offices in Erbil
and Basra, ahead of the possible deployment of an
initial number of humanitarian and development staff.
Such deployment is indispensable if those offices are
to fulfil their essential functions with regard to relief
and development activities at this time. We will be
assessing the scope for increased humanitarian and
development initiatives, consistent, as always, with the
security of United Nations staff. The arrival of newly
contributed guard units assigned to provide United
Nations security in Baghdad and Basra will, I hope,
encourage other countries to consider supporting the
expansion of United Nations activities in Iraq through
practical as well as moral support. On behalf of
UNAMI, I also wish to thank the Government of Fiji
for its important contribution to the security of our
Mission.

Iraq's challenges are also the challenges of the
international community. The new transitional
institutions of Iraq will need continued and active
support from the United Nations, the region and the
international community at large. I welcome the
ongoing regional process among Iraq and its
neighbours as an essential vehicle for dialogue and
cooperation. I also welcome any concerted
international initiative in support of Iraq's political and
economic reconstruction. The United Nations is ready
to support, and play its part in, such efforts. Now is the
time for us to stand together with Iraq's new authorities
and give them a chance to succeed in the eyes of their
people. As the Iraqi people begin to rebuild their
country, they need to feel that Iraq is resuming its place
as a fully independent, sovereign and integrated
member of the international community. The Security
Council has a special responsibility to ensure that
Iraq's relations with the region and the international
community can be normalized expeditiously.

I wish to thank the Security Council for its
support. I look forward to keeping it informed on
UNAMI's activities in Iraq as we move forward.

