Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Ithank
the Malaysian presidency and Minister Dato Sri Anifah
Aman for convening this open debate and commend
Malaysia's excellent leadership of the Security Council
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
We value the Secretary-General's leadership in that
area and the work of his Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict, Leila Zerrougui, as well
as UNICEF and other United Nations bodies, regional
organizations and civil society.

We carefully followed Eunice Apio's valuable
testimony, which calls upon us to act decisively to assist
children who have been abducted in conflict situations
from their homes, schools and refugee camps, mostly
by non-State armed groups in the framework of their
systematic campaigns of intimidation and reprisals
against civilians.

Resolution 2225 (2015), which was adopted today,
and the report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/409)
are very much in accord with my country's concerns;
we will therefore focus on certain aspects that, in the
context ofthe concept note (S/2015/402, annex), deserve
special attention.

Despite the progress achieved in the Secretary-
General's "Children, Not Soldiers" campaign, which is
focused on States, initiatives to achieve commitments
by non-State actors and accountability must be
strengthened. In that regard, the recommendations of
the Secretary-General's recent report provide important
guidance to States and the international community as
a whole.

Furthermore, States must respond to threats to
peace and security in accordance with international
law, while ensuring mitigation measures to protect the
children affected. Children must be treated primarily
as victims, with their rehabilitation and reintegration
forming the core of the efforts undertaken.

The detention of children on the grounds of their
association with armed groups during conflict must
be monitored through the reports of the Secretary-
General. Judicial actions against demobilized children
must fall within the jurisdiction of special courts, based
on international standards of juvenile justice. Detention
should be a measure of last resort and should take place
only in special centres for minors, and children should
never be placed among adult prisoners.

We vigorously condemn the abduction of children
by any and all parties to conflict, as it is not only illegal
under international law but a serious violation of the
Geneva Conventions and possibly a crime against
humanity.

The abduction of children in conflict is a long-
standing issue and one of the six grave Violations
against children in armed conflict established by the
Council. However, since 2014 that crime's visibility has
increased in the wake ofrecent cases requiring solutions
to that scourge, which can lead to other violations such
as forced labour, sexual slavery, recruitment and cross-
border trafficking in children. That is why we support
the listing in the annexes of the Secretary-General's
reports of parties to conflict that are kidnapping
children, so that they can be pressured to release their
hostages and be brought tojustice. Along the same lines,
the Council's sanctions committees should include
grave Violations of the rights of children as an eligible
criterion for the imposition of sanctions. Only joint,
coordinated and complementary efforts will ensure the
protection of fundamental rights and proper protection
of the most vulnerable populations.

We also stress the importance of child protection
advisers in political and peacekeeping missions with
training in children's rights, and the six grave violations
against children that were established by the Council,
as well as prevention measures. Likewise, ceasefire
agreements, peace processes and post-conflict agendas
must address the issue of kidnapped children and their
rehabilitation and reintegration.

The impact of armed conflict on education poses
challenges in terms of major humanitarian emergencies
and social and development challenges. The Council
notes daily, throughout the world, bombings and
burned schools, with children and their teachers as the
ongoing victims of killings, mutilations, abductions
and arbitrary detention. Schools are continually used
by parties to armed conflict as bases, barracks or
detention centres. We therefore urge parties to armed
conflict to implement resolution 2143 (2014) and to
refrain from actions that impede children's access to
education during conflict. We encourage Member
States to consider concrete steps to discourage the use
of schools by armed forces and non-State armed groups,
as such use violates existing international standards.

We believe that the implementation of the
Guidelines for Protecting Schools and Universities
from Military Use during Armed Conflict, known as
the Lucens Guidelines, supported by Chile through the
Safe Schools Declaration of last May, will contribute to
improved conduct and best practices leading to greater
protection for schools and universities in times of
armed conflict and reducing their use during military
operations, with a view to protecting children in any
and all circumstances.

Lastly, Chile would like to reiterate its firm
commitment to contributing actively to the prevention
and elimination of all forms of Violence affecting boys
and girls around the world and to continuing to work
towards eradicating the six grave Violations committed
against children in situations of armed conflict.

