Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Ambassador Gary Quinlan for his
briefing on the work ofthe Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), which he
chairs. In our view, the very dry nature of his briefing
is what makes it stand out.

Russian diplomacy has, over many years, worked
very actively to achieve fair agreements on the Iranian
nuclear programme on the basis of the step-by-step
reciprocity spelled out by the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Russian Federation, Sergey V. Lavrov. We are
satisfied that those efforts have yielded results and that
on 24 November 2013, a breakthrough agreement - and
that is not an exaggeration - was reached between
the P5+l, the international mediators and Iran. That
agreement recognized the unquestionable right of Iran
to develop a peaceful nuclear programme, including
uranium enrichment, subject to the understanding that
outstanding issues around it will be resolved and that
the programme itself will be placed under International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) safeguards.

It is also important that the aforementioned
agreement presupposes a weakening of the sanctions
regime against Iran. It is gratifying that the suspension
of unilateral sanctions, the legitimacy of which were
never recognized, and which have had a long-standing
negative impact on the socioeconomic position of the
Iranian people, has already started.

In that context, the ultimate goal is of course the
lifting of all sanctions - those imposed both by the
Security Council resolutions and unilaterally - once a
basic agreement on the final settlement of the Iranian
nuclear programme has been achieved. All sides must
implement the Geneva plan of action in good faith and
actively work to draft, by 20 July, a final package that
would allow for an early and comprehensive settlement
of issues surrounding the Iranian nuclear programme
on the basis of compromises in all areas.

In that regard, we welcome the second comprehensive
round of negotiations between the P5+l and the Islamic
Republic of Iran, held in Vienna from 17 to 19 March.
It was useful and affirmed the mutual readiness to
continue contructive cooperation and comprehensive
talks. There was an in-depth discussion ofthe sanctions
issues, Iranian enrichment activities and international
cooperation with Iran on peaceful nuclear energy,
and on how to allay concerns over the heavy water
reactor in Arak. The P5+1 and Iran agreed to continue
comprehensive talks at the political and technical levels.

The next round of expert consultations will be held
at the beginning of April, following which another
comprehensive round of negotiations will be held in
Vienna from 7 to 9 April. Such a tight schedule gives
the necessary positive momentum to the process for
us to focus our work on those aspects where there are
the greatest differences exist and to move towards
resolving them.

The increased cooperation between Iran and the
IAEA is promising. That cooperation has reached a
new stage and provides for Iran's implementation of
good-faith transparency measures that go beyond its
commitments in the framework of the IAEA guarantees.
We hope that the IAEA will close the Iranian dossier in
the near future and cooperate with that country in the
normal way.

We are convinced that the current sensitive stage
of the international community's work must be tailored
to promoting a positive negotiation process between
the P5+l and Iran. That is what guides our work in
the 1737 Committee. In the current critical stage, it is
particularly important that the Committee and its Panel
of Experts continue to act in an unbiased, balanced
and objective way in order to promote a political and
diplomatic settlement with regard to the Iranian nuclear
programme.

We are convinced that progress on the Iranian issue
will have a positive impact on the situation throughout
the Middle East and help to overcome the dangerous
trend of recent years, when there were attempts to

resolve a number of crisis situations by using force. For
our part, we will continue to spare no effort to achieve
a final comprehensive solution to issues related to the
Iranian nuclear programme. We hope that hasty actions
by some partners of the P5+1 will not lead to a loss of
coordination in that very important mechanism.
