Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the High Representative for Implementation
of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina for
the briefing on his report for the period from 21 October
2014 to 21 April 2015 (S/2015/300, annex). The period
was dominated by three main political developments,
the process of forming a Government following the
October 2014 elections, the efforts to kick-start Bosnia
and Herzegovina's integration into the European
Union and the actions and statements challenging the
fundamental principles ofthe Dayton Peace Agreement.

Inthatregard,we welcometheHighRepresentative's
efforts to ensure the upholding ofthe civilian aspects of
the Dayton Agreement, promote recent advances and to
continue to implement the gains that have been made in
implementing the Agreement. We further welcome the
announcement on 10 November of the official election
results for the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina and for
the two entities and the 10 cantons in the Federation.
We also commend the progress made regarding
concerns about the Law on the Temporary Prohibition
of Disposal of State Property enacted in March 2005,
while deploring the challenges that various parties
have made during the reporting period to the General
Framework Agreement for Peace, which are an affront
to Bosnia and Herzegovina's sovereignty and territorial
integrity. We were surprised by the announcement by
a member of the Bosnia and Herzegovina House of
Peoples, reported in the media on 9 April, about his
party's intention to adopt a resolution on a free and
independent Republika Srpska, and we condemn it,
since it undermines the country's cohesion.

We welcome the election of the new joint Presidency,
composed ofa Serb, a Croat and aBosniak member, which
took office in November in a constructive spirit. We also
commend the Parliamentary Assembly's endorsement
on 23 February of the commitment to reforms ahead
of the country's entry into the European Union. We
call on all authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina to
cooperate fully with the High Representative and the
relevant international organizations, as laid down in
article 9 of the General Framework Agreement, and to
allow the High Representative access to information
and official documents that he needs in order to carry
out his mandate. We are concerned about the attitude of
authorities at various levels who continue to refuse to
implement many decisions of the Constitutional Court
and the general lack of progress in strengthening the
rule of law in the country.

Concerning the perpetrators of war crimes, we
note the federal authorities' lack of persistence in
prosecuting them. The political pressure being put on
the police is also a serious obstacle to its ability to
function properly. Regarding the issue of refugees and
displaced persons, we believe that this is a central piece
of the General Framework Agreement for Peace, and
one that will require that the State authorities and its
constituent bodies ensure the creation of the political,
economic and social conditions conducive to their return
and harmonious reintegration without discrimination.
We should also note that the reforms designed to ensure
the independence of public media are stalled, thanks to
disagreement between the three public broadcasters in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and their consequent failure to
establish a national public television and radio entity as
required under State legislation.

We pay deserved tribute to the European Union
military mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which
continues to play an important role in supporting the
country's efforts to maintain conditions conducive to
safety and security. We also reaffirm our beliefin Bosnia
and Herzegovina's territorial integrity and sovereignty,
and we support the Office of the High Representative
in its efforts to achieve the five objectives and two
conditions necessary of the Office's closure.

