Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): At the outset, I wish to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Olara
Otunnu, and the Executive Director of the United
Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), Ms. Carol
Bellamy, for their tireless efforts to ease the situation
of children in armed conflict and for the proposals and
recommendations they made in their statements.

Nearly a year has gone by since the previous
meeting of the Security Council devoted to the problem
of children in armed conflict. Our return to this
pressing topic shows that children who fall victim to
war remain the Security Council's focus of attention,
above all in the context of its implementation of its
fundamental obligation under the Charter to maintain
international peace and security.

In recent years, the rights of children have
become a high-priority objective within the framework
of the activities of the entire United Nations system.
This September will mark 10 years since the entry into
force of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, a
document that became the first universal bill of rights
for children. At the heart of the Convention lies the
conviction that children have special rights and may
therefore expect to receive particular attention from the
adult world. Naturally, the fundamental right remains
that to life.

Moreover, the Convention specifically provides
for protection of the rights of the child in armed
conflict. In this respect, it also applies to those children
who have been forcibly involved in hostilities; who are
growing up in refugee camps; who are left to fend for
themselves on city streets; and who are subject to
exploitation.

The change in the nature of contemporary
conflicts has led to a situation in which more than 90
per cent of victims are civilians, at least half of whom
are children. Children account for more than 65 per
cent of refugees and internally displaced persons.
According to the assessments of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Mr. Otunnu, there are currently 20
million children who have been displaced by war
within their countries and to others. Many have been
maimed and orphaned; thousands have been subject to
rape, sexual abuse and other atrocities. Approximately
300,000 young people under 18 have been forced to
take up arms as child soldiers. Behind these figures lies
enormous human misery placed on the tender shoulders
of children.

It is obvious that the international community
cannot fail to act in response to such serious situations
in which children are suffering. Of course, the best way
to protect children is to prevent the emergence of
conflicts or to settle them before they become
devastating.

Russia generally supports the draft Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict,
drawn up by the United Nations Commission on
Human Rights and adopted by the Economic and Social
Council on 10 May this year. This is an important
victory for the protection of the interests of children
and a significant step towards the implementation of
our shared goals. The Russian Federation supports the
adoption of the Protocol at the fifty-fifth session of the
General Assembly this fall, so that it can be open for
speedy signing and ratification, with the subsequent
appropriate modification of national legislations.

At the same time, we regret that the relevant
working group of the Commission on Human Rights
was not able entirely to fulfil its mandate to create a
new, effective mechanism for the protection of the
rights of children in armed conflict. We believe that if
the positions of a number of States on this question had
been more flexible and more responsible, we would
have been able to include in the Protocol a universal
age limit of 18 for recruitment in armed forces and
participation in hostilities, thus avoiding the use of a
double standard. That is the principled position of the
Russian Federation.

Our country was among the first to ratify the
Convention on the Rights of the Child. The legal and
practical guarantee of the rights of children is a
fundamental axiom of Russian policy in the sphere of
the protection of children, which is being carried out in
the framework of a single national plan of action for
children. Moreover, highest priority attention is being
accorded to the problems of children in difficult
situations and to questions of their physical and
psychological rehabilitation.

Among the legal acts governing activities on the
behalf of children in our country, it is important to note
the 1998 federal law on fundamental guarantees of the
rights of the child in the Russian Federation, which
legally enshrined the objectives and major axes of
work to promote and protect the rights of the child.

Despite the difficult economic situation in Russia,
the Russian Government is seeking ways of providing
social support to the most vulnerable strata of the
population, first and foremost children, caught up in
armed conflict.

In conclusion, I should like to express the hope
that the recommendations put forward in the report of
the Secretary-General on the question of children in
armed conflict, as well as today's wide-ranging
discussion in the Security Council, will provide
additional impetus to international cooperation to
protect our growing generation from the conflagration
of armed conflict.

