Mr. Khalilzad (United States of America): I wish
to extend a warm welcome to the Secretary-General
and thank him for his statement.

I would like to begin by expressing my deep
gratitude and sincere thanks to Ambassador Jones
Parry for our work together in the Security Council. He
will be missed. I would also like to warmly welcome
Ambassador Ripert. I look forward to working with
him and the rest of the French Mission on the many
issues before the Council.

Today's adoption of the resolution renewing the
mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq marks an important new phase in the role of the
United Nations in Iraq. It expands United Nations
involvement in three ways.

First, it will provide increased assistance to the
Iraqi people and their Government on domestic
reconciliation that leads to a national compact. Clearly,
domestic reconciliation is the responsibility of the Iraqi
people and Government, but the United Nations can
lend specific expertise to help this process.

Secondly, the United Nations can also help
promote regional understanding that supports Iraqi
reconciliation. This updated mandate marks another
important step along the road to increased support for
Iraq from the region and the international community.
This process is already underway with meetings in
Baghdad, Sharm el-Sheikh and elsewhere.

Thirdly, as the Secretary-General said, the United
Nations will help marshal resources to assist those
Iraqis affected by the humanitarian crisis. In fulfilling
the tasks set out in this resolution, United Nations staff
members in Iraq are making, have made and will make
a vital contribution to Iraq's future stability, and we
deeply appreciate their sacrifices and their dedicated
and selfless work. The United States, as part of the
multinational forces in Iraq, will do its part to ensure
that the United Nations security and resource needs are
met so that the United Nations expertise can be fully
deployed to help address the challenges in Iraq.

We are indeed grateful for the expanding United
Nations role in helping the Iraqi people shape their
future. However, let me be clear. The United States will
continue to shoulder all of its responsibilities to assist
Iraq's Government and people. We are fully dedicated
to success in Iraq, and our commitments to Iraq, to the
region, to the United Nations and to the rest of the
international community remain.

The United States looks forward to standing side
by side with the Iraqi people for a stable, secure Iraq at
peace with itself and its neighbours, and we intend to
continue our considerable efforts to help build that new
Iraq and to help the Iraqis overcome the challenges of
sectarianism and terrorism.

Without a doubt, we in the international
community have had our differences with regard to
Iraq. Despite those differences, I believe that we all
share the same vision for Iraq's future. That is clearly
the case today. Today's forward-looking resolution,
adopted unanimously by the Security Council, is an
important signal that the page has turned. The
resolution underscores the widespread belief that what
happens in Iraq has strategic implications not only for
the region, but for the entire world. I thank my fellow
members of the Security Council for their commitment
to the people of Iraq and to the United Nations
important role.

We hope that today's resolution will be a
springboard to greater international support for Iraq's
Government and people. The United States stands
ready to work with other countries in the region and
elsewhere to support the Iraqi Government and people
as they build a democratic, prosperous and stable
society.

