Mr. Farhfidi (Afghanistan): I congratulate you, Sir,
on the manner in which you are presiding over the
Security Council today. We are happy to see this meeting
chaired by an eminent diplomat such as you. I
congratulate your country, where I personally witnessed
during a visit to Windhoek the efforts of your countrymen
to work for the progress of Namibia, but with full
awareness of belonging to the United Nations. We also
thank Ambassador Andjaba for his very valuable efforts
in the United Nations.

We were greatly impressed by the words of
Ambassador Olara Otunnu, which reflected his highly

 

credible work. He has performed his mission not only by
Visiting so many countries and travelling widely in many
continents, but also by translating into action all of his
heartfelt devotion to humanity.

I take this opportunity to extend my thanks to the
members of the Security Council and to His Excellency
Mr. Kofi Annan, the Secretary-General, who strongly
condemned on Tuesday last week the forced displacement
of civilians in Afghanistan as a result of the latest offensive
by Pakistani-Taliban troops north of Kabul. He said he was
concerned about reports that youngsters had been involved
in the fighting. The Secretary-General also expressed deep
concern over reports of the involvement of students, some
as young as 14, and called for respect for the Convention
on the Rights of the Child, which bars the use of child
soldiers.

The United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) has
urged avoiding the recruitment of children under 18 years
of age and getting them involved in warfare, as Louis-
Georges Arsenault, the UNICEF representative in
Afghanistan, told a news conference. The United Nations
Coordinator for Afghanistan, Mr. Broneck Szynolsky, has
said there are some 30,000 to 40,000 displaced persons in
Kabul. In addition, there are over 200,000 persons in
northern Afghanistan newly displaced as a result of the
latest massive offensive launched by the Taliban.
Mr. Arsenault also said that over the past two weeks, the
Taliban had visited madrassas - religious schools - in
Pakistan and had succeeded in recruiting and sending away
thousands of students.

As is now well known to the international community
and to the States members of the Security Council,
Afghanistan once again, since its establishment in 1992 as
the Islamic State of Afghanistan, has been the victim of
undeclared conflicts imposed by neighbouring countries, in
this case Pakistan. The Pakistani objective remains to
secure space - or, as characterized by its officials,
"strategic depth" - through ensuring a subservient regime
in Afghanistan. This design reminds us of the Nazi policy
of Lebensranm in the 1940s, in which ethnic cleansing and
genocide were widely practised. This continued conflict in
our country, involving children, has inflicted on already
war-stricken Afghanistan huge suffering for the Afghan
people, widespread destruction, impoverishment and
distress.

One of the disastrous dimensions of the conflict is the
victimization of children. Various categories of children
have been and continue to be affected by the armed
conflict, such as child soldiers, displaced children, refugee
children, unaccompanied minors, child Victims of
trafficking and sale, child victims of sexual exploitation
and abuse, children affected by ethnic cleansing policies,
child survivors of massacres, orphaned children
abandoned or separated from their families, children
traumatized due to war, child beggars, child victims of
landmines, and many others. Those categories of children
are the legacy of war and conflict in Afghanistan. The
emergence of Taliban in 1994 and their military
campaign, organized and financed by Pakistani military
intelligence, known as the Inter-Services Intelligence
(ISI), and the involvement of Pakistani military personnel
coupled with hundreds of Arabs and thousands of
Pakistani extremists and so-called religious students from
Pakistani schools, all of them armed, have created a new
dimension in the conflict. Ethnic discrimination, religious
intolerance and extremism are the main characteristics of
the present conflict, which is abusively called a jihad,
whereas a jihad of Muslims against Muslims is unheard
of.

The Islamic State of Afghanistan, in its previous
statements before the Security Council over the past three
years, has signalled the danger of the adventurous policy
of Pakistan and the involvement in Afghanistan of its
military personnel and members of its extremist
organizations. This is a major threat to the peace and
security of Central and South Asia. Despite the
commitment given by Pakistan at the Tashkent meeting of
the six-plus-two group on 19 July 1999, in which the
participant countries agreed to put a halt to military
support to any Afghan party and to prevent the use of
their territories for such purposes, the Pakistani ISI
directed and launched on 28 July a well-prepared all-out
offensive attacking the civilian population of the Shamali
Plains. Despite the subsequent Pakistani-Taliban defeat,
they barbarously pursued their planned widespread,
systematic campaign of ethnic cleansing, genocide and a
scorched-earth policy. The widespread use of cluster
bombs; the levelling and torching of villages; the killing
of hundreds of civilians, including women and children;
the forced displacement of 40,000 women, elderly and
children, in addition to 300,000 internally displaced
persons; the separation of children from their families and
the imprisonment of all male refugees in Kabul all present
a new level of heinous crimes against humanity
committed by the Pakistani-Taliban aggressors.

In spite of the abundant evidence of the Pakistani
military presence in Afghanistan, including captured
Pakistani fighters in our custody - I repeat, including

 

captured Pakistani fighters in our custody - about which
we will elaborate further in the forthcoming open debate of
the Security Council, Pakistan continues to deny its well-
known involvement in Afghanistan. However, due to the
multiplicity of evidence, recently, after five years of war,
Pakistani officials finally admitted to the presence of
so-called "volunteers" from Pakistani religious schools in
the fighting in Afghanistan. We have some of these
"volunteers" in our custody, who have confessed to how
they were recruited, trained and sent to Afghanistan in
vehicles provided by the Pakistani ISI.

On 20 August 1999, the United Nations Information
Centre reported from Islamabad how young students, some
as young as 14, are being recruited for war in Afghanistan.
Mr. Arsenault, the representative of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, said that
the Taliban delegation in Pakistan over the last two weeks
appears to have recruited and sent between 2,000 and 2,500
fresh Taliban in expectation of a new offensive. The report
adds that "a Taliban official recently told reporters that
these students would be sent directly to the front lines".
The Taliban have already admitted to the presence of
Pakistanis in their ranks.

The recruitment of young students from religious
schools is being pursued by the 151, along with the dispatch
of regular armed Pakistani personnel, to fight against the
armed forces of the Islamic State of Afghanistan. This
practice is advocated by some extremist religious
organizations in Pakistan and, with the practical
organization by the ISI of an effort of regimentation and
indoctrination, is being deployed to justify and qualify this
recruitment under the name of jihad or holy war.
Fanaticism and bigotry are being inculcated in the fresh
minds of these youngsters by the Pakistani military
intelligence authorities to turn them into zealot fighters.
Such acts are not in conformity with Islamic tenets. All this
is done under the name of Islam. A holy struggle of
Muslims against other Muslims has nothing holy in it and
is a crime according to Islamic standards.

The modus operandi of Pakistan also goes against the
recognized principles of international law, the United
Nations Charter, General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions and even conventions signed and ratified by
Pakistan. The Convention on the Rights of the Child, in
article 38, stipulates that States Parties shall refrain from
recruiting children into the army and that children shall not
take part in hostilities.

Thousands of young students from Punjab and Sindh
in Pakistan have been recruited publicly and their
religious schools have been officially closed. Before
entering Afghanistan, they have received cursory military
training in Pakistan. They have then been sent to the front
lines of Afghanistan. This fact has been increasingly and
amply reported, even by Pakistani newspapers. The
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions on
Afghanistan - including Security Council resolution
1214 (1998) of 8 December 1998 - have called on all
States to take resolute measures to prohibit their military
personnel from planning and participating in military
operations in Afghanistan.

Furthermore, in accordance with the definition of
aggression set out in article 3 (g) of General Assembly
resolution 3314 (XXIX) of 14 December 1974, the
sending by or on behalf of a State of armed bands,
groups, irregulars or mercenaries, which carry out acts of
armed force against another State is considered
aggression.

On the basis of these documents, Pakistani
responsibility for waging an aggressive war against
Afghanistan and the dispatch of young madrassa students
are well established. The determination of this aggression
and the threat which it poses to the region and to
international peace and security falls to the Security
Council, along with its adoption of strong measures
against aggression.

The Islamic State of Afghanistan firmly believes that
wars have a tragic impact on civilians, especially children
and women. We are of the view that the foreign-imposed
Afghan crisis does not have a military solution. The
foreign military and so-called "volunteers" and fighters
should immediately leave Afghanistan. The Afghans
should resolve their problems through peaceful dialogue
and negotiations under the auspices of the United Nations.

Afghan children are entitled to adequate health care,
a decent education, nutritious food, a secure and loving
family and a life of friendship and opportunity. We
endorse the idea of a new peace and security agenda for
children and women, ending the use of children as
soldiers and providing better protection for children and
women in conflict situations.

The Islamic State of Afghanistan, as signatory to the
1989 United Nations Convention on the Rights of the
Child, reaffirms the fundamental place of the family in
society and recognizes that the child should be brought up

 

in the spirit of the ideals of the United Nations Charter, in
particular peace, dignity, tolerance, freedom and equality.
Gender equality must be maintained in all aspects,
including the right to schooling. The child must not be
raised in the spirit of bigotry, extremism and intolerance, as
practised by the ISI and its affiliated organizations,
including the Pakistani-backed Taliban.

Allow me in conclusion to share with the members of
the Security Council information with regard to the forced
enrolment and recruiting of children by the Taliban in
Afghanistan. Our defence forces have captured 63 children,
aged 13 to 16, who have been treated in a special way by
being separated from the adults. Some of these children
were recruited, but others were forced to participate in
combat in the first row of the front lines as cannon fodder.
Our side has contacted the senior family members and
relatives of these children, and the captured fighters have
been sent back to their families. I have here a list of their
names, which I will forward to the Secretary-General of the
United Nations. In addition, the International Committee of
the Red Cross has been informed of this matter.

