Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), Mr. Farid Zarif, for his
briefing. We also welcome the participation of First
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Dacie, and of Mr. Hashim Thaci.

While reiterating its strict adherence to international
law, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela again
expresses its view that the implementation of resolution
1244 (1999) remains the applicable international legal
basis for achieving a comprehensive settlement within
the framework of political negotiations on the question
of Kosovo, while respecting the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence of Serbia. In that
context, we support the resumption of the dialogue and
high-level negotiations in Brussels between Serbia and
the local authorities of the province of Kosovo with
the aim of reaching a mutually acceptable agreement
between the parties. We encourage further such
talks in the light of the commitment of both parties
to implementing the First Agreement of Principles
Governing the Normalization of Relations, as agreed
on 19 April 2013.

We welcome the indication in the Secretary-
General's report (S/2015/303) that security on the
administrative border of Kosovo has remained stable,
although some protests have been reported since the
report of February 2015 (S/2015/74), which we expect
to be channelled into peaceful engagement. We attach
special importance to the positive role that is being
played and must continue to be played by the United
Nations, through UNMIK, in promoting security,
stability and the respect for human rights, as well as
its cooperation with the International Security Force
in Kosovo and the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) under the auspices of
the Organization. We trust that these missions, based
on their respective mandates, will continue to play a
constructive role in reaching an appropriate solution to
the question of Kosovo.

We welcome the progress made with respect to the
composition of the judiciary in western Kosovo, based
on the Brussels Agreement of 12 February 2014, which
established in Mitrovica a single Basic Court with a
Kosovar-Serb Chief Judge, with one seat in northern
Mitrovica and another in southern Mitrovica. We also
support the call for the necessary steps to be taken to
establish a specialist court to investigate complaints of
war crimes and crimes against humanity committed
during the armed conflict in Kosovo. This matter
cannot be delayed.

Furthermore, in keeping with our position of
categorical condemnation of terrorism in all its forms,
Venezuela welcomes Kosovo's adoption in late March
of a law to prevent the recruitment of persons as foreign
terrorist fighters to participate in the armed conflicts in
Syria and Iraq.

We believe it highly important that full respect
be given to the human rights of displaced persons and
minorities and to promote their return to their places of
origin so that they can fully enjoy their human rights
free from discrimination. However, we are concerned
that we continue to hear of incidents against Serbian
Kosovar citizens in certain areas. It is for that reason
that we call for appropriate measures to address the
situation and to prevent persecution and hostilities based
on ethnic origin or religion. Furthermore, we reiterate
our call on the parties to step up their joint work to
clarify the situation of persons who disappeared during
the war. We are grateful for the forensic cooperation
of EULEX in this matter. We are concerned about the
legal actions against cultural and religious heritage
sites in Kosovo, and we encourage both parties to work
together to avoid any further recurrences of such acts
that will endanger peace and dialogue in the region.

Venezuela supports the peace and reconciliation
process. However, we believe that if the process is to
be successful, there can be no impunity for war crimes
and crimes against humanity in Kosovo. We must
insist on receiving without further delay responses
to the situation of those who disappeared during the
conflict. We must support the process of voluntary
reintegration of the thousands of Serbians who were
displaced from their homes in Kosovo. To that end,
we must guarantee their security, ethnic and religious
tolerance, and the land rights and economic opportunity
of Serbian Kosovars. All actions towards reconciliation
and political understanding among the parties must
be undertaken in strict accordance with the Brussels
Agreement of 2013.

Finally, we call once again on the parties to redouble
their efforts to find a peaceful, just and lasting political
solution that is in accordance with international law,
including full compliance with resolution 1244 (1999).
