Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): Let me start by
commending the delegation of Slovakia for organizing
this important initiative. We commend it particularly
for developing this theme over a long time before this
debate and for its commitment to continue refining it
further beyond today.

We, too, would like to recognize the contribution
made by the President of the General Assembly, the
Secretary-General, the President of the Economic and
Social Council, and the Chairman of the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission.

Security sector reform is a relatively new tool for
building long-lasting peace and development, but a
critical one indeed. It is a necessary tool for creating an
enabling environment for the promotion and protection
of human rights and the implementation of the rule of
law. In other words, it is hard to imagine long-lasting
post-conflict reconstruction and development without
addressing security sector reform.

When a country is in the grip of conflict, State
institutions are the first to collapse and the democratic
way of life, including the culture of human rights, is
eroded. Organs of State - such as the judiciary, the
police and the military - begin to serve those in

power rather than the rest of the population. As a result
of the democratic breakdown, the various parties to the
conflict resort to creating their own private armies. All
that leads to a general breakdown of trust in State
institutions, as everyone is left to conclude that
democracy has been abandoned and human rights no
longer apply.

Security sector reform, therefore, is not a process
that is restricted only to building the State institutions.
It is also about the building of trust between
populations and newly established democratic
institutions.

The reform of the security sector requires full
country ownership, backed by an informed and active
legislature, a clear Government policy framework, and
an effective executive authority, together with an active
civil society. The roles and responsibilities of all those
responsible for the security of a country need to be
spelled out and fully understood by everyone.

Security sector reform also needs to be perceived
as part of the broader post-conflict reconstruction and
development framework of a country emerging from
conflict. In that regard, the linkages between elements
of security sector reform, such as disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, and a development
framework are important. For example, in countries
demobilizing youth, particularly child soldiers, a
development framework providing for jobs and
education are critical to the success of security sector
reform.

It is imperative that the international community,
including the United Nations, seriously define its role
in the security sector reform process. Locally and
internationally, there is a shortage of available
specialists who can assist with security sector reform,
particularly in the policy-making arena. While different
countries emerging from conflict may present common
challenges, their security, political and development
needs may vary, and may even be unique. Successful
SSR therefore requires good coordination, given the
diverse national institutions that may exist even in a
country that has just come out of conflict.

The international community has been involved
in various aspects of SSR, but not in a coordinated
manner. The idea of security sector reform as a distinct
approach requires that it be coordinated. The process
should be inclusive of all national stakeholders,
thereby contributing to restoring the confidence of the
population in a country emerging from conflict.

Yet, the assistance provided by the international
community should be clearly defined. The donor
community should avoid imposing solutions, which are
often at variance with the interests of a country
emerging from conflict. The process should be one that
favours conflict resolution and promotes national
reconciliation. In the recent past, the international
community, and the donor community in particular, has
had a tendency to impose solutions on countries
emerging from conflict. The uncertainty brought about
by the competing, and sometimes conflicting, interests
of donors on the one side and national interests on the
other have often led to a number of challenges for
countries emerging from conflict. As a result, the
process has ended up favouring the donor country
rather than the national reconciliation process or
nation-building.

The role of the various agencies of the United
Nations should be clearly defined as well. Central in
defining the role of all United Nations agencies should
be the need to guard against the potential of eroding
the rules-based international order for which the United
Nations stands. The need for the preservation of
multilateralism should translate into enabling the
country receiving assistance to develop its own all-
inclusive national priorities. For countries on the
agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission, SSR could
perhaps benefit from the overall coordination of the
reconstruction and development of that country.

While external actors can inform and advise, they
cannot prescribe when it comes to matters of national
security. That can be achieved through an open and
transparent national process, with the assistance of the
international community.

We have witnessed disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes being applied with
deadly consequences. The insecurity brought about by
ineffective police and military is manifested in the flow
of small arms and light weapons. Corruption, which is
also brought about by the lack of accountability and
proper functioning of a State, can become rampant.
Human rights abuses increase, and the threat of a
country relapsing into violence is always great.

The experience of South Africa's approach to
security sector reform was based on many factors that
were underpinned by an inclusive process involving all
South Africans, especially women. Despite the
historical institutional marginalization of South African
women, their participation and the supportive role they
played in our SSR process was crucial, as women
participated as decision-makers advocating for
democratic change and for a more equitable and just
society for all. There was recognition that this was to
be a long-term process that required commitment from
all.

It may be argued that one agency of the United
Nations may have precedence over others. Yet the
discourse on the development of an approach to
security sector reform cannot take place in isolation
from the ongoing discussion on the reform of the
United Nations, and in particular that of the Security
Council. The fact that the Security Council factors in
some elements of security sector reform in authorizing
peacekeeping missions should not be misunderstood to
imply that the Council has precedence over other
United Nations organs. The role of the various United
Nations organs in relation to security sector reform
initiatives should also be clarified. The lessons from
regional and subregional organizations should be taken
into account where appropriate.

It is worth recalling that the various contexts in
which SSR takes place will not always be in line with
the mandate of the Security Council. There have been
cases of countries not on the agenda of the Council
having chosen to undertake SSR activities. The
framework that we seek to elaborate should therefore
recognize the different contexts in which SSR occurs.
That will enable us to make a proper determination as
to whether we should seek a rigid United Nations
framework for SSR or an indication of comprehensive
guidelines and best practices.

It is for that reason that we believe that this
meeting affords us the opportunity to undertake a
realistic evaluation of how we can all work together to
develop a comprehensive approach to SSR. South
Africa looks forward to co-hosting a workshop on SSR,
together with the Slovak Republic, later this year as a
way to continue the valuable contributions we are
receiving today.

