Mrs. Haley (United States): I thank Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, and
Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for Yemen, for their briefings.

For millions of people around the world, this is a
season of hope. This is the time of year that brings out
the idealist in many of us. We are reminded that we
are all - every one of us - flawed and fallen human
beings. But we see a light in the darkness, and we hope
that our best instincts can triumph over our worst.
It is difficult to imagine more convincing proof of
humankind's worst instincts than the pictures coming
out of Yemen today. They show innocent children
and babies slowly starving to death and succumbing
to disease. I will be honest. This may be the season
of hope, but hope alone does not make us feel better
when we see the pictures of suffering in Yemen. The
world's worst humanitarian crisis demands more than
hope from the Security Council that peace will come
to Yemen. It demands that we take action to hold all
the warring parties accountable. It demands that we
address the Iranian aggression at the root of the crisis.
It demands that life-saving assistance reach the Yemeni
women and children who are suffering the most from
the conflict.

Special Envoy Griffiths has brought us encouraging
news. We congratulate him on convening the parties in
the Yemen conflict and bringing them together, face to
face, for negotiations for the first time since 2016. Those
talks have produced concrete outcomes, including an
agreement for a prisoner exchange. The progress made
in Sweden should build on the political will that is
necessary for more progress in the future. We welcome
the willingness of all parties, including Saudi Arabia,
to participate in those confidence-building measures.
Most hopeful of all is the news of the ceasefire around
the port city of Al-Hudaydah. The success of that
ceasefire is critical to addressing the acute, immediate
need for humanitarian assistance in Yemen. All parties,
including the coalition, must exercise restraint in line
with the ceasefire. It is critical that the ceasefire hold
in order to allow the space for continued conversations.
We expect that in the coming days, the parties will begin
withdrawing forces, in accordance with the agreement.

The ceasefire agreement calls for weekly reports
to the Security Council. Those reports must show
continued political progress and the commitment of
all parties. The members of the Security Council will
be monitoring that situation very closely. We must
be ready to act if one or more of the parties fails to
follow through. The next step is to expand the ceasefire
to include the entire city of Al-Hudaydah. We call on
all the parties to take that step and to show the world
they are serious about achieving peace in Yemen.
Ultimately, the success of the ceasefire must lead to an
agreement on the Special Envoy's framework for a final
political settlement. That is the outcome towards which
all the confidence-building measures and negotiations
are directed - a realistic political framework for peace
in Yemen. And the Security Council should not stop
focusing on this conflict until that is delivered.

In this season of hope, the international community
does not have to be satisfied just with hope for the
people of Yemen. We have the ability to change their
reality. Human beings created this crisis; human beings
can end it. Life and death are on the line, and we are
not powerless. We call on all of our colleagues in the
Security Council to take the next step to build on what
has begun and define the basic political will to save
lives - the lives of millions - and bring about peace
in Yemen.

