Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank Ms. Ursula Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief
Coordinator, for her detailed briefing.

The humanitarian landscape in Syria that
she described to us this morning is, once again,
disheartening. Over the past several years, the relevant
reports of the Secretary-General and Security Council
meetings on this issue have repeatedly related victim
fatalities, the renewal of the large-scale displacement
of refugees, besieged cities, an increasing spread of
diseases, a high level of malnutrition, the destruction
of medical infrastructure and other scourges. Given
such a situation, the only remedy left is to ensure the
immediate, safe and unrestricted access ofhumanitarian
assistance and strict compliance under international
humanitarian law, in particular respect for the principle
of proportionality as related to conducting military
attacks and taking the appropriate precautions with
regard to their impact on the civilian population.

We therefore regret the persistent restrictions
placed on access to humanitarian aid in various areas
of Syria, in particular the tragic and untenable situation
facing the people of eastern Ghouta and Idlib. We hope
that the ceasefire agreement in eastern Ghouta, recently
deliberated in Vienna, will have a positive secondary
effect in addressing the pressing humanitarian needs
of its people. We appreciate the work of the Syrian
authorities and Russia that resulted in the medical
evacuation of 29 people from eastern Ghouta in
December 2017. At the same time, we encourage them
to intensify such efforts as there are hundreds of other
people who are in need of urgent care.

Another issue that deeply concerns us pertains
to demining and, in general, to the deactivation of
explosive ordnance, in the light of what is happening
daily in cities, such as Raqqa in which 30 to 50 victims,
who fall prey to such ordnance, are recorded weekly.
We see as positive the dialogue aimed at humanitarian
goals between the United Nations and the Government
of Syria, especially the visit to the country by Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs Mark
Lowcock. That dialogue and the joint statement on
humanitarian mine action issued following the latest
Astana meeting positively herald that more substantial
progress could be made in that area. Concerning
military operations in densely populated areas, such
as Afrin, we call for preventing any escalation that
could further exacerbate the suffering of the people
and hinder achieving a political solution pursuant to
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex).

It is absolutely necessary that the Council show the
world its unity and sense of commitment, and send a
message that prioritizes human beings over political
interests. We therefore hope that a consensus can be
reached on the adoption of a text that reflects the five
priorities outlined by Mr. Lowcock, which constitute
the bare minimum for alleviating the human suffering
of the Syrian people, and that is why Peru fully
supports them.

