Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We take note of the twentieth report of the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
on the situation of the investigation in Darfur. We are
grateful to Ms. Bensouda for her comments on the
document.

The military, political and humanitarian situation
in Darfur remains complex. Intercommunal conflict
is the main source of the violence and the significant
increase in the number of internally displaced persons.
We welcome the active efforts of the Sudanese
authorities to appease the warring tribes. The escalation
of the intertribal clashes has been driven by a struggle
for resources caused, in large part, by the economic
hardships suffered by the people of Darfur and of the
Sudan as a whole. Improvements in the situation will
therefore greatly depend on the timely implementation
of the decisions of the International Donor Conference
for Reconstruction and Development in Darfur, held
in 2013 in Doha, to allocate billions of dollars of
assistance to Darfur's development needs, and on the
canceling of the foreign debt and the lifting of the
United States economic sanctions against the Sudan
that were imposed via circumvention of the Security
Council.

The resolution of humanitarian issues lies in
normalizing the military and political situation in the
region. We favour the timely involvement of the Darfur
rebels in the peace process on the basis of the Security
Council's approval of the Doha document. Sadly,
due to obstruction by the insurgents, the November
negotiations between the Government and the rebels
in Addis Ababa ended in failure. In that context, it is
high time to think about introducing targeted Security
Council sanctions against the heads of the hard-line
Darfur rebel groups.

The report touches on the theme of alleged mass
rape in Thabit, North Darfur. We recall that the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) conducted an inspection in Thabit,
collecting testimony from 70 people among the alleged
victims and witnesses. The Sudanese authorities also
carried out their own investigation, as requested by
the Council, based on the primary role of Khartoum in
shedding light on all ofthe circumstances of the alleged
events there. Not a single victim or witness was found
by either the Sudanese authorities or UNAMID. The
illogical nature of the scurrilous claims bandied about
by the anti-Khartoum broadcasting of Radio Dabanga
is borne out by the fact that many servicemen deployed
near Thabit have local wives. Incidentally, there have
been demonstrations by residents there who were
angered by rumours casting aspersions on the dignity
of the local women.

It is to be noted that Radio Dabanga, which spread
the rumours on the mass sexual violence in Thabit,
refuses to cooperate or contact the United Nations
officials there. We believe that this is all a part of the
information war and an attempt to step up pressure on
the Sudan.

The report welcomes the swift response of the
Secretary-General to the statements of a former
UNAMID press officer to the effect that the Mission
leadership allegedly deliberately covered up crimes
against civilians and peacekeepers in Darfur. We have
every confidence in the conclusions of the Secretariat
on the baselessness of such claims. What also stands out
are attempts to ignite a scandal that, for some reason,
are specifically focused on UNAMID. As noted by the
Secretary-General, problems with accountability exist
in other missions too. We need only recall the cover-ups
and embellished information issuing from the former
leadership of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan.

The endless violence in Darfur is naturally a cause
of concern. We therefore urge the Court to undertake
an objective and impartial assessment of events. The
ability of the Court to carry out impartial investigations
into alleged crimes by all parties to the conflict is
of key significance to strengthening its authority.
Undoubtedly, the job of the Court, as an independent
body of international criminal justice, is to carry out
judicial functions. However the Court's actions in
implementing its mandate in the Darfur investigation
should not be carried out independent of general
efforts to normalize the situation in the long-suffering
province.

We take note of the Prosecutor's comments regarding
States and the Court in the matter of Darfur. The current
situation shows once again how important the support
of States is to ensuring the successful functioning ofthe
Court. Moreover, in assessing the level of compliance
by any country with its commitments in that sphere, it
must be recalled that the level of compliance can vary
in each specific case. As to calls for so-called follow-up
action by the Council in terms of the referral of cases to
the Court, our position has been stated repeatedly and
is well known.

