Mr. Braun (Germany): Given the time, I shall
deliver a shortened version of my statement. The
complete text is available on our website. As usual,
Germany aligns itself with the statement made on
behalf of the European Union.

By taking the initiative to organize this important
debate, France has brought to the Security Council
agenda a subject that affects not only the Middle East,
but all of us. We stand today against the gross and
systematic violations of human rights in the Middle
East, the root of which can be found in the conflicts
in Syria and Iraq. The objective of the terrorist militia,
Daesh, is to establish a totalitarian system. Daesh will
not tolerate any model that deviates from the prescibed,
uniform way of life of a controlled and homogeneous
society. Those who cannot or refuse to comply with
that model are threatened, fought, driven out, raped,
tortured or killed.
The August 2014 attacks against the Yazidi
settlements in the mountains of Sinjar were
accompanied by the massacre of civilians, leading to
an exodus of epic proportions. Many Yazidi women
and children fell into the hands of Daesh and were
abducted, enslaved and sold. The commission ofinquiry
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights has found evidence that the systematic crimes
committed against Yazidis by Daesh may amount to
genocide. Daesh has also mercilessly attacked Shiites,
as demonstrated by the brutal siege that was intended to
starve the population of the town of Amerli.

Christian towns and Villages of Nineveh have been
abandoned. For centuries, Muslims and Christians
prayed side by side before the tomb of the prophet Jonah
in Mosul; yet that revered symbolic site was set ablaze
at the order of terrorist commanders. Neither has Daesh
spared Sunnis who refuse to submit to their inhuman
ideology. Recently, in the Syrian city of Hasakah, we
witnessed the bombings that resulted in the death of
dozens of Kurdish New Year party guests, and the
horrific massacres of members of the Sunni tribe Albu
Nimr in Iraq and the Shaitat tribe in Syria.

Some say that the only viable plan to counter Daesh
in the Middle East is the force ofa dictatorial State that
imposes its version of tolerance. Yet the example of
Syria teaches us that the tyranny of a despotic regime
not only does not guarantee lasting stability but also
does not allow genuine religious tolerance to grow.
What a dictatorship achieves is a deafening political
silence, a deceptive calm before the storm. Over
220,000 deaths leave no doubt that the Syrian regime
is neither protecting its citizens nor guaranteeing
any stability; on the contrary, it is threatening and
destroying it. That is why our response to the terrorist
Violence and totalitarian ideology ofthe Daesh terrorist
militia must take the form of mobilization for pluralism,
diversity, inclusiveness, participation and human
rights. That commitment should enable our partners on
the ground to act decisively against Daesh and other
terrorist groups, including through the use of military
means. Germany is actively involved in the anti-Daesh
coalition, including by equipping and training Iraqi
security forces to defend themselves against that
organization.

At the same time, we are supporting the new
Iraqi Government in its efforts to implement reforms
that will promote the participation and inclusion of
all groups in society. An inclusive political process
is also necessary to resolve the conflict in Syria.
The generous help received daily by those who have
been persecuted, in particular members of minority
groups, in their places of refuge in the Middle East,
from neighbours, compatriots, as well as complete
strangers, is impressive and serves as example to us all.
This immense willingness to help contradicts the false
image that Daesh seeks to convey to us and extends to
all those in need.

That example should guide us all. We must not
allow ourselves to be misled by polarizing ideologies.
Rather, we must always be guided by the respect for
the human rights of every individual. Together we must
find ways to help persecuted and displaced persons
on the ground, regardless of their ethnic or religious
background. Fleeing a country may be a necessity in
the event of an imminent danger, when there is no
other way out. That is why Germany is a host country;
since 2011, Germany has taken in some 100,000 Syrian
refugees.

Therefore we must do everything in our power to
create the conditions that would provide those suffering
from Daesh's reign of terror or the tyranny of the
Al-Assad regime, with the realistic possibility of safely
returning to their country as soon as possible, a safe,
free country where citizens of all ethnic and religious
groups are guaranteed participation, and where all
human rights are fully respected, regardless of one's
political conviction, gender or sexual orientation.
We also need to work together to protect the cultural
heritage of those countries, which is our common
heritage. The richness of the Middle East lies in the
diversity of its peoples and traditions. It is the cradle
of Christianity, which, like Judaism and Islam, is an
integral part of the Middle East. We must preserve that
richness together.

