Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (Spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo
for her valuable briefing. I would also like to thank Dr.
Hala and Ms. Amina Khoulani for their participation
and for their moving testimonies, which shed light
on the scale of the suffering and pain of thousands of
Syrian families who do not know the fate of their loved
ones, whether detained, missing or abducted.

Nine years into the conflict in Syria, questions have
surfaced regarding the fate of detainees and missing
persons. According to independent international
investigative committees, there are thousands of
detainees and missing persons in Syria who remain
unaccounted for. Given the long-term impact of that
humanitarian issue, the State of Kuwait has joined
other countries in calling for this meeting.

Let us remember that this issue is first and foremost
a humanitarian one and the release of detainees is
called for in a number of Security Council resolutions
on Syria, particularly resolutions 2254 (2015), 2401
(2018) and 2449 (2018). Progress on the issue would
move forward the political track and would be one of
many confidence-building measures among the parties.

In that regard, we reiterate our support to Special
Envoy Pedersen, and we take note of the efforts made by
the Astana working group. We welcome any agreement
reached within that mechanism on exchanging detainees

and prisoners and we call for stepping up efforts to
accelerate the release of more detainees and prisoners.

This year we mark the seventieth anniversary of
the four 1949 Geneva Conventions and their Additional
Protocols and the twentieth anniversary of the adoption
ofthe first Security Council resolution on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. We must align our words
and actions with the principles and standards in the
resolutions adopted to address the issue of detainees,
missing persons and prisoners of war. As the Council,
our demands must therefore be in line with such
resolutions and we must address the issue in terms of
its humanitarian context with clarity and transparency.
We would like to stress the following demands.

First, we call on the Syrian authorities and all
parties to the conflict to immediately stop all inhumane
practices in prisons and detention centres, which are
in violation of international law and international
humanitarian law, as reaffirmed by a number of reports
issued by independent international parties.

Secondly, we call for the release of women, children,
the elderly, the sick and people with disabilities.

Thirdly, we call for allowing families to ascertain
the fate of their loved ones and their whereabouts and
to allow them to visit their loved ones, in cooperation
with all relevant parties, including the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC).

Fourthly, we call for the provision of health care,
food, water and all basic necessities to detainees.

Fifthly, we urge the parties to the conflict in Syria
to take all appropriate measures to locate persons
reported missing without discrimination, while
creating the appropriate channels to communicate with
their families.

Sixthly, we call on all parties to the conflict,
particularly the Syrian authorities, to report the
numbers of the deceased and to identify them, while
locating their burial sites and returning their remains,
where possible, to their families, in line with their
obligations under international humanitarian law and
international human rights law.

We call those responsible to be held accountable for
such heinous crimes, which run counter to international
law. We stress the need to avoid impunity for the most
heinous crimes committed in the Syrian crisis since
2011. We once again underline the fact that lasting
and comprehensive peace in Syria cannot be achieved
without justice.

We are all too familiar with the human and social
suffering linked to the issue of detainees, prisoners and
missing persons given our bitter experience in 1990.
We know that the issue cannot be settled instantly. For
example, Iraqi-Kuwaiti joint efforts continue to locate
the remains of missing persons and detainees, whether
they are Kuwaiti or third-country nationals, even three
decades after they went missing. We stress the need to
ensure close cooperation with all relevant parties and
coordination with international mechanisms, including
the ICRC, which has extensive experience in that regard.

The Security Council adopted unanimously
resolution 2474 (2019) on missing persons in armed
conflict. That issue is truly a hidden tragedy in all
conflicts. The resolution must be translated into action
and its provisions implemented in all conflict areas,
including the conflict in Syria.

In conclusion, we call on the Syrian parties to
cooperate with the Special Envoy, Mr. Pedersen, and
his team in order to ensure progress on the release
of detainees and on locating, or ascertaining the fate
of, missing persons in Syria. That would represent a
confidence-building measure between parties as part
of the Special Envoy's efforts to resume the political
process in Syria in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and
the 2012 Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex).

