Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Madam President, for convening this emergency
meeting today at the request of the United Kingdom,
the United States and France. Ijoin others in thanking
Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura for his briefing and
for his relentless stamina.

The Al-Assad regime and Russia are reducing
Aleppo to rubble. Aleppo's inhabitants are ordinary
Syrians who have suffered so much for so long.
They are now facing an unprecedented, unrelenting
onslaught of cruelty, and it is increasingly clear that it
is an onslaught beyond the capabilities of the Syrian air
force alone.After five years of conflict, one might think
that the regime has had its fill of barbarity and that its
sick blood lust against its own people has finally run
its course.

But this weekend, the regime and Russia have
instead plunged to new depths and unleashed a new
hell on Aleppo. Bunker-busting bombs, more suited to
destroying military installations, are now destroying
homes, decimating bomb shelters, and crippling,
maiming and killing dozens, ifnot hundreds. Incendiary
munitions, indiscriminate in their reach, are being
dropped onto civilian areas so that, yet again, Aleppo
is burning. And to cap it all, water supplies so vital
to millions are now being targeted, depriving water to
those most in need. In short, it is difficult to deny that
Russia is partnering with the Syrian regime to carry out
war crimes.

Yet only four days ago (see S/PV.7774), we
heard Foreign Minister Lavrov speak right here of
Russia's commitment to a political, peaceful solution,
and of Russia's commitment to the cessation of
hostilities. Today, that commitment resembles much
of Syria - broken and lifeless. The true meaning of
that commitment can be seen on the ashen faces of the
victims of Aleppo; on the faces of a mother clutching
her child, crushed beneath the rubble; on the faces of
the White Helmets and medics, injured or killed as they
try desperately to save lives; and on the faces of every
single man, woman and child who still calls Aleppo
home. As the Secretary-General has said, these are
dark days for the protection of civilians.

These devastating events underscore what we have
known for so long. Russia needs to be salvaging, not
stymieing efforts to restore the cessation of hostilities.
Russia needs to be enabling, not attacking unfettered
humanitarian assistance. And ultimately, Russia should
be creating, not destroying the conditions necessary
for the resumption of political talks. If it does not take
these steps and more, Russia will only confirm its
status as an international pariah. But in truth, as the
horrific, unconscionable attack on the humanitarian
convoy last week painfully illustrated, Russia simply
has no credibility left on these issues.

Now Russia will no doubt try to deflect attention
away from the crimes it is committing in Syria by
blaming the opposition and talking a great deal about
the threat from terrorism. Everyone in this Chamber
agrees that Da'esh and Al-Nusra are terrorists and must
be defeated. That is not the question. But Russia and the
regime are not bombing terrorists; they are bombing all
forms of opposition and killing hundreds every month.
They collaborate with sectarian Shia militias and with
Hizbullah - a terrorist organisation in the eyes of many
members of the Council and the Arab League - to
inflict their own terror on Syria's civilian population.

Let us not forget that Al-Assad's regime, supported
by Russia, has killed far more civilians in Syria than
Da'esh and Al-Nusra put together. So every time we
rightly condemn Da'esh and Al-Nusra terrorism in Syria,
let us also condemn the absolute terror being inflicted
on the Syrian people by the Al-Assad regime and by
Russia as they continue to bomb Syrian civilians day
and night. Because the Syrian people will never forget
the death and destruction that the sectarian Al-Assad
regime has unleashed upon them, nor will they forget
that Russia aided and abetted that ruthless sectarian
dictator in waging war against his own people. They
also will not forget that the international community,
and the Security Council in particular, failed to stop the
bombing, failed to stop the chlorine and failed to stop
the starvation.

So let us be clear. It is Russia's actions in Syria
and in the Council that have caused that failure; it is
Russia's actions that have prolonged the conflict and
prolonged the suffering. It is Russia's four vetoes in the
past five years that have prevented Council unity and
brought shame on us all, and brought its diplomacy into
disrepute.
So the Council must now do more than demand or
urge; we must now decide. What can we do to enforce
an immediate end to the bombardment of Aleppo and
other civilian areas in Syria? We must decide what we
can do now to end the sieges and the chokehold that is
preventing aid getting in. And in doing so, we must speak
loudly and clearly that there will be accountability for
these crimes and so many more, including the barbaric,
despicable use of chemical weapons by the regime
against its own people. That is the only way to stop the
suffering, and it is the only way for Russia to atone for
its deplorable actions in Syria.

