Mr. Petrella (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): It is a
very great privilege for my delegation to speak in this
important debate under your leadership, Sir. Your country
is one of the most important in this Organization and we
feel honoured to have shared in the past the objectives of
freedom and equality for which you risked your life and
well-being. We also feel honoured to share now the
objectives of democracy, good governance and human
rights.

These discussions are in part directly related to the
entirety of this all-important subject. In this respect, I wish
to thank Ambassador Olara Otunnu for his comments and
to acknowledge his steadfast efforts and convictions on this
matter. We congratulate the Secretary-General on having
appointed him.

This is the second time that the Council has held a
meeting on the question of children and armed conflict.
That fact demonstrates the Council's commitment to a
matter that is of increasing concern to the international
community. Let us recall that, on 29 June 1998, we adopted
a presidential statement and that the Council is currently
preparing to adopt a draft resolution.

It is crucial to establish international norms aimed at
halting the barbaric and illegal practice of bringing children
to the battlefield. The obligations set out in the Geneva
Conventions and in the Convention on the Rights of the
Child, which are mentioned in the draft resolution under
consideration, are essential provisions, compliance with
which must be insisted upon. The current debate and the
draft resolution to be adopted by the Council join the
ranks of those mechanisms. The International Criminal
Court is a formidable tool for eradicating these types of
actions, which its Statute considers to be war crimes. We
urge States to accede to that international instrument as
soon as possible.

Argentina believes that the minimum age for
recruitment and participation in conflicts must be 18
years. Historically we have respected that minimum age
in our own domestic provisions. In addition, some years
ago we abolished mandatory military service, making it
strictly voluntary. It is our hope that this trend will be
further strengthened, and we are gratified that other
countries are doing the same. We also support the policy
adopted almost a year ago by the Secretary-General on
age limits for peacekeeping forces and civilian police.

It is necessary to adopt as soon as possible an
additional protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child. The Security Council should encourage this
process. States and regional organizations also must be
invited to join this effort.

Furthermore, it is essential to provide better training
for the troops that form part of peacekeeping missions.
That training should range from the disarmament stages
up through the demobilization and rehabilitation of
children, and should include the identification of all
reasonable ways of avoiding their participation in the
militia and in armed conflicts. As the United Nations
Children's Fund advocates, prompt return to school is a
viable alternative. Any other solution would be chancy.

In the same context, we have maintained that there
should be programmes to compensate, rehabilitate and
provide special educational privileges for children and
young people who have been mutilated as a result of
armed conflicts. The leaders of the future must come
from these groups, who better than anyone else
understand the horrors and the injustice of war.
We must not forget that in order to register lasting
achievements in this sensitive area, two aspects need to
be borne in mind. The first is education, which makes it
possible for tolerance to take root in the human mind.
The second is the effective implementation of
international instruments that contribute to putting an end
to the impunity enjoyed by those who commit these
crimes.

 

It is our understanding that the Security Council must
henceforth make every possible effort to promote the
protection, well-being and rights of children whenever
actions are taking to promote international peace and
security. This could be achieved, for example, by ensuring
that peace agreements contain explicit provisions in this
respect.

As we indicated last year in the Council, account must
also be taken of the fact that children remain at risk in
those post-conflict situations in which sanctions are
imposed that deprive the population of basic necessities.
We must improve the design of sanctions so that they do
not have an impact on innocent civilians and on children in
particular.

We must also encourage the continued consideration
of this question in the Security Council. This highly
appropriate initiative taken by the delegation of Namibia is
aimed at putting an end to a very harmful practice that
hinders prospects of national reconciliation, as it affects
generations of young people who for many years will bear
the burden of their traumatic experiences. The Council must
contribute, within its competence, to putting an end to this
unacceptable reality.

