Mr. Yang Jiechi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I am
glad to attend this high-level meeting of the Security
Council on peace and security in the Middle East. It is
good to see Mr. Guido Westerwelle chair the meeting.

The Middle East is undergoing unprecedented
changes. The political, economic and social impact
of the international financial crisis on that region
is unfolding. The people of that region have shown
a strong desire to run their affairs independently
and to seek change. Some countries are in a state of
turmoil, while others have entered a critical stage of
political transition and transformation. Regional hot-
spot issues have become more severe, local conflicts
have increased, and extremist and terrorist forces have
intensified their infiltration efforts. Traditional and
non-traditional security issues are entwined, exerting a
greater impact on the region.

In short, the situation in the Middle East has
become more complex and fragile and has attracted the
broad attention of the international community. Peace,
stability and development in the Middle East represent
the shared aspiration of all people in the region and
serve the common interests of the entire international
community. Middle East affairs should be addressed
mainly by the people of the region, and the future and
destiny of the region should be in the hands of its own
people.

The international community should respect the
aspirations and calls of the people of the region for
change and development. It should respect the distinctive
religious and cultural characteristics of the region, heed
the voices of the countries and peoples of the region on
issues related to the Middle East, and urge the parties
concerned to work out appropriate solutions through
inclusive political processes and to strike the proper
balance between reform, stability and development in
order to achieve durable peace and common prosperity.

The Palestinian issue remains at the core of the
situation in the Middle East. With drastic changes in the
regional landscape, it is all the more imperative for the
international community to recognize the importance
and urgency of relaunching peace talks between
Palestine and Israel. The international community
should adopt a more active and constructive stance
to promote peace talks, and urge the Palestinians and
Israelis alike to take concrete steps to remove obstacles
to peace talks, rebuild mutual trust, resume negotiations
and make substantive progress at an early date.

Israel should assume responsibility for taking the
first step. China supports the Palestinian people in
establishing, based on the 1967 borders, an independent
Palestinian State that enjoys full sovereignty, with
East Jerusalem as its capital. We support Palestine's
membership of the United Nations and other
international organizations.

The Syrian issue concerns not only the future and
destiny of Syria and its people, but also overall peace
and stability in the Middle East. The crisis in Syria
remains unresolved, and the situation is worrying.
In the face of the complex and grave situation, the
international community must have even stronger faith
in peace and stay on the right track of seeking a political
solution. We should support Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, the
Joint Special Representative of the United Nations and
the League of Arab States, in conducting impartial
mediation, and urge all parties in Syria to earnestly
implement relevant Security Council resolutions.
Mr. Kofi Annan's six-point plan and the communique
of the foreign ministers' meeting of the Action Group
for Syria (S/2012/522). We should also urge the parties
to put an immediate end to the fighting and violence,
protect civilians and create conditions for a Syrian-led
political transition.

As a permanent member of the Council, China has
faithfully fulfilled its obligations and acted as a positive
force in seeking a political solution to the issue. China
is ready to join the rest of the international community
in an unremitting effort to resolve the Syrian issue in a
just, peaceful and appropriate way.

The Iranian nuclear issue has a significant bearing
on the evolution of the situation in the Middle East.
China opposes the development and possession of
nuclear weapons by any country in the Middle East.
At the same time, we believe that the international
community should respect the right of a country to the
peaceful use of nuclear energy. China maintains that
dialogue and cooperation are the only way to address
the Iranian nuclear issue, and that it is ill-advised to
resort to force or unilateral sanctions. The parties
concerned should have firm confidence in and remain
committed to a diplomatic solution. At the same time,
they should be flexible and pragmatic, seek common
ground while overcoming differences, work for early
progress through dialogue and negotiations, and
over time, achieve a comprehensive, long-term and
appropriate solution to the Iranian nuclear issue.

Peace, stability and development in the Middle East
will not be possible without the support and assistance
of regional and international organizations. The United
Nations Charter entrusts the Security Council with
the primary responsibility for international peace and
security. At the same time, in Chapter VIII of the
Charter the Organization's founders also encouraged
the peaceful settlement of local disputes through
regional arrangements. The League ofArab States is an
important multilateral organization in the Middle East.
Over the years it has played an active role in upholding
the lawful rights and interests of the Arab peoples,
enhancing solidarity among Arab States and promoting
peace and stability in the region and beyond.

In the current circumstances, it is of both practical
significance and far-reaching strategic importance for
the United Nations and the League of Arab States to
strengthen their communication and cooperation and
jointly safeguard peace, stability and development in
the Middle East. Closer cooperation between the United
Nations and the Arab League should be based on the
purposes and principles of the Charter. The principles
enshrined in the Charter, including sovereign equality
and non-interference in each other's internal affairs, are
the basic norms governing international relations and
important guidelines for addressing hot-spot issues.

In carrying out cooperation, the United Nations
and the Arab League should aim to uphold those
principles, safeguard the fundamental and long-term
interests of the peoples of all countries in the Middle
East, and maintain peace and stability in the region.
Closer cooperation between the United Nations and the
Arab League should focus on the peaceful settlement of
disputes. History has shown time and again that settling
disputes through such diplomatic means as dialogue
and negotiation is the only right and effective way to
achieve durable peace.

As a regional organization, the Arab League has
a unique and important role to play in encouraging
the countries of the region to settle disputes through
mediation, negotiation, good offices and other peaceful
means. The United Nations should encourage the Arab
League to stay the course of political settlement, build
consensus and coordinate the efforts of countries of the
region in order to improve the situation and achieve
peace and stability.

Closer cooperation between the United Nations
and the Arab League should follow a holistic approach.
That is of crucial importance. The causes of turbulence
and conflict in the Middle East are mostly related to
economic well-being and ethnic and religious factors.
The United Nations and the Arab League should pay
greater attention and give more support to economic
and social development in the region, help the region
achieve development to improve people's lives, and
encourage different ethnic groups and religions to
show mutual tolerance, achieve reconciliation and
live in harmony, so as to remove the economic and
social breeding grounds for turbulence and extremist
thinking.

China is a good friend to and partner of the Arab
countries and people. We firmly support and help to
promote their just cause. With respect to the issues of
peace and security in the Middle East, China has always
fulfilled its obligations in a constructive way. We stand
for peace and oppose war; we stand for equality and
oppose power politics; we stand for principles and
oppose interference; and we stand for dialogue and
oppose confrontation.

Bearing in mind the fundamental long-term
interests of the peoples of the Middle East, China has
made its own efforts to advance peace, stability and
development in the region. China will, as always, take
a constructive part in the mediation and settlement of
hot-spot issues in the Middle East, support the United
Nations and the Security Council in continuing to play
an important role in addressing Middle East issues,
and help put the region on a path of peace, stability,
economic prosperity and social progress at an early
date.

