Let me thank you, Sir, for allowing me to participate in this meeting. I would like to congratulate the Dominican Republic on its presidency of the Council for this month and to express our deepest appreciation to China for the able manner in which it conducted the Council last month. On behalf of my principals - Head of State and Head of Government - I would like to express the gratitude of the people of Mali to Secretary-General Guterres and to the Security Council for their continued support to Mali and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). The Government of Mali takes good note of the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/223). Allow me to make briefly the following comments on its behalf. Since the last reporting period, there have been positive developments in Mali. The success of our national inclusive dialogue in December has led to key steps in the stabilization of the country: the historical session of the Monitoring Committee of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, held in January; the deployment in the north of the first battalions of the new Malian army, in February; the Prime Minister's visit to Kidal and Menaka, in early March; and the holding of the first round of parliamentary elections, on 29 March. Before moving to the next chapter, I should mention that our opposition leader, the Honourable Soumafla Cisse, and members of his delegation were taken hostage on March 25 by extremist groups, while campaigning for the elections. Since then, the Government has been undertaking all measures to secure his release. A former Prime Minister was appointed last week to coordinate efforts leading to his release. On development issues, the Government has established a special fund for the development of the northern regions. During this 2020 budgetary year, the Government has made a first contribution of $44 million to the Fund and will continue to provide peace dividends to our populations in need, in terms of security and basic services: education, health care, water, energy, economic and job opportunities for the population, particularly youth. On the issue of women's participation in the peace process, a high-level workshop was held in January 2020, which gathered 200 women leaders. All signatory parties have pledged their full support towards the implementation of the recommendations of the meeting, including the creation of an independent women's observatory to monitor the implementation of the peace agreement. I must say that the Government is concerned at reports of human rights violations in Mali, particularly in the northern and central regions. In this regard, I want to assure the Council that the Government is committed to respecting human rights. Investigations are under way and those responsible for violations of human rights will be brought to justice. In the same vein, the Government has decided to disarm and to dismantle all militias in the centre. We will continue to implement our integrated strategy for the stabilization of the central region, including through dialogue with local and traditional authorities. As you know, Mali is implementing its peace agreement in very challenging circumstances, including terrorism, all types of trafficking, intercommunal tensions and, now, the coronavirus. The Pau summit in France in January 2020 brought new dynamics to the fight against terrorism in the Sahel region and to the restoration of State authority, capacity- building and development initiatives. I pay to tribute the national forces of the Group of Five for the Sahel and the French Barkhane troops for their positive gains in the fight against terrorism. I commend the countries of the Europe Union for their commitment to deploying the special forces of operation Takuba in order to fight terrorism in the Sahel region. In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the Malian stakeholders' commitment to accelerating the implementation of the peace agreement. We need the Council's continued support in this regard, in order particularly to help overcome the challenges ahead. I would like also to reiterate the gratitude of the President, the Government and the people of Mali to the Security Council, the Secretary-General and his Special Representative in Mali, troop-contributing countries to MINUSMA, regional and international organizations and bilateral partners for their continued commitment to peace, security and development in Mali and Sahel region. I pay tribute to all fallen personnel in Mali and wish a quick recovery to the wounded. Finally, I call on the Security Council to make sure that the first battalions of the new Malian army deployed in the northern region will not be confined to their barracks. If they remain confined, they will not be able to play their role in the fight against terrorism. I urge the Security Council to make sure that the former rebellion forces are disarmed in accordance with the mechanisms set by the peace agreement. To ensure lasting peace, this disarmament should be effective and measurable.
