Mr. Stubb: I thank France, Belgium, the United
Kingdom, the United States, Italy, Croatia and the
Russian Federation for their comments and
observations and for their support for the work of the

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE).

I did not want to make my original intervention
into a Christmas tree, and that is why I limited myself
to a quite strict interpretation of what the OSCE is
doing at this moment. From the comments I received,
perhaps I would draw the conclusion that there is still
strong support to try to put a total of 100 observers into
Southern Ossetia, or areas adjacent to Southern
Ossetia, so we will continue our efforts in that line.
There was also strong support for the general work that
the OSCE does.

May I summarize. I was left with impressions on
two accounts. First, what are the key regions for the
OSCE? I would say the Western Balkans. We will
continue the efforts there, as the representative of
Croatia, among others, underlined. Secondly, it is the
Caucasus, by which I mean not only Georgia, but also,
of course, the conflicts in Nagorno-Karabakh,
Azerbaijan, Armenia and Moldova, in terms of
Transdniestra. Finally, there is Central Asia, which I

08-5232]
did not mention in my intervention. In my capacity as
Chair I did make a grand tour of Tajikistan,
Uzbekistan, Kyrgyzstan, Turkmenistan and Kazakhstan
during the summer, and it left me with the certain
impression that the OSCE has a very important task to
do there.

So what are the roles in the three regions? In the
Western Balkans it is institution-building. In the
Caucasus it is conflict management and post-conflict
management, and in Central Asia it is democratic
consolidation. Of course we will continue with the rest
of the work in border management, human rights,
elections, et cetera.

I am looking forward to the Helsinki Ministerial
Meeting on 4 and 5 December 2008, because for me, as
OSCE Chair, I think that will be a time for us to take
08-52321
stock of what has happened in the past few months and
perhaps also come out with an ambitious, short,
political declaration on the future of the organization.

I greatly appreciate all the comments received
from the Security Council. I have taken note and stock
of them and will take them with me and will continue
the reflection in our preparations for the Helsinki
Ministerial Meeting in December.

