Mr. Abebe (Ethiopia): We welcome the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2451 (2018), which we believe
could contribute to maintaining the positive momentum
created by the successful intra-Yemeni political
consultations held in Stockholm under the auspices of
the United Nations. We thank the United Kingdom for
its role in facilitating the negotiations.

After welcoming the Stockholm consultations
and endorsing its agreements, the resolution rightly
emphasizes the importance of implementing the
outcomes that have brought a sense of hope to the
Yemenis, who seek and deserve peace and stability.
We also stress that the parties should fully honour the
agreements reached in Stockholm. In that regard, the
United Nations should support the parties, and the
resolution that we have adopted today authorizes the
United Nations to play a key role.

While Stockholm has brought concrete results, it
is a positive beginning to the long journey. The parties
should therefore also continue to constructively engage
with the Special Envoy in the upcoming January talks
in the ultimate objective of arriving at a comprehensive
political solution that meets the aspirations of the
people of Yemen and addresses the legitimate security
concerns of the countries of the region.

As Yemenis continue to endure the worst
humanitarian crisis in the world, it is also vital to support
the United Nations and its humanitarian partners in
delivering aid to all Yemenis. Maintaining the ceasefire
in Al-Hudaydah; protecting humanitarian supplies;
ensuring safe, unhindered and sustained humanitarian
access; stabilizing the economy; and enhancing
funding for humanitarian response remains essential.
The implementation of the resolution could also help
in that regard. Preserving the current momentum is
indispensable at both the political and humanitarian
levels. We continue to support the efforts of Special
Envoy Martin Griffiths and the humanitarian work
of the United Nations and its partners. In that regard,
the unity of the Council remains critical to ending the
unspeakable tragedy in Yemen.

As we leave the Council, we hope that the positive
impetus generated by the Stockholm meeting will
be maintained and that the Yemeni parties, with the
support of the international community, will sustain
their engagement in search of peace and stability
in Yemen.

