Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome the convening of
this meeting. I take this opportunity to express our
gratitude to Under-Secretary-General Lowcock and
Special Representative Gamba for their illuminating
updates on the humanitarian situation in Syria and the
impact of the current conflict on children.

We take advantage of this open informative session
to condemn in the strongest terms the series of suicide
attacks carried out by the Islamic State on the morning
of 25 July in many villages of Al-Suwayda province.
Those latest attacks, resulting in more than two hundred
deaths and a hundred injured, must not undermine the
efforts to return to sustainable peace and stability
in Syria.

Government forces and local militias, which
control much of the country, particularly in the
southern region, must step up their presence along
the whole eastern administrative border of Suwayda
and take provisional control measures with regard to
citizens arriving in this area. However, my country's
Government wishes to express to the Council its great
concern at the situation of insecurity prevailing in the
south-west part of the country, given that the clashes,
following the implacable logic of military operations,
are resulting in hundreds of deaths and injuries as
well as the massive displacement of civilians, and are
also preventing United Nations entities from sending
cross-border humanitarian supplies owing to the lack
of security.

The continuing airstrikes against medical and
educational facilities and personnel in Idlib, the high
levels of contamination by explosives in Raqqa, the
presence of numerous improvised explosive devices
and the significant number of civilians who remain in
camps for displaced persons in eastern Ghouta all attest
to the precarious humanitarian situation. It is therefore
vital that United Nations humanitarian agencies and
their partners spare no effort and create synergies to
provide assistance to as many people in need as possible,
and also that the parties of the conflict guarantee safe,
sustained and unimpeded access to inter-institutional
humanitarian convoys, in compliance with resolution
2401 (2018).

Given this situation of devastation and anguish,
Equatorial Guinea cannot but join its voice to those
calling for the defence and protection of the rights of
children in armed conflict, particularly in Syria, the
issue with which we are dealing today. This was made
clear with the adoption of resolution 2427 (2018) during
the open debate held on 9 July (see S/PV.8305). There is
a need to tackle factors such as the lack of humanitarian
assistance, which exposes Syrian children to a greater
risk of violence and exploitation, including child labour,
recruitment and forced marriage. This prolonged
conflict has without a doubt had a significant impact
on children throughout the country and could cause
post-traumatic stress disorder and toxic stress, which
can lead to long-term physical and mental damage if
not appropriately treated.

Air strikes against schools and educational
personnel and the use of schools for military purposes
also significantly affect children, increasing their risk of
suffering and dying from vaccine-preventable diseases.
In order to remedy this situation, the parties to the
conflict must consistently abide by their commitment
to protecting the rights of children.

The information provided by Ms. Gamba is very
significant and should induce all parties to the conflict
to reflect very deeply. We have said on many occasions
that this conflict cannot have a military solution. But
even if there is an insistence on not reaching agreement,
the parties must at least respect humanitarian law and
use force proportionately so as to save the lives of the
most vulnerable, that is to say, children.

Let me conclude by expressing the firm support of
the Republic of Equatorial Guinea for the recent joint
initiative of the Russian Federation and the French
Republic aimed at providing humanitarian assistance
to the inhabitants of eastern Ghouta and Douma.
This initiative is the result of a coordination meeting
between the leaders of both countries held in May, in
St. Petersburg, and aims to provide first-aid medical
teams for more than 500 people with serious injuries
and medical supplies to treat 15,000 minor injuries.
This supplements the assistance targeted at meeting
the urgent humanitarian needs of the people of eastern
Ghouta. This Franco-Russian cooperation deserves
our full attention and praise, because it shows how,
with a little political will, the countries of the Security
Council with influence upon the parties to the conflict
can, if they so wish, reach an understanding and work
to ensure that the conflict is resolved peacefully.

