Mr. Salgueiro (Portugal): For the sake of time, I

will not read out the complete text of my intervention,
which is being distributed to members.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. The candidate countries Croatia,
Turkey and the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia, as well as
Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova, Armenia and
Georgia, align themselves with this statement.

The European Union (EU) would like to thank
you, Sir, for organizing today's debate. Since this is the
first time that we have spoken under your presidency,
allow me to congratulate you on the assumption of
your duties. I would also like to express our
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his very
pertinent intervention and for his personal commitment
to this issue. In the same vein, I would like to welcome
the interventions of Ambassador Leo Merores and
Ambassador Leslie Kojo Christian and to salute the
presence of the Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Asha-
Rose Migiro.

The European Union supports the draft
presidential statement to be adopted later today.

The European Union is very pleased to note the
strengthening of a culture of prevention across the
United Nations system. Moreover, in the institutional
context, recent United Nations reforms, including the
creation of the Human Rights Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission, are assisting countries on
the path towards sustainable peace and development,
thus helping to prevent the emergence or recurrence of
conflict.

However, further cooperation, coordination and
coherence are needed in this field, not only among the
main United Nations bodies, but also between the
United Nations and international and regional
organizations and other relevant actors, including non-
governmental organizations. We also encourage
Member States to focus resources in order to enhance
United Nations preventive mechanisms, and we
suggest that regular reporting to the Security Council
on prevention and early warning would help the
Council to better support that aim.

The European Union underlines the primary
responsibility of the Security Council for the
maintenance of international peace and security. In that
regard, we appreciate the contribution of and the
partnerships between the Council and international,
regional and subregional organizations in the
facilitation of political processes, as well as in
peacekeeping and post-conflict scenarios.

The European Union believes that the United
Nations should be open to using innovative approaches
proposed by regional and subregional actors, while
establishing clear arrangements for cooperation and the
division of work and responsibilities. We are
particularly pleased with the substantive progress in
the cooperation between the United Nations and the
European Union in crisis management, in particular the
signing on 12 June 2007 of the Joint Statement on UN-
EU Cooperation in Crisis Management. United
Nations-European Union cooperation is also
developing well in the field of conflict prevention,
notably through regular desk-to-desk dialogues.

We are also pleased with the joint communique
agreed to on 16 June 2007 between the United Nations
and the African Union, and we encourage a close
relationship between the United Nations, the African
Union and subregional organizations. We commend

them for setting up - with the support of the
international community, including the European
Union - peacekeeping operations on the African

continent, notably the African Union Mission in Sudan,
the African Union Mission in Somalia, and we
welcome the United Nations Security Council decision
to deploy a hybrid operation in Darfur.

Ownership and responsibility are important
principles of the European Union Strategy for Africa,
adopted by the European Council in December 2005.
We recognize that enhancing Africa's capabilities is
crucial for African ownership. In that context, in
November 2006, the Council of the European Union
adopted Conclusions on Strengthening African
Capabilities for the Prevention, Management and
Resolution of Conflicts. A joint strategy between
Europe and Africa for the next decade is currently
under negotiation and should be adopted later this year
at the second European Union/Africa Summit, in
Lisbon.

In the area of peace and security, the ongoing
establishment of an African peace and security
architecture, including the operationalization of the
African Standby Force and the development of the

African Peace Support Trainers' Association, is a key
initiative that will benefit from broad European Union
support.

Sustainable, predictable and flexible funding for
African-led peace-support operations is another major
challenge. In 2004, the European Union established the
African Peace Facility to enable us to support, using
financial instruments, African capacities in planning
and executing peace operations. The capacities of
African subregional organizations in conflict
prevention are further supported through substantial
regional programmes financed by the European
Development Fund. Tripartite capacity programmes
involving the United Nations are being considered,
notably in West Africa involving the Economic
Community of West African States.

The effective implementation of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) on women, peace and security
is a prerequisite for achieving, maintaining and
promoting sustainable peace. A gender perspective
must be integrated into all conflict prevention and
peacekeeping activities, in particular when developing
measures for HIV/AIDS prevention and care and
against gender-based violence.

The continued failure to protect children in
conflict, and the abuses and harms that persist after
conflicts have ostensibly ended underline the need to
give high priority to strengthening child protection in
conflict. Therefore, we welcome resolution 1612
(2005) and the mechanisms it created, as well as the
adoption of the Paris guidelines on the protection and
reintegration of children associated with armed forces
or armed groups of February 2007, as well as the Cape
Town Principles on the prevention of recruitment of
children into the armed forces and demobilization and
social reintegration of child soldiers in Africa.

Understanding the multidimensional root causes
of conflicts is the basis of conflict prevention - it is
far better to prevent than to correct. Civil society is an
important partner in preventing violent conflicts and
their recurrence, in strengthening democracy and in
promoting human rights. The European Union has
devoted considerable resources to supporting civil
society and strongly encourages others to do likewise.
United Nations organs and international and regional
organizations should also explore ways of building
partnerships with civil society groups in order to
facilitate conflict prevention and the peaceful
settlement of conflicts.

My last point is that there is no peace without
justice. Justice and the rule of law are at the core of the
peaceful settlement of disputes and of harmonious
coexistence both at the national and the international
level. The newly established unit on the rule of law
will contribute, in our opinion, to enhancing
coordination and support for rule of law issues in the
United Nations system.

Moreover, the role of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) is fundamental. The European Union
remains firmly committed to the effective functioning
of the ICC. We stress the importance of full
cooperation with the Court and call on States that have
not yet done so to accede to the Rome Statute.

The European Union welcomes the progress
made by the Court in recent years, and we believe that
the Security Council has a particular role to play in
combating impunity and preventing the most heinous
international crimes, as it is empowered to refer
situations to that Court.

The European Union will continue contributing to
international peace and security in every way possible,
including here at the United Nations, where conflict
prevention and resolution, in particular in Africa, must
continue to be of the highest priority and urgency.

