Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
commends Lithuania for its initiative in convening
this open debate on the rule of law. We welcome
Mr. Linkevicius, Lithuania's Minister for Foreign
Affairs, to preside over today's meeting. We listened
carefully to the briefing by Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon.

Building the rule of law is essential to achieving
and building peace in countries in conflict and post-
conflict situations. Strengthening the rule of law at the
international level is fundamental for the maintenance
of international peace and security and the promotion
of cooperation among States. It is also in the common
interests of all countries and those of the international
community. China would like to make the following
observations on the rule of law.
First, all countries share the goal of achieving
the rule of law. Because of the differences in national
conditions and levels of development, there is no single
universal model for the rule of law for all. At the
national level, countries are entitled to independently
choose the paths towards the rule of law that suit their
national conditions. Countries with different rule-of-
law practices should learn from each other and seek
common development. To strengthen the rule of law at
the international level, it is necessary to strictly abide
by the norms of international law. In the conduct of
international affairs, it is critical to uphold the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
adhere to such important principles as the sovereign
equality of nations and non-interference in internal
affairs, reject power politics and aggression and honour
international obligations in good faith.

Secondly, the rule of law is an important guarantee
for friendly relations among nations as equals. The
Charter of the United Nations is the point of departure
for achieving the rule of law. The Charter and the basic
principles of international law it enshrines constitute
the core of the international legal order as well as the
foundation of the rule of law at the international level.
The purposes and principles of the Charter represent
the reflection of human society on war. It is imperative
that all countries uphold the authority of the Charter,
maintain the post-war international order and the
gains from the global anti-fascist war and deal with
international affairs in strict observance of the Charter
and the basic principles of international law. They must
strongly oppose any action contravening historical
justice, the human conscience and international norms.

Thirdly, the peaceful settlement of disputes is
a necessary component of the rule of law. Resolving
disputes through peaceful means represents the basic
principle of international law. It is inseparable from
building the rule of law at the international level. The
peaceful settlement of disputes and the non-use of
force are important components of the rule of law at the
international level and both constitute core principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and the foundation
of contemporary international law. They represent
international obligations that all countries should
honour. Charter VI of the Charter provides for various
means to resolve disputes peacefully. We support the
resolution of disputes through peaceful means, in
keeping with the Charter, and call on all countries to
respect each other's legitimate rights to choose its own
means of peacefully settling disputes.

Fourthly, an integrated approach should be
taken to establishing the rule of law in countries in
conflict and post-conflict situations. To ensure the
effectiveness and sustainability of the rule of law in
such countries, it is critical to promote coordinated and
mutually reinforcing progress in the rule of law, the
political process, economic development and national
reconciliation. It is important to respect the sovereignty
of countries in conflict and post-conflict situations
and work to enhance their capacity in nation-building.
Efforts to strengthen the rule of law in such countries
should take into account the reality and the needs on
the ground, so that the building of the rule of law will
accord with their national condintions and needs.

Fifthly, it is important to properly handle the
relationship between keeping peace and seeking
judicial justice. Peace and justice are two worthy goals
pursued by humankind. They complement and reinforce
each other. Achieving judicial justice is not simply a
legal issue; it is closely linked to political, economic
and cultural factors. The pursuit of judicial justice
should be conducive to achieving reconciliation and
stability, rather than sacrificing the peace process and
undermining national reconciliation in the countries
concerned.

