The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.

We would particularly like to thank Mr. Griffiths and
Mr. Lowcock for their important and detailed briefings.

Peru fully supports the dialogue initiated by
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General with
all the parties to the Yemeni conflict, and would
like to emphasize his assessment that there is a real
possibility for a political solution if we act inclusively,
pragmatically, swiftly, even-handedly and with
restraint. We believe that because they are so closely
linked, the political and humanitarian aspects of the
Yemeni conflict must be addressed simultaneously
and with the utmost urgency. We therefore express our
deep concern about the escalation of hostilities, which
is exacerbating the greatest humanitarian crisis in the
world today.

We note with alarm that various actors involved
in the conflict continue to violate international law,
international humanitarian law and human rights.
These crimes must be duly investigated and those
responsible prosecuted and punished. In that regard, we
condemn the firing of missiles at Saudi Arabia, since
targeting urban centres is a war crime. We also stress
that any military response must respect the principles
of proportionality, legality and precaution.

We regret the fact that trade in essential goods and
humanitarian access continue to be restricted. That is
notwithstanding the important presidential statement
that the Council adopted in March (S/PRST/2018/5),
with concrete commitments aimed at alleviating the
suffering of the Yemeni people, and the generous
contributions announced for the humanitarian response
plan. As Mr. Lowcock pointed out, all ports, including
Hudaydah and Saleef ports and Sana'a's airport, must
be kept open. The airport is particularly important
for bringing in medical supplies and for emergency
humanitarian evacuations. Safe, rapid and unhindered
access for humanitarian workers must also be ensured.

In conclusion, I would like to stress that there can
be no military solution to the conflict in Yemen, and to
point out that my delegation will continue to work in its
capacity as Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014) to end
the suffering of the civilian population and to build
sustainable peace in that country.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Yemen.

