Mr. Abdullah (Oman) (spoke in Arabic): May I
begin by hailing you and thanking you, Mr. President,
for holding today's special Security Council meeting.

We thank you, Sir, for having invited us to
participate in the debate on the difficult context in Iraq
at present. This is a time for us to see how to tackle the
terrorist challenge represented by the so-called Islamic
State of Iraq and the Levant.

As you know, Sir, we hope that efforts by the
international coalition to vanquish terrorist groups and
terrorism itself in the Middle East will be successful.
We also hope that peace and stability will triumph in
that region of the world, and indeed in the world as a
whole.

Terrorism striking Arab States in whatever forms
or manifestations it takes, whatever its motives or
justifications, should be condemned as reprehensible
in every regard. My country therefore deplores all
heinous and inhuman terrorist crimes perpetrated by
the non-Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant.

Iraq is the cradle of civilization. Thanks to the
support of the international community, it will succeed
in gaining the upper hand over this phenomenon. Iraq,
which has built its civilization over millennia, will not
be defeated by terrorism. The barbarous acts that we
are witnessing in Iraq today perpetrated by the Islamic
State have nothing to do with humanity or with religion.
These groups must be rooted out and eradicated.
The international community must come together in
combating this phenomenon, which is so destructive to
human civilization, through means to be determined by
the Security Council.

The world must come together so as to eradicate all
manifestations of violence, terrorism and extremism.
Thus, through means and arrangements to be determined
by the Council, victory will be ours over these groups.
Effective punitive measures should be urgently taken,
otherwise this group and others will cross borders
into other States, which could strongly undermine the
credibility of the international community.
My country, as has always been the case, will
support these praiseworthy international efforts, and we
hope that this will lead to victory for the international
community - a victory that would show that the
world will not accept this organization or others that
constitute a challenge to human civilization. We remain
at your side and continue to support such efforts as we
have in the past, so as to ensure that no group is able
to score a victory. This also makes it possible to attain
the objectives of the United Nations in the area of the
maintenance of international peace and security.

