Mr. Haraguchi (Japan): First of all, I would like
to thank Ambassador Mufioz for his detailed
presentation. It is truly regrettable that terrorist acts,
such as that in Madrid in which hundreds of innocent
lives were sacrificed, have continued to occur even in
the year 2004. Terrorism can never be justified for any
reason whatsoever, and we strongly condemn such
brutal acts. I wish to extend my deepest condolences to
the families of the victims.

Today, the world is watching intently to see how
effective the United Nations will be in undertaking
counter-terrorism initiatives. In that connection, my
Government appreciates the Al Qaeda and Taliban
Sanctions Committee, which has demonstrated
increasingly greater effectiveness in its efforts in the
fight against terrorism. I should add that, in particular,
Japan supports Security Council resolution 1526
(2004) and wishes to offer its full cooperation towards
the realization of an effective counter-terrorism policy
through the implementation of the resolution.

Having heard the Chairman's briefing and
reviewed the recent activities of the Committee, I wish
to emphasize the following points.

First, in the light of the continuing occurrence of
terrorist acts, it is imperative that terrorist access to the
sources of financing and of acquisition of weapons for
terrorism be cut off. Furthermore, it is crucial that each
and every member State implement effective border-
control policies, including travel bans. Travel bans are
necessary to prevent not only key Al Qaeda leaders,
but also the new generation of Al Qaeda members who
have managed to elude capture in the international
pursuit, as well as resurgent Taliban elements, from
moving freely around the world to achieve their
terrorist objectives. From that point of view, we
strongly hope that more information will be submitted
for inclusion in the Committee's consolidated list so
that Member States will have access to a more
substantial list.

An Al Qaeda terrorist whose name has been
included in the consolidated list was recently arrested
in Germany. Through the investigation following the
arrest we learned that he had been engaged in some
activities in my country for a certain period of time
under false names. That incident has generated
renewed interest in Japan in the consolidated list. In
cooperation with interested countries, we intend to add
the other names used by that terrorist while in Japan,
so as to assist in making the consolidated list more
substantive. We also consider it essential that the
Committee work in closer cooperation with non-
Security Council Member States and other
organizations having expertise in that area, such as the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), with a view to
facilitating technical assistance for the implementation
of sanction measures by Member States.

Secondly, to our regret, according to the report of
the Committee (S/2004/349) of 27 April, less than 70
per cent of Member States have submitted reports in
response to paragraph 6 of Security Council resolution
1455 (2003). However, I am pleased to learn that since
the adoption of resolution 1526 (2004), the number of
countries submitting reports has increased by 30 per
cent. Along with the overseas visits of the Chairman
and the Monitoring Team, the reports to be submitted
by all Member States are a source of useful
information for the purpose of evaluating the
implementation of sanction measures. We believe it is
necessary to continue to request those Member States
that have not yet complied to submit their reports
promptly. We encourage the Committee to further
enhance information sharing with the CTC, so that the
United Nations as a whole will be able to implement
prompt and effective counter-terrorism measures while
avoiding duplication of efforts.

Thirdly, according to paragraph 8 of resolution
1526 (2004), the new Monitoring Team established by
that resolution is to submit three comprehensive,
independent reports on implementation by States of
sanction measures, including concrete
recommendations for improved implementation of
sanction measures and possible new measures. In that
context, my Government is deeply interested in the
perspectives and the operational plan that the first
report of the Team, due by the end of July this year, is
expected to provide. We hope that the Monitoring
Team will work vigorously for the improvement of
sanction measures in accordance with that plan.

We must continue our fight against terrorism in
Afghanistan and its neighbouring regions, bearing in
mind the above-mentioned points. At the same time,
however, I wish to emphasize the importance of
extending our efforts to peace and reconstruction
assistance, so that Afghanistan may build resistance
against terrorism. The political process in that country
is now at a critical stage, with the presidential and the
parliamentary elections planned for September, as
announced by President Karzai at the Berlin
Conference in March.

Together with the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan, Japan is leading the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
process in Afghanistan, which, in our view, is key to
the progress of the political process. Therefore, while
highly appreciating the contribution of the various
Afghan groups in the fight against the Taliban regime,
we also strongly appeal to them to recognize that
participation in the peaceful political process by way of
DDR is the surest path to the reconstruction of their
homeland. We also wish to appeal to Afghanistan's
neighbouring countries and the international
community to provide necessary assistance to the
process.

The fight against terrorism will require a great
deal of patience, and we must remain ever vigilant.
This Committee plays a central role in our joint
endeavour to combat terrorism. I would like to express
our appreciation for the dedication of the Chairman of
the Committee, Ambassador Mufioz, and his
outstanding staff, as well as for the efforts of the
Committee secretariat and the Monitoring Team
experts, who recently initiated their activities.

