Mr. Lewis (United Nations Children's Fund): We are
honoured to participate in this debate and we hugely
appreciate the opportunity. I want to begin, if I may, by
associating the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF)
with the remarks which the representative of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) just delivered. We have an enormous regard and
respect for the way in which UNHCR states and analyzes
these extraordinary humanitarian-assistance dilemmas. I was
reminded of the speech which Mrs. Ogata made to the
Security Council on 28 April, which was, I am sure
everyone will agree, a model of clarity. Everything is
always so intelligently formulated and has such a persuasive
integrity that UNICEF simply endorses the view.

I therefore will not gild the polemical lily. UNICEF is
not UNHCR. We have a vital role in these humanitarian
interventions, but our role is very specific. It deals with
children and women, children being our primary mandate.

The subject of the Council's hearing is humanitarian
assistance and, therefore, predictably close to our heart.
And, if I may say so, the recent events in Zaire give it
credence. The refugees in Kisangani give it a particularly
dramatic note. Of those refugees, 9,000 are estimated to be
and to have been unaccompanied children. I can
remember, if I may be personal for a moment, standing
at kilometre 41 on the Kisangani rail line looking out at
those children - passive, traumatized, vulnerable,
desperate - thinking that this was indeed a scene out of
Dante, that it was a world of dementia, that it seared
one's soul. And I think that all who were involved were
similarly consumed by the predicament and the tragedy.

The subject of these deliberations is further central
for us, given the brutal assault on UNICEF staff in Goma
scarcely two weeks ago. These horrific episodes happen
to all of us and to our indispensable partners in
humanitarian-assistance activities: the non-governmental
organizations. So let me, on UNICEF's behalf, make
some specific recommendations. Some will, I hope, be
realistic, some perhaps lacking in trenchant plausibility,
but all offered in good faith. And most important, all the
suggestions are informed by and within the context of the
Graca Machel study on the impact of armed conflict on
children and the General Assembly resolution which
followed it.

Graca Machel's recommendations paralleled
UNICEF's anti-war agenda. Her recommendations are a
Biblical text for UNICEF and I reaffirm what the Under-
Secretary-General, Mr. Akashi, said earlier. As Graca
Machel noted, in the last decade, 2 million children have
been killed, 4 million to 5 million disabled, 12 million
rendered homeless, 1 million orphaned, 10 million
psychologically traumatized. Half or more of the refugees
are children and so, too, the vast numbers of internally
displaced.

What Graca Machel did, of course, was to weave the
links among the political, the military and the
humanitarian in a unique way. And what she argued,
given both the numbers and the circumstances, has now
become an imperative.

Let me therefore enumerate, specifically following
from what I have attempted to say. First, we must find
ways of protecting humanitarian staff. International norms
cannot be jettisoned. Political and, if necessary, military
support must be provided. We cannot send our colleagues
out to save the world and then have the world abandon
them. We want to associate ourselves with the remarks of
UNHCR and with Mr. Akashi. The United Nations
Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel should be interpreted to cover the
safety of civilian humanitarian staff and of the staff of
non-United Nations agencies. We cannot wait much

 

longer for this. The sooner it is done, the more secure all
of the humanitarian staff will be.

Secondly, last year the General Assembly passed a
landmark resolution, a child-rights resolution, 51/77, based
on the Graca Machel study. It said, in part, that
humanitarian concerns regarding children in armed conflict
should be fully reflected in United Nations field operations.
May I be so bold as to suggest that UNICEF would
therefore recommend that it is vital that the special
protection needs of children be specifically considered in
peacekeeping and demobilization mandates which issue
from the Security Council.

Thirdly, in that regard, resolution 51/77 was also a
good signpost, by inviting Governments to integrate into
training, for all potential peacekeeping personnel, a
knowledge of their obligations to women and children in
conflict - training which Governments would render. But
we would go on specifically to urge that knowledge of
humanitarian and human-rights law be a distinct feature of
induction training for all United Nations military and
civilian personnel in field operations in a way which would
permit them to understand the specific application of the
provisions of the Convention on the Rights of the Child and
the 1951 refugee Convention.
Fourthly, on UNICEF's behalf, I would like to take it
a step further. We welcome the code of conduct for United
Nations peacekeeping personnel, consistent with
humanitarian and human-rights law, and hope that it will be
further elaborated. UNICEF is interested in the idea, which
we think worth pursuing, of an ombudsperson within
peacekeeping operations to handle any investigative and
disciplinary procedures.

Alas, from time to time that becomes necessary. The
Security Council will know that the Graca Machel report
identified in six out of 12 country case studies a rise in
child prostitution with the arrival of peacekeeping
personnel.

Fifthly, let me be even more specific in three areas.

On the issue of child soldiers, our view is that peace
agreements and peacekeeping mandates should specifically
incorporate provisions for the demobilization and social
reintegration of children below the age of 18 where they
have participated in conflict. We have learned in post-
conflict situations that this is the toughest part of the
exercise of the mandate, because it takes rather more time
than integrating adults into society and requires long-term
support.

On landmines, it is UNICEF's view that all field
operations should have a specific demining provision in
the mandate which governs that operation - both in
terms of mine clearance and mine-awareness education.
And let me say rather forlornly that we are losing the
battle against landmines. They are proliferating more
speedily than they are removed. Between 5,000 and 8,000
children a year are killed or maimed. It is therefore, by
explicit nature and by indirection, a Security Council
issue.

On sanctions, it is our respectful view that they are
useful if they are carefully targeted. But that is not always
the case. And the vulnerable populations - women and
children - suffer. Yes, there are exemptions provided for
the flow of humanitarian assistance, but, if this is not
inappropriate, those exemptions are sometimes applied in
a capricious and arbitrary fashion. The exemptions must
be protected and we would suggest that a child-impact
assessment before and during the application of sanctions
should accompany the mandate for sanctions.

I want to bring these remarks to an end. I should
like to say that the links among political, security and
humanitarian circumstances are seldom so vividly etched
as in UNHCR's cri du coeur, which we share: that armed
elements among refugees be separated out by the host
country or by the international community - read: the
Security Council - or we will reap the whirlwind as we
have reaped it in the Great Lakes region, where heinous
crimes are committed with impunity, as Mr. Akashi
noted. What has happened recently is only the latest
example of this ugly phenomenon.

So, too, do we endorse UNHCR's call for access in
conflict situations as an absolutely indispensable
component of delivering humanitarian assistance. These
civil conflicts are so complicated, and they descend into
such abattoirs of depravity, that even children are wilfully
targeted and treated mercilessly. And it is getting worse.
Somewhere the lines must be drawn.

The Security Council is increasingly involved in
support for humanitarian action. Military and civilian
peacekeeping personnel are increasingly used to ensure
the safe delivery of humanitarian assistance to civilian
populations. It is the Security Council that will weave the
web of human rights and humanitarian law into the
political, security, developmental and humanitarian fabric.

 

UNICEF is a very small player; we know that. But we
are always there - before the conflict, during the conflict
and after the conflict. Children are our mandate. Children
are always there. We hope these political deliberations will
lead to ever bolder and more confident initiatives.

