Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): We have
all witnessed the rapidly unfolding painful events and
the great suffering that has struck Libya, a brotherly
country experiencing acts of violence and the use of
heavy weapons and aircraft against large swaths of the
civilian population. Hundreds of innocent victims have
died and we have seen the displacement of hundreds of
thousands of Libyan citizens.

Faced with that great danger, the Security
Council has not stood by idly. We adopted resolution
1970 (2011), which demanded the immediate cessation
of all acts of violence. Given the grave danger posed
by these crimes, the situation in Libya was referred to
the International Criminal Court. For its part, the
General Assembly decided to suspend Libya's
membership in the Human Rights Council. However,
Colonel Al-Qadhafi's regime disregarded the demands
and yearnings of his people as well as international
resolutions.

Lebanon launched an appeal in the Security
Council based on the resolution of the League of Arab
States of 12 March, which stipulates that the Security
Council must

"assume its responsibilities with regard to the
situation in Libya, including taking the necessary
measures to impose a no-fly zone; the
establishment of safe areas, especially in places
that have been struck by aircraft; and measures to
ensure the protection of the Libyan people and all
foreign citizens".

Today's resolution essentially takes into account
the calls by the people of Libya and the demands by
the League of Arab States for an end to the violent acts
and atrocious crimes being carried out by Libyan
authorities against their people. As indicated in the
Arab League's statement, those authorities have lost all
legitimacy. Today's resolution is aimed at protecting
Libyan civilians. We underscore the fact that it will not
result in the occupation of any parts of Libyan territory.
In that regard, I would like to reiterate the following
aspects.

It is quite clear that Lebanon, which has itself
experienced the atrocities of war and violence, would
3
never advocate the use of force or support war in any
part of the world - especially not in the brotherly
country of Libya. Lebanon therefore hopes that the
resolution adopted today will have a deterring effect,
ensure that Libyan authorities move away from using
all forms of violence against their own people, and
avert the use of force.

As we did during the various stages of the
negotiations that led to the adoption of this resolution,
I would also like to reaffirm the importance of and
need for full respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Libya. Lebanon also reaffirms the
importance of close cooperation between the United
Nations and the League of Arab States pursuant to
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. This
aspect has also been included in the resolution we have
just adopted.

We fully understand that the provisions and
actions called for by the resolution cannot alone
guarantee stability in Libya. We therefore reaffirm the
importance of the efforts undertaken to achieve a
peaceful solution to the situation in Libya. We support
the mission of the Secretary-General's Special Envoy,
Mr. Abdel-Elah Al-Khatib.

Faced with the great suffering being experienced
by the Libyan people, the loss of life and the great
dangers that still exist, although this resolution falls
short of our expectations, we hope that it carries a great
deal of hope for a better future for Libya and its valiant
people.

