Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank
Mr. Stephen O'Brien for his powerful briefing and for
all he does on this crucial issue. We are meeting today
exactly five months since a ceasefire was declared in
Syria. Sadly, as Stephen has set out, it is a ceasefire that
exists in name only. The past five months have seen
continued fighting, continued atrocities and continued
destruction. Throughout civilians have been maimed
and killed, starved and besieged. In towns like Khan
Shaykhun, they have been exposed to the very worst
of humankind.

Like many others in this Chamber, we cautiously
welcomed the ceasefire and the Astana agreements on
de-escalation zones. After six years of fighting, we
are all ready to support any genuine effort to bring an
overdue end to the bloodshed. But the fact is that the
Astana plans have done little to help the people of Syria,
instead, so far, they have done a great deal to help the
regime and its allies. The guns have fallen silent only
where it has suited them. The guns have been deafening
elsewhere. So, in some places, yes, there has been an
overdue reduction in the violence, but only where it
suits the regime.

We need only ask the people of Dar'a governorate,
one of the four so-called de-escalation zones, what the
ceasefire feels like on the ground. Last week barrel
bomb after barrel bomb, air strike after air strike,
rained down on opposition-held areas there. Is that
what the regime means by ceasefire? Is that what it
means by de-escalation? And just as the attacks have
continued, so have the sieges. At the end of April, the
United Nations estimated over 620,000 people were
living under siege in Syria, the overwhelming majority
in towns and villages besieged by the regime and its
allies. How can anyone claim there is a ceasefire in
place when the equivalent population of Las Vegas is
being besieged? Quite simply, one cannot.

Going hand in hand with the continued attacks
and continued besiegement is the continued failure to
improve humanitarian access. As Stephen said, in the
past two months, there has been just one aid delivery
to an area besieged by the regime and that delivery
was too little too late, providing supplies for the bare
minimum of the population.

It does not have to be this way. The United Nations
is standing by ready to deliver aid and medicine to
those in critical need. It knows the routes it will take.
It has the assurances it needs from the opposition and
it has the mandate to act. All of us around this table
have agreed in countless resolutions that access must
be granted, but instead the United Nations teams are
forced to wait - not for aid, not for supplies, but
instead for the regime's letters of approval, letters that
never arrive. So the children continue to go hungry and
the sick and wounded continue to die in pain. This is
not about bureaucracy or paperwork; these are the cold
calculating actions of a regime that chooses to starve
its fellow Syrians into surrender. One can see why
the United Nations judges that this kind of behaviour
constitutes war crimes.

In light ofthese continuing atrocities, it is clear that
the guarantors of the Astana process need to do more,
so much more, to make the ceasefire and de-escalation
zones a reality. This must mean a genuine end to the
violence - a ceasefire in deed and not just in thought.
It must mean effective and impartial monitoring
mechanisms, ideally reporting to the Security Council,
so that those who violate the ceasefire are named and
held to account. It means sustained humanitarian access
for the United Nations and its partners, with the United
Nations being allowed to assess what each de-escalation
zone needs. Those with influence over the regime must
ensure that this access is given. It is long overdue.

Above all, if there is to be a long-term peace in
Syria, there has to be full implementation of resolution
2254 (2017), as our Egyptian colleague has just said,
and there has to be justice. There has to be justice for
the people of Khan Shaykhun, for the people of Aleppo,
for the people of so many places across Syria who have
endured for so many years. Without these steps, there
simply is not a credible plan. There is just the fiction
that we have today. It is a fiction where ceasefire exists
and yet bombs still fall. It is a fiction that has endured
for too long.

