The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as Permanent Representative
of Luxembourg.

1, too, should like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH),
Ms. Sandra Honore, for her briefing and for her efforts
in a crucial period for the country's future.

Luxembourg associates itself with the statement to
be made by the observer of the European Union.

We recognize the significant progress made in Haiti
since the January 2010 earthquake. Nevertheless, like
Ms. Honore, we are also aware ofthe challenges that the
country continues to face. While security conditions
have remained relatively stable and the figures collected
indicate a decline in serious crime, the intensification of
demonstrations during the second half of 2013 attested
to the growing discontent of the Haitian population,
which faces socioeconomic problems and persistent
institutional impasses. To respond to the demands of
Haitian citizens, it is essential that the various elections,
which have been postponed for more than two years, be
finally held. In that regard, the Parliament's adoption of
an electoral law, promulgated by President Martelly in
10 December last year, are positive developments.

It is now important to speed up preparation for
elections. We welcome the national dialogue process
initiated on 24 January between the executive branch,
Parliament and the political parties under the auspices
of the Episcopal Conference of Haiti. The signature of
the agreement on 14 March in the framework of the
inter-Haitian dialogue was an important step towards
national consensus. That consensus is essential to
strengthening democratic institutions through the
holding of elections in 2014 and to establishing
governance conducive to socioeconomic development
for the benefit of all Haitians.

The general improvement of the humanitarian
situation in recent months has been encouraging.
However, the living conditions of the 146,000 displaced
persons still living in camps following the January
2010 earthquake are deplorable, and the improved food
security situation could be set back in the event of a
future hurricane. We are particularly concerned about
the plight of nearly 100,000 children under the age of
five who suffer from malnutrition, including 20,000
who suffer from acute, severe malnutrition. Similarly,
while the total number of people infected with cholera
has been cut in half since the outbreak of epidemic
at the end 2010, the mortality rate from cholera has
risen. The international community must address those
challenges.

For its part, Luxembourg remains committed
to assisting Haiti in overcoming the challenges of
socioeconomic development and reconstruction of the
country.

Progress has also been achieved in the protection
of human rights and the rule of law. In the report
published on 7 February, the independent expert
mandated by the Human Rights Council, Mr. Gustavo
GallOn, highlighted the deplorable conditions in the
prisons and drew attention to the problem of prolonged
pre-trial detention0 in Haiti. We encourage the Haitian
authorities to redouble their efforts, with the support of
MINUSTAH, to find solutions to those problems.

On a positive note, we welcome the decision of
the Court of Appeals in Port-au-Prince validating the
judicial proceedings against former President Jean-
Claude Duvalier for crimes against humanity.

A professional police force is a key component of
the rule of law. We commend the progress made in the
capacity-building of the Haitian National Police. As
the Special Representative noted, the staff currently
consists of 11,228 police officers, including 950
women. In December 2013, 1,058 students, including
111 women, received their diplomas as police officers.
The next announced graduating class is also quite
promising, so Haiti is well on its way to achieving the
goal of 15,000 active police officers by 2016.

The progress that has been made towards the
stabilization of the situation in Haiti since the
initial deployment of MINUSTAH in 2004 has been
considerable. Certainly, the presence of the United
Nations is still necessary, also in view of the upcoming
elections. I am thinking especially of the presidential
elections scheduled for November 2015, but we should
now begin preparations for the post-2016 period.

We thank the Secretary-General for providing five
options for a post-2016 United Nations presence. In
general, Luxembourg supports the goal of progressive
assumption of MINUSTAH's authority by the Haitian
Government, especially the Haitian National Police, in
the maintenance of law and order and ensuring a stable
environment. If conditions on the ground permit, we
believe that an accelerated transition towards a new
configuration of the United Nations presence in Haiti
should be pursued.

We look forward with interest to the comprehensive
strategic review that the Secretary-General will present
to us in a future report so that the Security Council
may make an informed decision, in close cooperation
with the Haitian authorities, with regard to the future
presence of the United Nations that will best suit the
aspirations and needs of the Haitian people and to
ensure the sustainable stability of the country.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Haiti.

