Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, allow me to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important meeting on
Afghanistan. I should also like to thank the Secretary-
General for his report on the situation in Afghanistan
and its implications for international peace and
security. It is both comprehensive and detailed, and it
comes at a very important juncture in Afghan political
history.

I should also like to take this opportunity to
express our appreciation for the tireless efforts of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, whom we welcome among us
today. Further, we should like to pay tribute to the
excellent work carried out by his excellent staff in the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), particularly in the light of the difficult and
complicated circumstances prevailing on the ground. I
pay tribute to his efforts, his persistence and his
determination to pursue the path of the United Nations
in Afghanistan.

We should like to share Mr. Brahimi's optimism
with regard to the evolution of the political, security
and development tracks in Afghanistan, marked by
life's stages of joy, sadness, worry and optimism. It is
truly heartening that there have been so many
achievements thus far in the political, economic and
social areas. The return of children to school by the
millions, the return of 1 million displaced persons to
the country, the elimination of poppy cultivation -
formerly a major problem - the launching of locust
eradication and, in the political field, the convening of
the Loya Jirga, which revitalized that traditional
constitutional Afghani mechanism - one eighth of
whose members are women, which in itself is a notable
achievement - are all extremely important
developments. Those achievements, along with the
initial stages of the training of the police and of the
armed forces, despite the many difficulties and
challenges encountered, should make us all proud.

However, this is a long process for the
international community. The task remains unfinished,
and the United Nations Mission and Mr. Brahimi still
have a long path ahead of them. I admired the
determination in Mr. Brahimi's statement that the
Mission would not allow setbacks to derail the peace
process. We owe a debt to the Afghani people and to
the rest of the world to pursue that positive process and
to assist the Afghani people. I truly appreciate
Mr. Brahimi and his tireless efforts.

There are several protracted problems that the
Government and people of Afghanistan must still face,
the security situation in particular. First, we must ask
what we can do to achieve the necessary security for
the Afghani people. Mr. Brahimi said that around 70
security-related incidents have recently occurred in
Afghanistan. I share his assessment that the huge
improvement in the security situation over the past six
months can be attributed to the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF). I also agree with him that the
grave security situation, especially in the north, will
hinder the improvement of the political situation. If we
are to address those problems, we need to extend the
security task nationwide. I fully support his request to
extend ISAF's mandate throughout the country.

Only yesterday, at an open meeting, the Council
discussed the situation in the Mano River region and
the lessons learned there. The members of the Council
felt that the security situation in Liberia might spill
over into the other countries of the region. So what can
we expect with regard to a security environment that is
so volatile in all parts of Afghanistan except Kabul? If
we use the Mano River region as an example, that
situation could spill over into Kabul, because, unless
security prevails throughout Afghanistan - which,
after all, is one entity - the prevailing insecurity
might affect the other parts of the country.

It is only natural for us to support the efforts to
establish institutions capable of addressing the security
situation in Afghanistan. I should like to express our
appreciation for all donors who have been able to help
Afghanistan's military, security and other institutions
to enhance the security of the Afghani people, who
have suffered devastating wars for so long.

We believe that the balanced participation of all
ethnic groups in directing the political affairs of
Afghanistan is an extremely important factor in
achieving security; it would support and complement
the functions of the security institutions. As
Ambassador Brahimi said, the convening of the Loya
Jirga, the establishment of a constitutional commission
to draft a new constitution and to write an election
code, and the actual holding of elections in which all
Afghani ethnic groups participate, will advance the
political situation and enhance security.

The return of all Afghani refugees, the guarantee
of human rights and the establishment of a human
resource infrastructure, as well as Afghani capacity-
building, will contribute to the establishment and
consolidation of comprehensive human development,
not merely human resources, in Afghanistan. In that
regard, we must thank the donor countries that have
provided assistance aimed at overcoming Afghanistan's
protracted problems. At the same time, we urge donor
countries and others that have the ability to do so to
provide additional assistance to Afghanistan so that it
can rise to meet its political, economic, social and
security challenges.

