Mr. Heusgen (Germany): On Monday, we all observed a minute of silence for the latest victims whom we and the Niger mourned. I think that we are all aware that they were only the most recent victims in a spiral of violence that we are observing. I would also like to convey, at this stage, my condolences and those of the German Government to the Ambassador of Mali for all the victims in the Malian civilian population and security forces. As one looks at the numbers in Mali, they are a disaster. In that regard, I would like to turn to my French colleague and once again fully support what he said earlier. Germany is in partnership with friends and the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) and remains totally committed to bringing security and stability to the region. We support obtaining the desired results, including those related to the economic and social aspect. In condemning the terrorist attacks, Germany continues to stand side by side with our partners in the G-5 summit, Mali, the Niger and other countries. In our discussions, we must not make the mistake of underestimating the grave threat that we see related to the military aspects of the situation. We need to understand the drivers of violent extremism and we have to recognize that a part of the population, as several colleagues noted earlier, has legitimate grievances that must be addressed. We need to do everything we can and the authorities in Mali and the G-5 countries need to do everything to establish good governance, fight corruption and impunity, develop the justice system and respect for human rights - as the Ambassador of Dominican Republic highlighted earlier - and implement the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. As previous speakers said, what is also needed, of course, is the restoration of State institutions to all parts of the country. We have to protect children, which has two aspects. One aspect is the physical protection of children. Children are the victims of violence and I am sure that my Belgian colleague will say something about this. The other aspect is education. Whenever I hear the number of schools closed, I see that as another indicator that violence will rise. What will children do if theydo not go to school? Therefore, the opening of schools is key. As the Ambassadors of France, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and the Dominican Republic said earlier, more has to be done to advance the participation of women, including in Government and the peace process. I welcome the remarks by the Under-Secretary- General and I recognize the efforts of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) in that regard. Those of us who were in Bamako on our Security Council trip last year still remember, when we looked at the follow- up committee, that its membership was almost entirely made up of men. More has to be done. Of course, that is only something very personal, but I remember that at a meeting I attended last January (see S/PV.8445), the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mali was a woman, whereas I see that a male Minister was announced for today's meeting. That is just one indication. I hope that the Foreign Minister is able to listen to our remarks or that they will be conveyed to him. Lastly, as the Ambassador of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines very eloquently said earlier, the drivers of violence and problems are related to climate change and security and their effects and more has to be done in that regard to build resilience. Let me conclude in turning to MINUSMA. As sometimes criticism is voiced with regard to the Mission, at this stage I would like to sincerely recognize what MINUSMA is doing and what the individuals in the Mission are doing. We recognize that, in difficult circumstances, they are doing a good job. MINUSMA alone cannot provide security and can only do so as a partner of the Government in the implementation of the peace agreement. MINUSMA continues to try to strengthen the Malian Government, such as with regard to the police, but such support should be based on a comprehensive strategic development plan prepared by the Malian authorities, which would then be supported by the Mission. My United States colleague talked about reforms or proposals for the adaptation of MINUSMA and we will of course study such proposals with great interest. For the time being, MINUSMA has a limited mandate and more also needs to be done to better communicate its mandate so that there is no unjustified criticism of its work. The Government also has a role to play in that regard. We, as a Council, have to ensure that MINUSMA, whatever its mandate, has adequate means at its disposal - as does the United Nations system in general. In this respect, I also support what Mr. De Riviere said earlier.
