Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): First I would like to join in those words of
welcome that have already been addressed today to the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Macedonia, Mr. Kerim,
who is taking part in the meeting.

The Russian Government strongly condemns the
deterioration of the situation provoked by armed
Albanian extremists in the Kosovo portion of the
Yugoslav-Macedonian border and within Macedonia.
We fully support the legitimate requests of the
Macedonian Government on the need to put an end to
these provocations, which were presented in detail by
the Minister of Macedonia today. We are particularly
concerned about new reports of coordinated activities
combining the sharp intensification of Albanian
fighters' activities in Macedonia with terrorist
activities in Kosovo and the Presevo Valley. It is time
for the international community to draw lessons from
the sad experience of aiding and abetting separatist
elements of the Albanian extremists. Recent events
show that they are not interested in dialogue and
intend, through provocation and stirring tensions, to
achieve their nationalistic ideas through methods of
force. The fighters' activities are clearly intended to
destabilize the internal situation in Macedonia. The
extremists are going from isolated terrorist acts to
attempts to involve Macedonian army and law
enforcement units in broad-scale hostilities using
various types of weapons.

This calculation is, as in the past, to provoke a
disproportionate reaction and then the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO) will supposedly protect
them. However, we already see the signs today that
everyone, both in NATO and in the Islamic world, have
caught on to the provocateurs and have prepared to
rebuff their activities, which are causing great harm to
the Balkans and are in violation of the basic interests of
all Albanians living there. We must immediately put an
end to the high-handedness of the extremists, disarm
and dissolve the illegal armed groups remaining in
Kosovo, and isolate their leaders politically.
The increasing nationalism in Kosovo, the
escalation of tension in the Presevo Valley, where once
again today a Yugoslav soldier died, and the outbreak
of violence in northern Macedonia are, without
exaggeration, a threat to peace, security and stability
throughout the Balkan region. The international
community must stem terrorism and violence on an
ethnic basis, ensure respect for the territorial integrity
and sovereignty of all States in the Balkan region.

In practical terms, this means in particular the
need for the Kosovo Force (KFOR), as required by
resolution 1244 (1999), to close the Kosovo portion of
the Macedonian-Yugoslav border to the transfer of
weapons and fighters from Kosovo. The weapons,
including heavy weaponry, that is being used to
undermine stability in Macedonia is coming there from
Kosovo. In fact, yesterday this was reaffirmed by the
Secretary-General of NATO at a meeting with members
of the Security Council. So we are all reaping the fruits
of aiding and abetting the constant and flagrant
violations of the Security Council arms embargo in
Kosovo. although Russia has repeatedly called for
ultimately ensuring strict compliance with resolution
1160 (1998).

The leadership of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) must also
take additional decisive steps with a view to stemming
the continuing illegal activities in Kosovo aimed at
stirring up militant nationalism, including the attacks
we have heard from the mouths of Kosovo Albanian
figures on the Yugoslav-Macedonian border
demarcation agreement and the territorial integrity of
Macedonia. The United Nations Administration
Mission in Kosovo and KFOR bear a special
responsibility for preventing the spread of extremism
from Kosovo and for retaining stability in the Balkans,
and the Security Council must heighten its attention to
issues involving compliance by the international
presence with their mandates.

