Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): At a time
when the General Assembly has barely concluded its
general debate - during which a wide consensus was
generated around the need for action in the Middle East
before the region finally plunges into violence, and on
the margins of which the Quartet attempted to breathe
life into a peace process that is today moribund -
Israel has once again launched its troops, tanks and
helicopters into Palestinian camps in Gaza to wreak
death and destruction.

The toll of the previous five days of unbridled
recourse to brutal force is outrageous. Israeli missiles
and rockets have mowed down dozens of Palestinians,
among them numerous children. Hundreds of civilians
have been injured, and numerous houses and much
infrastructure have been destroyed. Horror and
desolation prevail in the Jabaliya, Khan Younnis and
Beit Hanoun camps.

Instead of acknowledging the increasing appeals
for restraint, including one by the Secretary-General,
Israel has decided to pursue its military offensive, with
the arrogance and indifference that only the certainty
of immunity can nourish, promising more death and
destruction. Bearing down relentlessly on an exhausted
civilian population that has suffered physical abuse,
violence and deprivation. Israel has used the most
deadly and sophisticated weapons to carry out its
terrorist enterprise. The Israeli Prime Minister publicly
boasted about what he considered an early success and,
deaf to reason, announced on Sunday an escalation of
the military operation, perhaps lasting several weeks.

This disproportionate use of force against the
Palestinian people is obviously not in response to a few
rockets fired into Israel, which killed two children -
and we are deeply sorry for this, because we are
touched by the death of any child. This use of brutal
force is clearly part of a strategy designed to terrorize
the Palestinian people, to annihilate their will to resist
and their sense of national pride and to leave them
battered and broken after Israel's announced
withdrawal from the Gaza Strip - if it ever takes
place.

These vile methods used by Israel against
defenceless civilian populations constitute war crimes
and acts of State terrorism that must be energetically
condemned and denounced by the international
community as a whole. What difference is there
between a bomb explosion that kills passengers in a
bus and a rocket or a missile deliberately fired by a
tank on a home, killing women and children? Frankly, I
see no difference.

Confronted with the grave downward slide of the
situation in the Gaza Strip, where the civilian
population is suffering from the worst kinds of acts, the
international community cannot and must not remain
passive or indifferent. Just a month ago, this very
Security Council acted in an unusually rapid and
effective manner even though there was no direct threat
to international peace and security. Today, if its
credibility is to be maintained, it must demand that
Israel immediately put an end to the operations being
carried out in Gaza, withdraw its troops, respect the
Council's resolutions and the standards of international
humanitarian law, end its policy of arbitrary
executions, stop destroying homes and respect its
commitments under the road map, the validity and
relevance of which has just been reaffirmed by the
Quartet.

Algeria energetically condemns the abominable
crimes committed today against the people living in the
Gaza Strip, and we reiterate our full solidarity with the
Palestinian people, who are exposed to a genuine war
of extermination. We call for a just, definitive and
comprehensive solution based on international legality
and Israeli withdrawal from the territories that it is
occupying by force, allowing the Palestinian people to
establish their independent State with Al-Quds
al-Sharif as its capital.

My country calls on all Security Council
members to support the draft resolution that I have just
introduced on behalf of the Arab Group. It is a
balanced draft, inspired by the urgency and gravity of
the situation, and is couched in language that is largely
agreed by the Security Council. It calls essentially for
an end to military operations in the Gaza Strip and to
the cycle of violence and counter-violence. Thus, it
would open the door to wisdom so that the parties can
honour their obligations with respect to the road map.

