Mr. Bessho (Japan): Let me first express my
gratitude to the presidency for convening this timely
debate. I would like to welcome the Secretary-General's
Special Representative, Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto,
who made his first briefing today. Japan looks forward
to working with him and is ready to assist his efforts in
any way possible.

As we have heard in the briefing by Special
Representative Yamamoto, Afghanistan has seen
some positive developments, but also has areas that
require further improvement. We welcome the National
Unity Government's continued reform efforts as the
Brussels Conference on Afghanistan approaches.
International expectations are high for the outcome
of anti-corruption initiatives in support of the steady
implementation of the Self-Reliance through Mutual
Accountability Framework.

Japan welcomes the Government's establishment
of the Anti-Corruption Criminal Justice Centre. It
is essential that the Center deepen trust between the
Government and Afghan citizens, as well as between
the international community and the Government,
through increased transparency and reform.

Since the previous debate (see S/PV.7722) on the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), in June, we have witnessed two major
positive developments in the economic sector. The
first is that Afghanistan achieved full membership in
the World Trade Organization. The second is that the
International Monetary Fund approved a $45 million
three-year extended credit facility agreement for
Afghanistan. Afghanistan's achievements on economic
reform deserve to be highlighted. Afghanistan is striving
to become an export-oriented economy, and we note
that the National Unity Government has been focusing
on expanding agricultural productivity. Agriculture is a
key sector for generating jobs and income, and over the
past few years, Afghanistan has invested in irrigation
and water management. Japan supports Afghanistan in
exploring its agricultural potential as part of its efforts
towards self-reliance.

Sadly, there is little good news about Afghanistan's
political and security situation. On 23 July we saw the
deadliest single terrorist attack in Afghanistan since
2001, while UNAMA reported the highest number of
civilian casualties in a six-month period since 2009.
Japan is also concerned by the continued abductions,
assassinations and military clashes, as well as the
Secretary-General's recent observation that tensions
have increased significantly between President Ghani
and Chief Executive Abdullah. The peace process
is essential to Afghanistan's future security, but
unfortunately we have seen no real progress in that area.

Long-standing trafficking in narcotics remains
a persistent and dire problem in Afghanistan. Profits
from the illegal narcotics trade flow to the Taliban
and other insurgent groups, causing many negative
consequences. Japan, together with the Russian
Federation and the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, has supported training programmes for counter-
narcotics police officers from both Afghanistan and
Central Asian countries, thereby simultaneously
contributing to strengthening regional cooperation.
However, there remains much to do in addressing the
country's ongoing narcotics challenges.

Today, the Security Council adopted a presidential
statement (S/PRST/2016/l4) reaffirming our support
for the National Unity Government. Japan strongly
urges political actors at all levels to work together in
support of a truly united national Government that
can address Afghanistan's many difficult issues. We
look forward Special Representative Yamamoto's
leadership in implementing UNAMA's mandate, and
pledge our continued support for efforts in Afghanistan
going forward.

