Mrs. Migiro (United Republic of Tanzania):
Tanzania pays tribute to you, Madam President, and to

your delegation for having organized this important
debate. Regional organizations play a vital role in
maintaining peace and stability in their respective
regions. We therefore welcome the presence of
representatives of regional organizations at this
meeting to give us their perspective from the field.

The United Nations has a long history of
collaboration with regional organizations. That history
of collaboration has enabled regional organizations to
become increasingly involved in brokering peace
agreements, in conflict resolution and in peacekeeping.
In a number of countries - including, recently, the
Sudan - they have played a useful role
complementary to the efforts made by the Security
Council. They are indispensable partners in
maintaining regional and international peace and
security. But, even with those positive developments,
more is required.

Tanzania believes that an institutionalized
approach and mechanism will make possible a shift
from the present fragile arrangements to a more
substantive and regularized cooperation. That is central
to the needs of both the United Nations and regional
organizations in the fulfilment of their common
responsibilities for maintaining peace and in the
prevention of armed conflict.

The challenge, as we see it, lies in devising
practical arrangements for strengthening the
relationship between the United Nations and regional
and other intergovernmental organizations in keeping
with the provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter. In
that regard, the African Union has done a tremendous
job under very difficult circumstances, both in
brokering the Darfur Peace Agreement and in
monitoring the N'Djamena Ceasefire Agreement.

As the primary United Nations organ responsible
for peace and security, the Security Council has the
power and the prerogative to advance cooperation with
regional and intergovernmental organizations to a
higher level so as to make it more effective and
responsive to challenges that threaten international
peace and security.

The African Union, in the context of the African
Union Mission in the Sudan, has demonstrated the
advantages offered by a regional organization: physical
proximity to the conflict and a greater understanding of
the dynamics. We believe that the African Union, in
this case, stands to benefit from a formalized
arrangement with the United Nations in developing the
institutional and operational capacity of the African
Union Peace and Security Council, in the training of
civilian and military personnel, and in the exchange of
information, early-warning systems, communication
and capacity-building at both the peacekeeping and the
peacebuilding stages.

We are very mindful of the benefits that regional
organizations have gained through cooperation with
other regional and intergovernmental organizations.
The European Union, for instance, has helped Africa to
establish the African Peace Facility, while the Group of
Eight provides direct bilateral assistance to the African
Union, the Economic Community of West African
States and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, to mention them. That kind of
cooperation should continue alongside that between the
United Nations and regional organizations.

In conclusion, I believe that our debate today
should result in a firm resolve to translate our
determination to institutionalize cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations into
concrete and sustainable action. The Security Council
must enable the United Nations to effectively
implement that resolve. Finally, my delegation wishes
to support the draft presidential statement, we thank
the Greek delegation for having prepared it.

