I extend my heartfelt thanks to Germany and the Dominican Republic for convening today's open debate. Georgia aligns itself with the statement of the European Union (see annex 25). Let me make a few remarks in my national capacity. Conflict-related sexual violence constitutes a grave human rights violation and serious threat to international peace and security. The adoption of the landmark resolution 1325 (2000) 20 years ago was an important milestone in this regard. Resolution 1820 (2008), which recognized conflict-related sexual violence as a threat to international peace and security, and resolution 1888 (2009), which established the mandate of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, served as major breakthroughs in the fight against this heinous crime. In addition, by adopting resolution 2467 (2019) last year, spearheaded by Germany, the international community took a significant step forward in strengthening justice and embracing a survivor-centred approach. Yet despite the significant advancements in the normative domain, implementation is lagging. According to the findings of the latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/487), sexual violence continues to be used as a cruel tactic of war to dehumanize, instil fear, forcibly displace people and impede prospects of sustaining peace and reconciliation. The coronavirus disease has further compounded challenges faced by the survivors of the sexual violence. Ensuring accountability for perpetrators and justice for survivors is key to prevention and deterrence of future violence of this nature. Embracing a survivor- centred approach should become another pivotal aspect in our response to conflict- related sexual violence, including through ensuring better access for victims to justice, and medical services. Finally, without addressing such structural root causes of sexual violence as gender inequality, it is impossible to build a society where human rights are universally respected. Committed to the full and effective implementation of the Beijing Platform for Action, the Government of Georgia pays heightened attention to the implementation of the Security Council resolutions on women and peace and security. Through our national action plans, we have been promoting gender equality in all aspects of public life, including by integrating gender perspectives in the security sector and decision-making processes, increasing participation of women in the Geneva International Discussions and in the mechanisms for preventing and responding to incidents of sexual violence. Another key aspect is promoting gender equality in the military. The Georgian Ministry of Defence's gender-equality strategy establishes the conditions required to guarantee equal rights, freedoms and opportunities for men and women, prevent and eradicate all forms of discrimination, counter any kind of gender violence and eliminate the misconduct, sexual harassment and physical and psychological mistreatment. The Ministry of Defence has further improved its legislative base to ensure accountability for sexual harassment by military service personnel. In 2018, for the first time, the notion of sexual harassment and sanctions for perpetrators thereof have been introduced in the defence system. Since 2014, training on gender perspectives has constituted an integral part of predeployment preparation of peacekeepers, with 6,000 military service personnel, both men and women, having been trained up to now. Gender and domestic violence issues are also subject to post- traumatic-stress-disorder sessions at the post-deployment stage. Fighting sexual violence requires placing the needs and priorities of victims of sexual violence at the heart of our response strategy. Accordingly, the State Care Agency, operating under the auspices of the Ministry of Health, provides protection, assistance and rehabilitation of the victims of human rights violations, including domestic violence, violence against women and sexual abuse. At the international level, Georgia, together with Canada, Sweden, Uruguay and Fiji, has been active in the United Nations Human Rights Council in leading a new initiative: a resolution on accountability for ensuring women's and girls' full enjoyment of human rights in humanitarian settings, which is planned to be presented to the Council in the near future. Notwithstanding the aforementioned efforts, my Government continues to be unable to extend protection to conflict-affected women residing in the occupied regions of Georgia, namely, Abkhazia and Tskhinvali. The protracted illegal occupation of these two regions by the Russian Federation continues to deprive local residents of some of their basic human rights, with restrictions on freedom of movement, deprivation of property rights and prohibition of education in their native language. Finally, let me reiterate our unwavering commitment to contributing to the promotion of the women and peace and security agenda and to the global endeavour to eradicate conflict-related sexual violence.
