Ms. Raskovic-Ivic (Serbia): It gives me great
pleasure to be able to address the Council and to pay
my respects to this body of the world Organization.

First and foremost, I wish to emphasize the
unique significance of the Security Council as a
guarantor upholding the universal principles of
international law and the entire world order. This is
even more important if we keep in mind the imperative
of bringing about peace and stability in, and
developing the future of, both Kosovo and Metohija
and the region of South-Eastern Europe.

The Republic of Serbia resolutely maintains that
upholding and promoting peace and stability in the
Western Balkans will be possible only through strict
observance of international principles. These include,
first and foremost, the inviolability of the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of democratic States.

We wish in particular to reiterate the fact that
Serbia is fully determined to assume its share of
responsibility in the process of working towards a
successful resolution of the Kosovo and Metohija
issue, in accordance with international law and in
conformity with universal democratic values. We are
addressing the Security Council with full confidence
that it will make an instrumental contribution in line
with its previously adopted documents, in particular
with resolution 1244 (1999) of 10 June 1999, which
reaffirms the sovereignty and territorial integrity of our
country.

We firmly believe that achieving a durable
solution to the future status of Kosovo and Metohija
will be possible only through systematic, responsible
and orderly negotiations, without imposed deadlines
that can only result in additional pressure. Otherwise,
new complications may arise with unforeseeable
consequences 4 the inevitable result of any departure
from the universal principles embraced by the
international community. Impatience and haste cannot
contribute to a sustainable solution to the issue of
Kosovo and Metohija or to peace and stability in the
region.

May I remind the Council that three months ago,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
reported on the progress made in all areas, including
security. On that very day, a Serbian returnee from
Klina, Dragan Popovic, was brutally murdered. The
perpetrators were never identified. This was taken as
yet another ominous message to the Serb community,
especially to the returnees. Regrettably, that reality
speaks for itself.

Since that meeting of the Security Council, 51
small- and large-scale incidents have occurred,
involving assaults against the lives and property of
Serbs. However, from October 2005, when it was
decided that the negotiations on the future status of
Kosovo would begin, to 1 September 2006, there were
260 incidents.

In the evening of 26 August this year, a 16-year-
old Albanian slowly walked across the bridge between
South and North Mitrovica. He threw a bomb at a
nearby Serbian coffee shop packed with people and
calmly walked away. There is no doubt that this act of
violence was political and that it targeted Serbs.
Therefore, it was not aimed at a specific person who
happened to be a Serb, but at Serbs as legitimate
targets.

It is with the deepest regret that we must state
that that terrorist attack against the Serbs occurred
subsequent to a statement to the effect that the Serbs as
a nation were guilty - a statement that was expressly
made in front of the Serbian negotiating team in
Vienna and several other witnesses by a person one
would never expect to do so, especially considering the
high office he holds.

That unfortunate statement was followed by a
refusal to offer an apology to the Serbian people for
having made such a harsh accusation. At the same
time, this has been the only argument, if it is an
argument at all, that has been presented in favour of
Kosovo and Metohija's independence so far.

The Serbian negotiating team is working actively
on protection of the Serbian and other non-Albanian
communities in Kosovo and Metohija, mainly through
decentralization. Regarding the issue of future status,
its main arguments are based on the universality of
international law and the inviolability of borders. That
presumes that it is inadmissible to rob the
internationally recognized State of Serbia of 15 per
cent of its territory in order to create a second Albanian
State in the region. It is thus clear why the Albanian
side has not engaged in meaningful negotiations. The
negotiations have so far been conducted in such a
casual manner that minutes were not kept nor were
rules of procedure set until the Serbian side explicitly
requested that these things be done.

On 28 March this year, there was yet another
incident on the same bridge in the course of which a
l9-year-old man, Milisav Ilincic, was stabbed. The
international public prosecutor for the Kosovska
Mitrovica district, Paul Flynn, terminated the
investigation against two Albanians suspected of
attempted murder, although one of them had confessed
to having stabbed Ilincic.

Taking into account that event and many other
incidents, as well as the incomprehensible fact that
ever since UNMIK assumed responsibility for peace
and security in Kosovo and Metohija in 1999, very few
cases involving the murder or assault of Serbs have
been tried in court, it would appear that the survival of
the remaining Serbs, from the Albanians' point of View,
stands in the way of their political and ideological
goals. Hence, the UNMIK tactic of avoiding conflicts
with militant Albanians simply means turning a blind
eye to reality.

As hard to believe as it is, everything I have
mentioned leads to the conclusion that fear of powerful
and violent Albanians and their threats of revenge is
the very factor that is undermining international law
and justice.

Let me remind members that in Kosovo and
Metohija people may get killed just for speaking a
Slavic language resembling Serbian, as in the case of a
Bulgarian in Pristina who lost his life. Ethnic identity
becomes a license to kill. But the real situation is even
worse. In a terrorist bomb attack I referred to earlier,
on 26 August, a few non-Serbs - foreign nationals -
were also injured. One of them happened to be an
international police officer. They were attacked just for
being present in a Serb-owned establishment.

As for religious monuments, cultural heritage and
religious freedoms, on the one hand there is an
emphasis on legislating those matters, and we welcome
that. On the other hand, in practice, religious shrines

are being desecrated and looted. As one of many
examples, in a church in the Serbian village of Mogila,
in the Vicinity of anilane, there are still some
Christian icons on the church walls with the eyes of the
saints gouged out by Albanian extremists in the
campaign of ethnic cleansing of March 2004 against
the remaining Serbs and other non-Albanians. The
Provisional Institutions have never undertaken to
protect those religious shrines or to ease the fears of
the believers who pray in that church and look at the
desecrated icons as they contemplate whether they
should remain in their homeland.

Furthermore, the international community has
every right to demand that the Kosovo Institutions
adopt laws against so-called general discrimination.
However, the mere adoption of such laws is not a
solution to the problem. The true leaders of Kosovo
society are the individuals of undisputed authority
within their communities: the clan leaders. The
decisions are made by them, not by the judiciary. That
was said even by Mr. Kai Eide in his report
(S/2005/635, annex). In Kosovo, justice is being taken
into people's own hands; tribal laws and blood feuds
still rule there, unfortunately. One cannot fight that just
by promulgating laws against discrimination. What is
needed are true implementation and true monitoring.

Securing the safety of public transport has always
been a priority - at least a declared one - and is one
of the 13 recommendations of the Contact Group. In
practice, there are so-called death roads, a colloquial
expression used by KFOR and UNMIK officers to refer
to the roads connecting the Serbian settlement
Strpce - a very distant Serbian enclave in Kosovo
territory - to other Serbian regions. So far, 12 terrorist
attacks against Serbs have been conducted there.

Only a few hours before the public transport
competencies were to be transferred from UNMIK to
the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government,
several Albanians stoned a bus carrying Serbian
children home from a field trip. The incident took
place in the village of Zabari, outside Kosovska
Mitrovica, on 30 August 2006. Bus windows were
broken, but fortunately there were no casualties.
UNMIK issued a statement denying that the police
officers escorting the bus had witnessed the incident -
not denying, however, that it had taken place. Sadly
enough, the children will remember their ordeal,
whether anyone saw it or not, whether anyone chose to
see anything or not, or whether a statement on the
incident was issued at all.

I wish to recall that Ambassador Kai Eide, in his
comprehensive review of the situation in Kosovo,
qualified the process of establishing the future status of
Kosovo and the continuance of standards
implementation as the only way towards any progress.
Ambassador Eide also emphasized other very
important and essential issues. Regrettably, so far there
have been no serious signs whatsoever that anyone is
willing to recognize at least some among those
absolutely adequate and correct recommendations. On
the other hand, unfortunately, the flexible attitude of
our negotiating team failed to be reciprocated by the
Albanian negotiating team, which maintained a rigid
and uncompromising attitude: independence at any
cost.

With regard to the completion of the
reconstruction and compensation programme in the
wake of ethnic cleansing against the Serbs in March
2004, it is important to underline the fact that security
is the top issue and the top priority that has to be dealt
with.

The lack of progress in the return of the displaced
and exiled population, which has been recognized, is
particularly worrisome. Without getting into details
about the methodologies that some organizations apply
to record the returnees, we call attention to the fact that
even the most optimistic of those records indicate a
maximum of 5 per cent of returnees. The real numbers
do not exceed 2 per cent. I also wish to point out that
the return of the internally displaced persons can be
facilitated and made possible through genuine
commitment and joint efforts in the field.

The Kosovo PISG should publicly support the
submission of property claims to the Kosovo Property
Agency regarding restitution of agricultural and
commercial property. However, a genuine wish to
resolve the issue is lacking. The Kosovo Property
Agency has started receiving claims, but without any
media coverage or outreach campaign. The fact that the
Agency has still not obtained the funds to process the
claims clearly demonstrates that its activities are
considered peripheral by the PISG.
It is not a secret that large-scale organized crime,
as well as crime in general, including trafficking in
human beings and corruption, flourish in Kosovo and
Metohija. The trade in and smuggling of drugs and

arms continue unhindered before the very eyes of the
representatives of the international community,
including police and the military. There is no need to
stress yet again that Serbia, as a State of which Kosovo
and Metohija is an integral part, is more than open to
any specialized police and investigative activity which
will assist in the eradication of trafficking in human
beings and narcotics in the province, because this is not
just Kosovo's problem and not just Serbia's problem: it
is a European and world problem.

The situation and developments in Kosovo and
Metohija should be assessed realistically and
responsibly. Here, "realistically" means the point of
view of international law and historical and political
aspects. "Responsibly" is probably of paramount
importance; it presumes that the consequences of our
present actions should be anticipated for two, five, 10
or even more years in the future. To force a premature
solution would come at a great cost to the region, the
province and the international community, which,
instead of reaching a sustainable solution, would have
to deal with an even more difficult and complex
situation in Kosovo and Metohija.

A precipitous solution would not solve the issue,
but would be a precedent opening up a Pandora's box,
which should be avoided at any cost. It is truly hard to
believe that anyone would want to take that
responsibility just to meet a certain deadline. I
emphasize that patience and patience alone, with eyes
wide open to reality and the future, can bring about a
true compromise solution to the Kosovo and Metohija
issue.

An imposed solution will not be conducive to the
resolution of the problem of Kosovo and Metohija. It is
quite clear that it is self-deception to believe that
Kosovo and Metohija is going to be a special and
unique case. The point is that any imposed solution
will inevitably generate unforeseeable and fatal
consequences.

I would like to share that feeling of responsibility.
Together with the leaders in my Government and with
my country, I wish to say to the Council, loud and
clear, that a sustainable, compromise solution to the
issue of Kosovo and Metohija can be reached only if
artificial deadlines - and the philosophy of Kosovo as
a special case - are set aside.

The Serbian side therefore believes that the
settlement of the Kosovo and Metohija problem lies in

the implementation of the principles and concrete
solutions based on the platform of the Serbian
negotiating team regarding the future status of Kosovo
and Metohija. In the long run, that is the only way
ahead towards the proper resolution of the dire
situation in the province. The international community
ought to support this, and show by its deeds that it is in
favour of a stable and safe region. That can be
achieved only by taking a step towards establishing the
rule of law, by bringing the criminals and terrorists to
justice and punishing them and by ensuring security
and all the other preconditions for a normal life.

Furthermore, the necessary political steps should
be taken to persuade the Albanian side to give up
extreme, exclusive demands and to embrace a rational
compromise solution - namely, substantial autonomy
with comprehensive competencies. At the same time,
the Albanians will gain the Serbs as strategic partners
for the future. Without the Serbs, Albanians will not go
far, and they should not routinely reject the reasonable
and generous offers from our side. Despite the evident
difficulties, there is still enough scope for an
agreement, based on democratic principles and
European standards.

