Mr. Belinga-Eboutou (spoke in French): It is a
real pleasure to see you, Sir, presiding over this last
public meeting of the year and the last of Bulgaria's
and Cameroon's terms on the Security Council. I thank
you for convening this meeting so that we can convey
our impressions and testimony as we complete not only
our chairmanships of the Council's committees and
working groups, but also our memberships of the
Council itself.

As members know, the Council asked me to
follow Ambassador Chowdhury of Bangladesh as
Chairman of the informal Working Group on General
Issues of Sanctions. The Council established the
Working Group in 2000 so that it could offer general
recommendations on the broader issue of sanctions,
their administration in particular.

The coercive measures provided for in Article 41
of the Charter of the United Nations - more
commonly known as sanctions - are a powerful
instrument in the hands of the Security Council that
helps it to discharge its responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. They
are a powerful and valuable tool for modifying the
behaviour of a State, entity or individuals that threaten
to breach or have already breached international peace
and security. The Council expects the Working Group
to provide recommendations on ways and means of
designing and implementing that tool with greater
effectiveness, fairness and transparency.

Over the past two years, various issues have
preoccupied the Working Group. I shall cite but a few.
How can we enable States suffering the unwanted
effects of sanctions to have access to the sanctions
Committees? What assistance can be provided to third
States affected by the application of sanctions? How
long should sanctions last? What role can the
Secretariat play in monitoring and implementing
sanctions?

While working on the basis of the principle that
there can be no agreement until there is agreement on
everything, our Working Group was able nevertheless
to agree provisionally on a number of points that I have
elaborated in my report to the Council. Without going
into detail, I would say that these agreements touch on
the access of Member States to the sanctions
Committees; measures to establish arrangements for
monitoring sanctions in order to identify and
investigate sources and methods of sanctions
violations; and evaluating sanctions regimes.

I am happy to say that some of the
recommendations agreed to by the Working Group are
now being applied by the Council and its subsidiary
bodies. I wish to welcome the appreciated contribution
to our work by the Interlaken, Bonn-Berlin and
Stockholm processes.

Despite the progress made, there remains much to
be done. Differences remain on two points that are
closely interlinked: the duration of sanctions and
conditions for their lifting. I believe, however, that the
Security Council in its wisdom will be able to find
common ground on those issues. There are, indeed,
some elements on which all of the Council members
are in agreement. We all agree that sanctions imposed
by the Council must remain in force until their
objective - the desired change in the behaviour,
actions or policies of the subject of the sanctions -
has been attained. Sanctions are an extraordinary
instrument, and that extraordinary character, we
believe, must be reflected in the decision to resort to
them, as well as in respect of their duration. That is
why it is always necessary to clearly define the
objectives in the resolutions that impose them and to
assess them regularly.

If they are initially based on the gravity and the
evidence of a threat to or breach of international peace
and security, the decision to lift them must not be taken
lightly. Such a decision must take into account the
diversity of situations.

Therefore, it is possible to compromise on the
pending issues and, indeed, this compromise is within
our grasp. Since we agree on the objectives sought and
the way to achieve them, why not move beyond the
slight differences we have on how to manage the time
aspect of sanctions that we agree to impose. The
question must be asked because sanctions today have
become more complex and varied. They strike not only
at States, but also at certain nationals and entities of
those States. Other sanctions are more global in scope
and address new threats to world peace, particularly
terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction.

This is the last meeting that Cameroon will be
attending as a member of the Council. I wish to take
this opportunity to express to all Council members and
members of the Secretariat our gratitude for their
welcome and support. They have confirmed my
country's belief that the United Nations, particularly
the Security Council, is an irreplaceable forum for
dialogue - a barrier, a rampart for the world.

I am almost tempted to say that the Security
Council alone often holds the key to certain crucial
moments in the history of humanity. Without its
wisdom, experience and determination promote
security and peace, might would be right in many parts
of our world. The calling of the United Nations,
particularly the Security Council, is to ensure that
together, all Member States contribute actively to
achieving peace every day.

The world's future will be what the United
Nations, and the Security Council in particular, makes
or does not make of it.

Cameroon has been able to gauge the priority
given in the work and deliberations of the Security
Council in the search for solutions and responses to the
dangers that threaten Africa. On 22 October 2002, the
Council held a public meeting on Central Africa, which
was particularly meaningful. The commitments made at
that time were very encouraging to the Central Africa
region, made up of the Economic Community of
Central African States. These commitments showed
clearly that the Security Council and the members of
United Nations stand firmly alongside the peoples of
the United Nations who are in Central Africa.

We hope that the Council, in full tranquillity,
objectivity and impartiality, will continue to study in
depth new and creative ideas collected by the
Secretariat mission that met in Central Africa. We are
thinking particularly of the almost unanimous request
for a standing presence in Central Africa of a special
representative of the Secretary-General. That would
help strengthen the partnership between the United
Nations and the Economic Community of Central
African States in the area of the maintenance of peace
and security. It would help in the implementation of
this integrated approach to issues of peace and
development, which we urgently call for.

In a few days, we will celebrate Christmas and
the advent of a new year, a time for good wishes. May
the Prince of Peace bring to each and every one of us
peace - peace within us, peace in our families, peace
within our States, peace between our States, peace in
the world; peace, the fruit of our solidarity, the
solidarity of our united efforts and energy. Let us not
forget that peace in the world will look like us. It will
be you. It will be me. It will be us. It will be every one
of us.

May the year 2004 be a time of reconciliation
among men; a time of rediscovered harmony between
nations; a time when swords are turned into

ploughshares, when the clash of arms is replaced by There are no further speakers inscribed on my
songs of peace. May the year 2004 be for each and list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
every one of us a year of hope, a year of dreams come present stage of its consideration of the item on its
true. agenda.

