Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting, one
year after the Security Council adopted resolution 2309
(2016). I also welcome the presence and participation
of the Secretary General of the International Civil
Aviation Organization (ICAO), Ms. Fang Liu, and thank
our colleague Ambassador Aboulatta for his briefing
on behalf of the Counter-Terrorism Committee.

The lives of thousands of people flying around the
world on a daily basis depend upon the implementation
of effective security measures in all aspects of civil
aviation. Terrorist attacks against air transport and
its connected infrastructure can have devastating
consequences and have serious collateral effects on
various aspects of life for States and their peoples.

The global nature of air transport means that States
increasingly depend upon one another in order to
implement effective security measures. Cooperation and
concerted action are ultimately indispensable elements
in order to achieve a reliable and safe environment
for civil aviation. States must do their very best to
implement the ICAO Standards and Recommended
Practices, which requires political will.

However, it is worthwhile indicating that, on
many occasions, political will is not enough. Many
countries simply do not possess the infrastructure,
technical capacity, know-how or financial and human
resources to comply with the standards. Cooperation
therefore becomes essential in their implementation.
We greatly value the assistance provided by ICAO and
its No Country Left Behind campaign. We recognize
the importance of the support that some countries are
able to provide through technical assistance, training
programmes and technology transfer.

We note that international civil aviation security
involves a long chain of actors, institutions and States
cooperating with each other - it is just as strong
as its weakest link. In faithful compliance with the
international obligations that we have undertaken,
Uruguay has established a national civial aviation
security committee and has in place a national
programme for the same.

In terms of implementing resolution 2309 (2016),
Uruguay's national civil aviation and aviation
infrastructure authority highlights the importance of
training on the issue of security, including monitoring
practices, security checks, quality control, strengthening
the exchange of information on international threats
and, in particular, front-line aviation security personnel,
who do not always have access to critical information
or the knowledge and training required to manage it.
We believe that safety audits are a useful instrument to
identify best practices, as well as the need for technical
assistance and training. Furthermore, new technologies
used for passenger control and checking travel
documents, especially what is known as the Advance
Passenger Information System, are important elemenst
in combating potential acts of air terrorism.

During her visit to our country in April, ICAO
Secretary General Fang Liu was able to appreciate
the efforts made by Uruguay to implement the ICAO
Standards and Recommended Practices. Ms. Liu took
that opportunity to indicate that Uruguay had raised its
grade in the ICAO Universal Safety Oversight Audit
Programme by over 30 per cent with regard to the
previous year, including resolving all the significant
concerns that had been highlighted previously.

Uruguay will continue working with respect for the
Charter of the United Nations and international law to
respond to terrorist threats to civil aviation, for we are
aware that only a collective effort will make it possible
to overcome these new and growing challenges.

