At the outset, I should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the month of April and to express what an honour it is to see the Dominican Republic, a friendly country, lead today's deliberations. I would also like to thank you for the initiative of convening this meeting on the Great Lakes region and the implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region during this particularly difficult period dominated by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. I would also like to take this opportunity to thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres for his commitment to my country and for his report on the Great Lakes region before the Council today (S/2020/272). I should also like to thank all the members of the Security Council for the exemplary readiness and willingness they have always shown whenever called upon to address questions related to the situation in my country. My delegation welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region just introduced to us by Mr. Huang Xia, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region. On the whole, the report calls for no particular remarks from our part. However, we would like to take the opportunity of its presentation here to make a few comments my delegation deems useful. I shall therefore briefly run through some points relating to the political, security, humanitarian and human rights situation before concluding on the implementation of the Framework. At the political level, the situation in the Great Lakes region remains dominated by the new momentum driven by the diplomatic efforts made by President Felix- Antoine Tshisekedi Tshilombo of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, President Joao Lourencgo of Angola, President Yoweri Museveni of Uganda and President Paul Kagame of Rwanda, which have contributed significantly to easing tensions in the region. The region's leaders have taken steps at the national, bilateral and multilateral levels to ease tensions, settle disputes, strengthen relations among their countries and restore confidence among their respective Governments. My delegation therefore welcomes the call on 2 April by the representatives of the Framework guarantors on all actors to continue to refrain from any action likely to jeopardize the progress achieved in political processes at the national and regional levels, and encouraging them to demonstrate their dedication to regional cooperation and integration. Turning in particular to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the first peaceful transfer of power at the highest State level led to an easing of tensions in the political sphere and to the establishment of new institutions following the democratic elections of 30 December 2018. This easing of tensions has enabled the Government, with the assistance of its many partners - bilateral and multilateral alike - to launch reforms on several fronts. In general, the security situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is calm. However, it is important to point out the national and foreign armed groups active in the eastern part of the country as well as the inter-ethnic fighting there, as highlighted by the Secretary-General in his report. Those armed groups attack not only civilians but also our armed forces and the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), with the aim of undermining Government efforts for stability in my country and the region. The Secretary-General's report also highlights the efforts made by the Forces armees de la Republique democratique du Congo (FARDC), in collaboration with MONUSCO, to neutralize those armed groups. My delegation reassures the Security Council that these efforts will continue until those groups are completely eradicated, since peace and security remain essential factors for the stability of the Great Lakes region, thereby requiring the eradication of armed groups. As stated in the report under consideration, the FARDC has stepped up military operations against armed groups in the provinces of North and South Kivu, in accordance with the commitment made by President Tshilombo Tshisekedi to restore peace and stability, particularly to the east of the country. On 30 October 2019, the FARDC launched large-scale military operations in North and South Kivu provinces, which enabled them to seize several bases held by the Allied Democratic Forces. The FARDC also conducted military operations against the Forces democratiques de liberation du Rwanda (FDLR), including in Rutshuru territory, also in North Kivu, on 17 September 2019, during which a senior military leader of that negative force, General Sylvestre Mudacumura, and other senior lieutenants lost their lives. As a result of those operations, we have seen the destruction in South Kivu of more than 95 per cent of the bases of the destructive forces of the Conseil national pour le renouveau et la democratie, a Rwandan rebel FDLR splinter group, and the neutralization of more than 200 combatants, including their leader, Wilson Irategeka, as well as the recovery of his dependants and 147 weapons and ammunition of all calibres. At the end of that operation, more than 1,877 members of the Conseil national pour le renouveau et la democratie were taken prisoner or surrendered in Kalehe, South Kivu province, and the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo repatriated 390 combatants and 2,241 dependants to Rwanda at the Ruzizi border. About 100 combatants of the same group are wandering between the Uvira highlands and the Itombwe forest in the Mwenga territory. In addition, on 9 November 2019 the commander of the Rassemblement pour TPunite et la democratie, General Juvenal Musabimana, also known as Jean-Michel Africa, was killed during an FARDC operation in Binza, in Rutshuru territory, and the commander of the Front de liberation nationale, Jean Pierre Gaseni, was also killed during FARDC operations, on 30 November, in Kalehe territory. From all of that it should be noted that the military offensive by the FARDC in North and South Kivu against the armed groups has significantly contributed to their weakening. The enemy, in distress, has increased retaliatory attacks against the civilian population. It should also be noted that, in the face of the military pressure from the FARDC, significant armed surrenders were observed in the ranks of the Mayi Mayi, Nyatura, Nduma defense du Congo-Renove and Raia Mutomboki armed groups in North and South Kivu. The illegal exploitation of natural resources in the Democratic Republic of the Congo has consequences for national peace and security, as well as for the protection 27/30 28/30 of the environment. In order to combat mafia networks, the Congolese Government has put in place appropriate mechanisms and on 9 March 2018 passed a new mining code law with the aim of increasing control over the management of the State's mining domain, mining titles and quarries, to clarify the social and environmental responsibility of mining companies with regard to the communities affected by their projects and to balance the tax, customs and exchange regime within the framework of the partnership between the State and mining operators. To complement that reform, on 25 October 2019, in partnership with the International Organization for Migration, the Congolese Government launched a project aimed at improving security around mining sites with a view to reducing illicit mineral trafficking, child labour and gender-based violence. In that context, the Democratic Republic of the Congo calls for the support of the international community to combat the illicit trafficking of its natural resources and to enhance the traceability of its raw materials, in particular through effective enforcement of the use and of International Conference on the Great Lakes Region export certificates by all States of the region, import countries and transit countries. The issue of human rights violations and restrictions on the democratic space is at the heart of the actions of President Tshilombo Tshisekedi, who, upon taking office, made a commitment to promoting the rule of law. That commitment has already been translated into action through the implementation of several measures. Respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms is an ongoing concern of the Government, which guarantees respect for the freedoms associated with the democratic process, in particular through professional supervision of public events. As stated in paragraph 25 of the Secretary-General's report, "fijn the Democratic Republic of the Congo, violations of political rights and freedoms decreased compared to the previous reporting period as a result of the Government's efforts to open the political space and address human rights abuses and impunity, including by establishing transitional justice mechanisms." Under the leadership of the Head of State, the Government has done a great deal to improve the human rights and social justice situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The political will to promote human rights, in accordance with the constitutional requirement to ensure the respect, defence and promotion of all human rights, has been amply demonstrated. The humanitarian situation is dominated by the problem of displaced persons, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and the resurgence of the Ebola virus disease. Ebola haemorrhagic fever, which was in the process of being declared over in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, has resurfaced, with at least three new cases in North Kivu province. On the other hand, the global COVID-19 pandemic has not spared the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the countries of the region. Like other countries of the region, in order to contain the spread of the disease, the Government of the Democratic Republic of Congo, under the leadership of the President of the Republic, immediately took concrete measures. Those include quarantining people, screening for suspicious cases, raising public awareness of preventive measures, restricting gatherings, closing borders and implementing partial containment measures. My country, which seeks support for the coordinated efforts and measures taken to date by the countries of the region to combat the pandemic, appreciates the willingness expressed by the representatives of the guarantors on 2 April 2020, when they invited international financial institutions and partners to mobilize the resources needed to help the region deal with the COVID-19 pandemic and make progress towards stabilization and sustainable development. It is also important to note that population displacement remains one of the main factors of insecurity and instability in the region. That is why, in paragraph 81 of his report, the Secretary-General urges the leaders of the region to step up efforts to find durable solutions for refugees and internally displaced persons in line with the outcomes of the high-level ministerial meeting on the situation of refugees in the Great Lakes region held in Kampala in March 2019. The Democratic Republic of the Congo remains committed to the Framework agreement, which it sees as proof of the international community's determination to help find a definitive solution to the instability that has affected the country for several years and for which it continues to pay a heavy price, with several million deaths so far. Accordingly, the Democratic Republic of the Congo has always endeavoured to fulfil all the commitments it has undertaken under the Framework agreement and will continue to shoulder its share of responsibility for ensuring that peace and harmony return to the region. To that end, and, as the Secretary-General points out in paragraph 31 of his report, the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo has taken concrete steps to honour its national commitments under the Framework agreement. For example, on 27 September 2019, at the margins of the meetings held during the high- level week of the General Assembly at its seventy-fourth session, the Framework's national follow-up mechanism organized, with the support of various United Nations entities, an international conference on peace and investment in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, during which it presented a road map for achieving peace and stabilizing the eastern part of the country. The Government has also established the FARDC forward command post in Beni, North Kivu, to strengthen military operations against armed groups and deployed additional troops and police units in the east of the country. In addition, the Government has entered into partnerships with neighbouring countries and other actors, which, through the follow-up mechanism on the repatriation of disarmed combatants and other regional initiatives, have helped to advance the repatriation of unarmed foreign combatants and strengthen regional security cooperation. Furthermore, in collaboration with MONUSCO and other partners, the Democratic Republic of the Congo has launched a campaign in Kolwezi, Lualaba province, to raise awareness of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework among local political leaders, civil society, women, youth and the local media. Moreover, a commission was established to tackle corruption, and the second decentralization forum was held in Kinshasa, from 11 to 15 December 2019, to review progress in this area. From 13 to 15 February 2020, the National Oversight Mechanism facilitated an intra-Banyamulenge forum to enable reflection and an exchange of views on the security and humanitarian situation in the localities of Fizi, Uvira and Mwenga, in South Kivu. In addition, the agenda of the tenth High-level Meeting of Heads of State and Government of the Regional Oversight Mechanism, initially scheduled for 27 to 29 March 2020 in Kinshasa, has already been drawn up. It is at that summit that President Tshilombo Tshisekedi will assume the presidency of the Regional Mechanism. The Democratic Republic of the Congo regrets the postponement of that important meeting to a later date as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. My country also regrets the postponement, for the same reason, of the Great Lakes Investment and Trade Conference, which had been scheduled for 18 to 20 March 2020 in Kigali. 29/30 30/30 These postponements are particularly regrettable in the light of the importance of those two events in the promotion of cooperation and development in the region. The Democratic Republic of the Congo would like to take this opportunity to call on the guarantors of the Framework agreement and the countries of the region to take advantage of the momentum seen in the region in recent months in order to implement the commitments they have all made. The Great Lakes region aspires to greater well-being, but the economic development of the region can be achieved only with peace and harmony among States and populations. In conclusion, allow me to underscore once again that the Government and the Congolese people remain committed to the Addis Ababa Framework agreement, in which they place great hope for building lasting peace and promoting harmonious coexistence with the countries of the region, as well as for laying the foundations for stability in all of our States, without which it is difficult to pave the way for mutually beneficial regional cooperation. Accordingly, my country looks forward to the Secretary-General's strategy for peace and security in the Great Lakes region. It is high time for us to provide a normal life for the populations of the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo - a normal life without the crack of weapons and the sound of boots.
