Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Ms. Ursula Mueller for her comprehensive
briefing. I reiterate France's full support for the
recommendations of the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Mark Lowcock, which
Ms. Mueller has just referenced.

I would also like to express my country's grave
concerns about the latest developments in the
humanitarian situation in Syria. Several points are of
particular concern. We note the extremely dire situation
of the population in eastern Ghouta - still besieged
and denied the humanitarian assistance and medical
evacuations that they need - and the escalation of
violence, particularly in the Idlib region. In addition, we
are concerned about the attacks on hospitals, medical
facilities and the provision of health care, as well as the
persistent restrictions on humanitarian access in Syria,
which are unacceptable and have tightened further
in recent weeks - denying the civilian population
the access to the essential resources that they so
vitally need. Accordingly, I should like to make three
main observations.

First, we are particularly concerned about the
current escalation of violence in eastern Ghouta and
the Idlib region, which adds to the suffering of the
affected populations. In eastern Ghouta, 400,000
civilians are victims of almost daily bombings by the
regime and its allies. According to the World Health
Organization, approximately 750 people in eastern
Ghouta are still waiting for emergency medical
evacuation. Since 30 December, the wounded have
been unable to be transported out of eastern Ghouta to
receive care; 21 others have died from their wounds,
unable to wait another day. We note and stress that it is
the responsibility of the Syrian regime to allow those
medical evacuations to proceed without delay.

The situation in the south of Idlib and in the north of
Hama is very worrying as well. The continued bombings
led to the displacement of about 250,000 civilians last
month. More than 33 people were reportedly killed in
less than 24 hours. The town of Sarakab was bombed
yesterday morning, and the strikes hit the town market,
killing more than 11 people and injuring a number of
others. One hour later, the only public hospital in the
district - a hospital supported by the non- governmental

organization Medecins Sans Frontieres - was struck,
killing five people, including a child, and injuring six
others, including medical staff.
France very firmly condemns attacks on health-
care workers and medical infrastructure, as well as the
indiscriminate bombings carried out in recent weeks by
the Syrian regime against civilians in eastern Ghouta
and in residential areas of Idlib province.

France reiterates that indiscriminate bombings
and the use of incendiary weapons against civilians
represent serious violations of international humanitarian
law and could constitute war crimes or even crimes
against humanity. It is vital and urgent to bring to an
immediate end the bombings in Idlib and the siege in
eastern Ghouta. The Astana guarantors have taken
upon themselves the responsibility to supervise its
implementation, and we therefore urge these States to
effectively impose on the Syrian regime a complete
cessation of hostilities as well as respect for the basic
principles and norms of international humanitarian law
and human rights law.

The second observation is particularly worrying:
the deterioration ofhumanitarian access in recent weeks
in Syria. We have reiterated this concern on numerous
occasions in this Chamber: the humanitarian situation
will not improve without comprehensive, unimpeded,
safe and ongoing humanitarian access to the aid
distributed by the United Nations and its partners.

Nonetheless, the regime is continuing to create
unacceptable obstacles to the provision of humanitarian
aid. The Syrian authorities have not authorized even a
single inter-agency convoy in several weeks. France
condemns this unacceptable attitude and reiterates its
call for the safe and unhindered access of the United
Nations and its humanitarian partners to civilians
throughout Syrian territory. The right of the Syrian
population both to humanitarian assistance and to
protection must be respected unconditionally.

The Security Council cannot remain silent given
these recurring violations of international humanitarian
law, which require a strong response from the Council.

Finally, I would like to touch on the obvious
discrepancy between the continuing violence on the
ground in Syria and the diplomatic offensives, which
are not facing up to the situation. We know that only
an inclusive political solution that is elaborated under
the auspices of the United Nations and that sets up a
political transition in the context of resolution 2254
(2015) can bring a lasting and credible end to the
suffering of the Syrian people.

However, the regime is continuing its policy of
methodical and deliberate obstruction, as we saw
during the negotiation session held in Vienna on 25 and
26 January. In this context more than ever, we need
to support the United Nations and United Nations
mediation in Geneva, as well as eschew any temporary
solutions agreed without the opposition, which would
be unrealistic as they would not meet the aspirations of
all Syrians. It is up to those countries that support the
regime, primarily Russia and Iran, to bring to bear the
pressure necessary to ensure that the regime puts an
end to this negative and irresponsible strategy. Make no
mistake: there can be no negotiated political transition
in Syria without a total ceasefire, humanitarian access
throughout the whole of the territory and the creation
of a neutral environment that would restore trust and
ensure the safety of all Syrians.

How credible is a regime that is stepping up the
bombing in Idlib, preventing medical evacuations
in eastern Ghouta and refusing to authorize a single
humanitarian convoy? How credible can diplomatic
efforts be that are devoid of any specific assurances
and that do not lead to any significant and lasting
improvement in the humanitarian situation in Idlib and
eastern Ghouta?

We reiterate that humanitarian aid is unconditional
and apolitical. We therefore make an urgent request to see
proof of this on the ground. That is exactly what France
will seek to defend in the weeks to come, in line with
the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex), namely,
the establishment of a neutral environment that must
include the lifting of sieges, the cessation of hostilities,
prisoner exchanges and chemical disarmament, all of
this under international supervision so as to ensure
genuine constitutional reform and the holding of free
elections. That is the only way to bring a lasting end to
the suffering of the Syrian people and open the way to
an inclusive political process in Syria, in the interests
of all the Syrian people. It is for that reason that we will
continue to fully support the process stemming from
resolution 2254 (2015), and we will make every effort
to unite the Council in this respect.

