Mr. Guterres (Timor-Leste): It is both an honour
and a privilege for me to address this body for the first
time as the first representative of the Democratic
Republic of Timor-Leste to the United Nations. Allow
me, therefore, to take this opportunity to convey my
Government's deep appreciation for the unwavering
support of the Council, and of the United Nations in
general, throughout the years of Timor-Leste's struggle
for freedom and self-determination. I would also like to
assure the Council of my country's full support in its
deliberations on the other important issues before it.

My delegation sincerely congratulates you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency. We have no
doubt that your experience and dedication will guide
the Council in its deliberations in times when difficult
decisions are required.

My Government would also like to commend the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive and balanced
report on the United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor (UNMISET) before the Council today. The

report (S/2002/1223) reflects the hard work of the
Secretary-General's Special Representative, Mr.
Kamalesh Sharma, and his staff. His advice and
leadership during the past six months underscore the
continued commitment of the United Nations to Timor-
Leste.

The report indicates that much still needs to be
done. We fully agree with that conclusion. The
Government and the people of Timor-Leste stand ready
to face the many challenges ahead of us. In doing so,
we are committed to the principles promoted by the
United Nations: democracy, transparency and respect
for human rights and the rule of law.

At the same time, however, I must ask for the
Council's understanding. Timor-Leste is still a young
country; its transition from decades of Violence and
deprivation to being a fully functioning member of the
community of free States is not yet completed. The
difficult task of building human and institutional
capacities and an infrastructure needs time. Building a
self-sufficient and prosperous nation will require the
Council's continued support and partnership, as well as
that of the international community at large.

In its first National Development Plan, the
Government of the Democratic Republic of Timor-
Leste has identified the key challenges that will
confront the country in the years to come. Poverty
reduction, education, health care, infrastructure and
economic development and institutional capacity-
building at all levels of Government remain top
priorities. Therefore, funding the posts called for by the
Secretary-General to support Timor-Leste's efforts in
the areas of development and poverty reduction is
critical to the viability and long-term political stability
of Timor-Leste. We need personnel that have the
expertise and capacity to accomplish the goals set forth
in the National Development Plan. That will help not
only to foster the investments and progress already
made in the country's economic and social recovery,
but also to achieving the goals contained in the
Millennium Declaration.

UNMISET's mandate also calls for assistance in
law enforcement and the justice sector. The
development of an effective, independent and impartial
legal system is an area of great concern to the
Government of Timor-Leste. It is central to the security
and stability of our nation, reconciliation among our
people and the creation of an investor-friendly
economic environment. We understand that our civil
servants and lawyers still have things to learn. Training
and capacity-building therefore remain key priorities.
Creating a justice system from scratch cannot be done
over night. It requires the sustained effort and
commitment of all of us - Government, civil society
and the international community.

While reconstruction challenges remain
paramount, I would like to highlight some of the
positive political developments within Timor-Leste and
outside it. Democratic culture and political
participation are growing. The first laws have been
passed, and the Parliament has become the proud
sovereign of our young nation. The reconciliation and
return of refugees has continued. Just recently,
President Gusmao Visited West Timor with a delegation
of 100 citizens from Timor-Leste to encourage the
return and resettlement of the remaining refugees.
Reconciliation and healing between the Timorese will
also further improve relations with Indonesia.

Strengthening relations with Indonesia is a
priority of my Government. As mentioned in the report,
President Xanana Gusmao's first State Visit took him to
Jakarta, where President Megawati Soekarnoputri
warmly received him. In addition, a high-level meeting
was recently held, which resulted in the creation of the
Joint Ministerial Commission for Bilateral Cooperation
between the two countries. In addressing issues of
mutual concern, the Commission will further
strengthen friendly and neighbourly relations.

The negotiations with Australia on petroleum
exploitation in the Timor Sea are well on track.

On the international level, Timor-Leste has
become a member of the African, Caribbean and
Pacific Group of States (ACP) and a member of the
Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries (CPLP),
and we support the Indonesian initiative to establish
the South-West Pacific Forum, comprised of Australia,
Indonesia, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, the
Philippines and Timor-Leste. We have been invited to
participate as an observer in meetings of the
Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) and
of the Pacific Island Forum. Timor-Leste has
established diplomatic relations with several countries
and has started to open its first diplomatic missions.
We have ratified the Rome Statute for an International
Criminal Court, and we have accelerated preparations
for ratification of several international human rights
instruments by 10 December 2002.

Of course, Timor-Leste is fully committed to the
global fight against terrorism. Cowardly attacks against
innocent civilians are morally repugnant, and we intend
to fully cooperate with the work of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee established pursuant to Security
Council resolution 1373 (2001). However, since Timor-
Leste's law enforcement and security apparatus,
including its defence and police force, is still in its
nascent stage, we need the continued presence of the
international police and peacekeeping force until we
have the capacity to meet these and other goals on our
own. Downsizing now would be premature and would
jeopardize the achievements of recent years. I would
urge Council members to adhere to the targets
established by the Council in May 2002.

In this context, I would like to convey my
Government's heartfelt sympathies and condolences to
the families of the victims of the senseless terror attack
in Bali. Among the lives lost were those of United
Nations staff members serving in my country. We share
your loss. Just yesterday, President Xanana Gusmao
laid a wreath at the site of the tragedy.

Let me conclude by expressing, once again, my
Government's deep appreciation for the continued
support of the United Nations and the Secretary-
General. Timor-Leste is on a good path. Although
progress has been made, much work remains to be
done.

