Mr. Fulci (Italy): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union.

The most important consideration in the Secretary-
General's recent report on the United Nations Mission in
Haiti (UNMIH), was the continued commitment and
determination of President Preval and his Government to
consolidate democratic institutions and to create the
conditions for sustainable development of the country.

Four months ago, after the democratic election of a
new President and the peaceful transfer of power from
President Aristide to President Preval, Security Council
resolution 1048 (1996) made a positive assessment of the
country's prospects for rebuilding an economy and a
society that had been severely affected by the military
dictatorship.

Today the Security Council will adopt a new
resolution, which again shows the strong commitment and
support of the international community to the
consolidation of Haitian democracy and institutions. The
spirit in which this resolution has been drafted is to
contribute to the completion of a process that began with
such difficulty.

The European Union completely shares this
commitment and this goal, in the spirit of friendship that
pervades our relations with Haiti. In fact, the European
Union has repeatedly emphasized the need for the Haitian
situation to evolve in such a way as to assure stability,
security and peaceful coexistence for all members of
Haitian society, fostering economic growth and allowing
the country to reap the benefits of the efforts made by the
international community.

This is why we have supported the continuation of
the United Nations operation in the country. The creation
of this new support mission reflects, in our opinion, the
need for continued assistance by all of us. In particular,
we believe that the completion of the process of creating
a new Haitian police force, committed to the rule of law
and respect for human rights, is one of the key issues
facing the country. Every other aspect of Haiti's future is
related to the question of internal security.

The necessary reforms and full economic recovery
can work only if the domestic climate is conducive to
new investments. It is essential, therefore, that the
elections scheduled for the local assemblies and the
Senate elections next November take place in a secure
environment.

 

We wish to conclude by expressing our satisfaction at
the particular spirit of cooperation that has characterized the
work on this draft resolution. We wish to express our
thanks to all those who demonstrated good will in making
a solution possible. It allowed us to reach an important and
significant result, one that will greatly benefit Haiti, its
people and the path it has chosen towards democracy. We
also want especially to thank the United States and Canada
for the concrete contribution they are making to the success
of this operation.

The following countries associated with the Union
align themselves with this statement: Bulgaria, Cyprus, the
Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta,
Poland, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia.

