The President: I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the representative of Viet Nam. I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2019/1005) on the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS), and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, for his comprehensive briefing. My delegation following observations. wishes to make the First, we commend the unceasing work and efforts of UNOWAS from 2016 to 2019 in assisting and sustaining peace and conflict prevention efforts in the countries of West Africa and the Sahel. We also welcome the positive developments in the political process, post- conflict reconstruction and the peace outcome of the past several years in the countries in the region. Secondly, although important progress has been made over the years, we are of the view that greater national, regional and international efforts are needed to consolidate the still fragile peace and to address paramount development challenges. We are concerned about the deteriorating security environment in some countries, especially violent extremism, terrorism and criminal activity. Such blended threats constitute a perfect storm, seriously undermining peace and sustainable development in any country. We strongly condemn all forms of violence and terrorism, notably the recent deadly terrorist attacks on civilians and security forces in the Niger, Burkina Faso and Mali. Thirdly, we welcome the results of the presidential election in Guinea-Bissau on 29 December 2019. We also support Togo, Guinea, Cote d’Ivoire, Burkina Faso, Ghana and the Niger in ensuring successful elections in 2020. Fourthly, we support every initiative and effort to enhance regional and international cooperation and partnerships to promote greater social and economic development and to tackle the root causes and other security-related threats, including climate change, in the region. Finally, we support the role of the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), including Chad, Mauritania, Mali, Burkina Faso and the Niger, in fighting transnational terrorism in the region and hope that the international community will continue to support the G-5 Sahel Force, in accordance with the relevant Security Council resolutions. I now resume my functions as President of the Council. I now invite Council members to informal consultations to continue our discussion on the subject. The meeting rose at 11.40 a.m.
