Ms. King (Australia): I thank Under-Secretary-
General Feltman for his briefing.

Australia congratulates Ukraine on the successful
holding of presidential elections on 25 May. The high
turnout, in which millions people cast ballots across
the country, reflects the determination of the Ukrainian
people to chose their own Government without
interference. It is a demonstration of their commitment
to a sovereign, democratic and independent Ukraine.

We commend the work of the Ukrainian electoral
authorities and the willingness ofthe Ukrainian political
parties to participate and support the electoral process
in difficult circumstances. We also commend the
observer mission of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) for its efforts across the
country. We welcome the OSCE's preliminary findings
that the elections were held in line with international
standards and respect for fundamental freedoms. We
congratulate President-elect Petro Poroschenko, who
has been given a clear mandate to govern Ukraine.

Regrettably, not all Ukrainians were able to
vote. In two areas in eastern Ukraine, pro-Russian
separatist forces prevented many polling stations from
opening, depriving of their right to cast their ballots.
We commend the efforts of the Ukrainian authorities
to perform their electoral duties in those areas in the
face of threats, intimidation and violence. Due to the
unlawful annexation of Crimea, the Ukrainian citizens
in that region were unable to cast their votes at all. We
applaud those who travelled from the Crimean peninsula
specifically in order to vote elsewhere in Ukraine. That
was a clear expression of support on their part for a
democratic and unified Ukraine.

The restoration of stability in the east presents
a very serious challenge for the new Ukrainian
Government. Pro-Russian groups continue their efforts
to destabilize the region, attacking Ukrainian forces,
occupying administrative buildings and targeting
major infrastructure, such as Donetsk airport. Reports
that militants have attempted to cross the border from
Russia into Ukraine in the past few days are deeply
concerning. It is essential that Russia control its borders
to prevent any such incursions. In such circumstances
of continued destabilization and the use of force by
separatists, the Ukrainian authorities have the right to
protect their own citizens and to re-establish control
over their territory. They should continue to do so in a
manner proportionate to the circumstances.

Given the current instability, the efforts of
journalists and monitors are particularly crucial. We
condemn the continuing attacks by separatists on
journalists, as the OSCE Representative on Media
Freedom, Ms. Mijatovic', stated on 23 May. Journalists
are deliberately targeted for doing their job of trying
to tell the outside world of the events taking place in
Ukraine. We condemn the killing of an Italianjournalist
and his assistant near Sloviansk on 24 May. We are also
deeply concerned about reports that the four missing
OSCE monitors in the Donetsk region are being held
by separatists. They must be released immediately.
While we, of course, welcome the safe release today of
11 OSCE monitors, we share the Secretary-General's
concern that international staff in Ukraine continue
to be placed in great danger. We agree with him that
the detention of international staff is completely
unacceptable.

The conduct of the presidential elections on 25 May
was a central element of the OSCE road map for the
stabilization of Ukraine. The country now has the
opportunity to secure a stable and peaceful future. We
welcome the President-elect's commitment to travelling
to the east and to engage closely with the communities
there to overcome their differences. Such an inclusive
approach will be crucial to ensuring a successful
constitutional reform process.

We welcome President Putin's statement that Russia
will respect the election outcome. It is now time for
serious dialogue between Russia and Ukraine and an
express commitment on the part of Russia to Ukraine's
sovereignty and territorial integrity. That is so clearly
in the interest of both countries. As Australia's Foreign
Minister, Julie Bishop, said on 26 May, Australia
stands with the people of Ukraine, who have shown
through the election their commitment to democracy
and political and economic stability and to determining
their own Ukrainian future. We share the Secretary-
General's desire to see the international community
unite in support of a peaceful, stable and prosperous
Ukriane. Australia looks forward to working with the
new Ukrainian leadership.

