Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): Let me start by
commending the Australian presidency for having
organized this important high-level meeting on
Yemen on the margins of the general debate of the
General Assembly at its sixty-eighth session. I would
like to thank Mr. Jamal Benomar, Special Adviser to
the Secretary-General for Yemen, for his informative
briefing and for his personal dedication to a successful
transition in that country for almost 30 months now.
I also thank Mr. Abubaker A. Al-Qirbi, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Yemen, and Mr. Abdul Latif bin
Rashid Al Zayani, Secretary General of the Gulf
Cooperation Council, for their insightful presentations.

As we expect the conclusion of the National
Dialogue Conference in the first week of next month,
we wish to express our sincere appreciation for the
progress that has been made since March. We are
happy to hear that six of the nine working groups have
completed their work, and we take note of the efforts
undertaken to ensure the inclusiveness of the process
and the decision to mainstream the concerns of women,
youth and marginalized communities throughout the
work of the Conference.

Rwanda further welcomes the establishment of a
commission to consider and address land issues and
a commission on the forcibly dismissed employees of
southern Yemen as a demonstration of the Government's
commitment to addressing long-standing grievances
and to create confidence.

It is in the same vein that we command President
Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi Mansour for his decree
reinstating 795 army and security officers who were
forced into retirement after the 1994 civil war in a major
step towards resolving the grievances of the southerners.
We also welcome the Government's formal apology to
the people in the south and the east and the Houthis for
the wars against them under the former Government.
This positive gesture by the current Government is
commendable, since it is aimed at encouraging people
from these regions to resolve their grievances through
a political settlement.

Rwanda is deeply concerned by increasing terrorist
activities of Al-Qaida and its henchmen in the Middle
East and in Africa. As we mourn the terrorist attacks of
lastSaturdaycommittedbyAl-Qaida-linkedA1-Shabaab
in a shopping mall in Nairobi, we remember that only
one day before that attack, Al-Qaida in the Arabian
peninsula had committed a terrorist attack against brave
Yemeni army officers and policemen. We also condemn
the persistent sabotage activities, which mainly target
electricity, pipelines, or gas infrastructure, and the
kidnappings. These criminals acts have contributed to
the deterioration of the humanitarian situation in the
country, and my delegation calls upon all the spoilers
who intend to undermine the efforts of the Government
towards a democratic and reconciled Yemen to cease
all forms of violence and join the political process. We
stress that the perpetrators of these crimes will be held
accountable.
My delegation expresses concern over the dire
humanitarian situation in Yemen. As indicated on
Friday by Under-Secretary-General and Emergency
Relief Coordinator Valerie Amos, who visited Yemen
on 12 September, 13 million people are in need of
humanitarian assistance, 10 million are food insecure,
7 million are in critical water situations, 6 million
are without health services, and more than 250,000
are affected by severe, acute malnutrition. These
figures show us how the humanitarian situation in
Yemen is critical, particularly as we know that the
humanitarian consolidated appeal of 2013 remains
underfunded, at just 43 per cent. We therefore urge the
donor community to honour the commitments pledged
during various meetings of the Friends of Yemen, and
we call for further humanitarian assistance for Yemen,
including by providing financial support to the Yemen
humanitarian response plan for 2013.

To conclude, I would recall that, despite real
challenges, the political transition in Yemen is
undoubtedly a model for the region, following the wave
ofpopular uprisings in the Middle East during the Arab
Spring. Yemen did not become Libya or Syria, and for
that we need to commend the people and leadership of
Yemen for their political maturity. We cannot forget
to recognize the important role played by the Gulf
Cooperation Council, the Security Council, which
visited Yemen in February, and the Special Adviser to
the Secretary-General in that regard.

Rwanda stands ready to continue supporting her
sister country of Yemen to achieve success through the
current political transition.

