Mrs. Huree-Agarwal (Mauritius): I join other
speakers in thanking Mr. Guehenno for his
comprehensive and useful briefing and for introducing
the Secretary-General's report.

The municipal elections held last week in Kosovo
were yet another step towards democratization of
institutions and increasing collective participation in
the day-to-day affairs of the province. We are pleased
to note the elections were conducted in a rather
peaceful manner.

The 54 per cent turnout at the elections is most
encouraging to my delegation, despite several attempts
to boycott the elections. It is regrettable that the Serb
community did not participate in the elections in large
numbers, and as Mr. Gue'henno rightly pointed out,
their low turnout has decreased their capacity to take
part in the decision-making process.

The election of 262 women is also encouraging.
We believe this is the right channel through which the
concerns of vulnerable groups, especially women and
children, could be addressed when framing policies and
programmes.

The vision the Council has set for Kosovo will
never be achieved without the full participation of all
communities in the work of the provisional self-
government. They should continue to cooperate with
the United Nations and its Mission in Kosovo by
participating in the institutions set up by the United
Nations Interim Administration in Kosovo (UNMIK) in
the best interest of everyone.

We hope all communities will work together to
meet the standards set up by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Steiner. We also welcome
the political will demonstrated by the Government of
Kosovo to track progress in this regard.

The existence of parallel structures in the
Mitrovica region continues to hamper the successful
governance of the province. In this regard, we welcome
the seven-point plan aimed at in co-governance and
decentralization developed by Special Representative
Steiner. The success of this strategy will not be
possible without the cooperation of the Belgrade
authorities, and our delegation hopes that they will
work with UNMIK in achieving the plan for the
Mitrovica region.

We are also pleased to note that the number of
incoming internally displaced persons and refugees has
surpassed that of the outflow of minorities from
Kosovo. We believe that necessary action should be
taken to address the security problem as the result of
these mass returns. Proper planning is of utmost
importance to insure the safety and security of those
returnees.

The incidents reported in paragraph 38 of the
Secretary-General's report indicate that more needs to
be done to ensure the smooth integration of the
internally displaced persons and refugees in the social
life of Kosovo. In this regard, we welcome the recent
initiative taken by Mr. Steiner to establish a task force
that will oversee and invigorate the process of return to
the province. However, without concrete support from
all local political leaders, donors, host countries of
Kosovo, refugees and the local population, the process
will not achieve the required result. We therefore call
on all of them to join efforts to this end.

We understand that the tasks are enormous and
the challenges are difficult, but it will not be long
before a peaceful, democratic, multi-ethnic Kosovo is
established in line with European standards.

Finally, we pay tribute to all those who are
working relentlessly in this regard.

