Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, let me thank
Special Envoy Geir Pedersen for his comprehensive and
insightful briefing. I would like to assure him of our
full support.

As we heard two days ago from Under-Secretary-
General Mark Lowcock, the humanitarian situation in
Syria is unacceptable. The impact of the hostilities in
the north-west of the country is difficult to imagine.
Allow me here to echo the comments made by my
United States and United Kingdom colleagues on the
important role of humanitarian workers and to express
our appreciation to and thank them, as I did a few days
ago, for their tireless efforts on the ground in Syria.

We must prevent further military hostilities,
which have disastrous humanitarian consequences.
That is the only path towards a sustainable peace
agreement. The lives of 3 million civilians, including
children, are at stake. Once again, we call for ensuring
that the de-escalation zone in Idlib, as agreed in the
memorandum of understanding between Russia and
Turkey, is effectively restored and fully respected.

It must be emphasized that the political process
has continued to fail to gain traction. That includes the
establishment of the constitutional committee, which
is the first step towards a genuine political process
under United Nations supervision. Launching a lasting
political process should be of the utmost importance
and the Security Council should provide support to
that endeavour.

We have an international framework to support the
intra-Syrian political process: resolution 2254 (2015)
and the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex).
All necessary elements of the political process under
United Nations supervision are clearly indicated. The
resolution demands that all parties immediately cease
any attacks against civilian targets. It urges all Member
States to support efforts to achieve a ceasefire and
requests the United Nations to convene the parties to
engage in formal negotiations.

Let me underline that the success of that action
requires the full and constructive engagement of all
parties to the conflict. It can succeed only ifthe Syrian
authorities participate in the negotiations in good faith
and without preconditions. Sustainable peace in Syria
can be guaranteed only by an intra-Syrian framework
political agreement, as the political transition will be
Syrian-led. One element in that process should be free
andfairelections,heldunderUnitedNations supervision.

Let me also briefly touch on the very important
issue of accountability for war crimes. We urge all
parties to the conflict to condemn arbitrary detention,
hostage-taking and forced disappearances and to
protect humanitarian workers and journalists.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the European
Union common position on the reconstruction of Syria.
We will be ready to assist in the reconstruction of Syria
only when a comprehensive, genuine and inclusive
political transition, negotiated by the Syrian parties to
the conflict on the basis of resolution 2254 (2015) and
the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex), is firmly
under way.

As we fully support the safe return of Syrian
refugees who have fled their homes, we also believe
that a durable solution should ensure the security
of a sustainable, dignified and voluntary return of
Syrians to their country of origin, in accordance with
international law and the principle of non-refoulement.

