Mr. Ahmad (Pakistan): Allow me first of all to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening today's debate on
general issues relating to sanctions, which is both
pertinent and timely.

Article 41 of the United Nations Charter empowers
the Security Council to consider measures not involving
the use of armed force to ensure implementation of its
decisions aimed at promoting international peace and
security. Over the years, the Security Council has
designed and imposed a wide range of measures in

 

different situations, including arms embargoes, economic
and trade restrictions, severance of air and sea travel links,
freezing of bank accounts and diplomatic isolation.
Sanctions, as non-military measures, are considered by
some an effective tool in the gradual response to threats to
international peace and security. For others, they are a blunt
and counter-productive instrument.

In his latest report, Secretary-General Kofi Annan has
pointed out the dilemma in the implementation of sanctions
regimes, stating that,

"Sanctions have had an uneven track record in
inducing compliance with Security Council
resolutions." (A/54/2000, para. 230)

He has also noted that economic sanctions that are directed
against regimes have caused enormous suffering to the
common people, instead of achieving the desired objectives.

As a matter of principle, Pakistan is opposed to
sanctions and has consistently supported all efforts by the
international community towards peaceful resolution of
conflicts. We believe that preventive diplomacy, through
constructive engagement, is a better proposition than
punitive measures against any country. Imposition of
sanctions should be considered only as the last option, and
after all diplomatic efforts have failed to rectify a given
situation.

Sanctions must be viewed with reference to the
purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter.
Sanctions often tend to violate the fundamental human
rights of the common people in the targeted countries, such
as the right to live, the right to freedom from hunger, the
right to medical care, the right to education and the right to
development. More often than not, one of the unintended
consequences of sanctions has been their adverse impact on
the vulnerable segments of society, in particular the elderly,
women and children. In brief, sanctions hurt the very
individual whose rights and fundamental freedoms we
espouse at every international forum today.

In practice, we have seen that there are no uniform
criteria for imposing sanctions. Different yardsticks have
been used in responding to similar situations. While some
countries have been subjected to stem measures for
violating Security Council resolutions, many perennial
violators of Council resolutions and the United Nations
Charter have not been held accountable at all.
On occasion, sanctions have been imposed in support
of national agendas.

These factors require that a careful review be
undertaken of the utility of sanctions as an instrument to
further international peace and security. First and
foremost, decisions to impose sanctions against any
country must be taken on the basis of an objective
assessment of any situation. Before taking such a
decision, it must be ensured that the negative
consequences for the people of the target country are
minimized. As experience has shown, this may be
difficult to realize. The concept of "smart" sanctions has
not yet proved to be smart enough to spare the common
people from the adversity of sanctions. We have serious
doubts that there could be targeted sanctions without
substantial collateral damage to the public at large.

Another important aspect that requires thorough
review is the impact of sanctions on third countries.
Article 50 of the United Nations Charter recognizes the
right of third States to consult the Security Council with
regard to the economic problems they face because of its
enforcement measures against any Member State.

Sanctions have been particularly harmful for
developing countries, including Pakistan, as their
economies are more vulnerable.

The Charter Committee of the United Nations has
extensively deliberated upon this issue for a number of
years. We feel that it is now time to move beyond this
debate. We need to consider practical steps to assess the
damage caused by sanctions and evolve ways and means
of compensating the losses incurred by third States.

In 1998, an ad hoc expert group was set up by the
Secretary-General, and it prepared various
recommendations for implementation by the Secretariat,
including the appointment of a special representative to
undertake full assessment of the actual consequences for
the affected countries and the sending of special fact-
finding or evaluation missions to the affected countries.
The group's findings concerning negative implications for
expatriate labour also deserve due consideration.

A sub-group was also established to consider the
question of sanctions in the light of the Secretary-
General's report entitled "An Agenda for Peace" and the
"Supplement to an Agenda for Peace". Its report was
adopted by the General Assembly at its fifty-first session.
It made useful recommendations on sanctions-related

 

issues, including the need for timely assessment of the
adverse effects of sanctions, clear warning before the
imposition of sanctions, provision for regular review,
precise conditions for lifting sanctions, ways and means of
improving the sanctions regime and establishment of an
effective monitoring system. The Security Council must
take these recommendations into consideration.

In conclusion, we welcome the decision of the
Security Council to consider various aspects of the issues
relating to sanctions. The views expressed in today's debate
by the non-members of the Council should provide valuable
input to the formulation of comprehensive recommendations
on the subject by the Security Council.

