Monsignor Kassas (Holy See) (spoke in Arabic):
My delegation wishes to thank the Malaysian
presidency for having convened this important meeting
on children and armed conflict and conveys to Malaysia
its appreciation for all that it has done and will continue
to do as Chair of the Security Council Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict.

The year 2014 was described as one of the worst
years for children affected by armed conflict. But as
the Secretary-General's report on children and armed
conflict (S/2016/360) for 2015 illustrates, the 2014
horror list has been surpassed by the number of children
caught up in armed conflicts and the scale and severity
ofviolations in 2015. As the Secretary-General states in
paragraph 4 of the report,

"The impact on children of our collective failure
to prevent and end conflict is severe, and the
present report highlights the increased intensity
of grave violations in a number of situations of
armed conflict". No one can ignore this damning
observation. Never in recent memory have so many
children been subjected to such violent brutality:
children used as soldiers, suicide bombers, sex
slaves and disposable intelligence-gatherers in the
most dangerous military operations. The deliberate
destruction of their schools and hospitals, in total
disregard of international humanitarian law has,
become a strategy of war. My delegation fully
agrees with the report that the use of air strikes
and explosive weapons with wide-area effects in
populated areas exacerbates the dangers to which
children caught up in armed conflict are exposed.

These crimes must be condemned in the strongest

possible terms.

The Holy See has been a constant partner of the
United Nations in opposing not only the use of children
as combatants, but the many other forms of violence
against children caught up in armed conflict. Through
its various structures operating in most of the conflict
zones, the Catholic Church is actively engaged in taking
care of the victims of such violence. Over the years,
Holy See structures and numerous Catholic institutions
have collaborated with United Nations peacekeeping
missions and agencies to help alleviate the sufferings
of children in armed conflict and to share best practices
to address this ongoing scourge. While expressing deep
appreciation for all those who work in this area, the
Holy See hopes that the plight of children caught up
in armed conflict will awaken consciences, lead to a
change of heart and inspire all parties to lay down their
arms and take up the path of dialogue.

Moreover, while the international community
plays an important role in supporting States in their
primary responsibility to protect their citizens, it must
also interact with the local communities affected by
violence against children in armed conflict so that
solutions and programmes can emerge organically and
at the same time foster local ownership. A solution
to the plight of children caught up in armed conflict,
in particular of child soldiers, requires sensitivity to
finding ways to reintegrate these children back into
their own communities.

While we witness barbaric acts beyond anyone's
imagination committed also by child soldiers, we
must remember that these children are exploited and
manipulated into what they have become. Therefore,
while their reintegration into society requires that we
recognize the atrocities they may have committed,
we must also build pathways for counselling and
reconciliation, and do that with a view to accomplishing
fully the reintegration we seek.

The obligation to put an end to barbaric acts against
children caught up in armed conflict is incumbent upon
every one of us. More specifically, it is incumbent
upon the Council as it calls on all States to put in place
and implement stronger measures for the protection of
children in armed conflict and as it ensures that United
Nations peacekeeping operations strictly adhere to all
laws and measures in this regard.

