Mr. Nesho (Albania): I am honoured to speak today
at this formal meeting of Security Council on the renewal
of the mandate of the Stabilization Force (SFOR) and the
United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH). On this occasion, I would like to congratulate
the Portuguese presidency and you, Mr. President, for
conducting in a very skilful manner the work of the
Security Council, as well as this debate.

We believe that today's draft resolution is an
important and needed step for further consolidating peace
and stability in the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
SFOR and UNMIBH, along with the International Police
Task Force (IPTF), will together continue to provide a
secure environment for another year for the work of
reforming the judicial system and establishing a
democratic police force in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Two and half years after the Dayton Agreement, it
is evident that the goal of restoring peace and building a
multi-ethnic society in Bosnia and Herzegovina cannot be
reached without the continuous and strong support of the
international community, although the final responsibility
for achieving this goal remains in the hands of the
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

In his last report, the High Representative for
Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina pointed out,

"Substantial progress has been made in enhancing
the climate of reconciliation and tolerance, ensuring
freedom of movement and minority returns",

but that

"the peace process has not yet become irreversible."
[5/1998/314, appendix, para. 4]

In our View, the question of the return of refugees
and cooperation with the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia are essential for advancing the process
of reconciliation and integration between all parties in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. With 1.8 million refugees yet to
go home and with unpunished war criminals at large, the
peace process remains unsecured and threatened, and
justice is not done. It is vital for the international
community, in cooperation with the authorities of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and the countries of the region, to
ensure the safe return of refugees to their homes and
properties and the surrender of war criminals to the
Hague Tribunal.

The extension of the mandate of SFOR in Bosnia
and Herzegovina is a necessary step in the light of today's
situation in the Balkan area and the deepening of the
crisis in the Kosovo region. The policy of conflict and
"ethnic cleansing", the deterioration of the situation in
Kosovo and the massive flow of ethnic Albanian refuges
from Kosovo into Albania as a result of violence and
genocide used against them show that the Dayton process

 

was an imposed victory of the international community over
uncivilized nationalism and the policy of force.

This is why we are in favour not only of the extension
of the mandate of SFOR, but also of energetic action by the
international community to prevent a second tragedy like
Bosnia from taking place in the Balkans. It is now time for
the international community to be more united and
determined to stop the "ethnic cleansing" in Kosovo and to
find a peaceful and workable solution to calm the situation
and to resolve the conflict in Kosovo. This action will
strengthen the peace process in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the implementation of the Dayton Agreement, as well
as peace and stability in the Balkan region.

