Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I want to thank
China for initiating this open debate, which provides
an important opportunity to consider one of the most
serious and complex challenges facing the international
community. I also thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing.

Global terrorism is not a new phenomenon. But the
threat that it now poses is unprecedented in its scale,
reach and human cost. The past two years have been
among the bloodiest on record. Around the globe, on
a nearly daily basis, indiscriminate attacks have been
destroying the lives of everyday people, leaving trauma
and fear in their wake. And while a relatively limited
number of States continue to bear the brunt of that
carnage, the rise of new pernicious global networks
and their sophisticated use of modern communications
technology mean that no country can consider itself
safe from that menace. There are no quick or simple
solutions.

What is clear, however, is that, now more than
ever, international cooperation is vital to keeping our
communities safe. The United Nations has a central role
to play in ensuring that we remain united in our resolve
and in supporting a coordinated and effective approach
at the national, regional and global levels. Over the
years, a range of measures, such as the designation
of terrorists and terrorist organizations and steps to
suppress the financing of terrorism have been adopted
to address the threat. More work is needed to ensure
that those measures are implemented effectively.

While the Council has a key role to play, including
through its sanctions committees, Member States
and other actors, such as the Financial Action Task
Force, are crucial to those efforts as well. Today's
joint briefing by the Chairs of the Security Council
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, which is
being held in another room at Headquarters, provides a
further opportunity to consider those issues. Security
cooperation has an important role to play, particularly
in countering groups such as Da'esh, Al-Shabaab and
Boko Haram that seek to impose their will through fear
and force.

New Zealand is playing its part through its support
to the Iraqi Government in its efforts to combat the forces
of Da'esh within its territory, but security responses
alone are not an effective and enduring solution to the
terrorist threat. A comprehensive approach remains
critical - one that also addresses the underlying drivers
ofviolent extremism. As the Secretary-General hasjust
reminded us, this year's biennial review of the United
Nations Global Counter-terrorism Strategy presents
an opportunity to assess whether the structures,
information-sharing mechanisms and resources
currently in place are sufficient to support effective and
efficient cooperation within the United Nations, among
Member States and with relevant actors in the private
sector and civil society.

It also is timely for the Council to consider what steps
it can take to strengthen the United Nations counter-
terrorism architecture, catalyse necessary action and
ensure that all parts of the system are working together
and without unnecessary duplication, while facilitating
effective capacity-building. The Council also has an
important role to play in identifying and addressing
critical gaps in international counter-terrorism efforts.
In that regard, I wish to highlight two specific areas
that we feel warrant particular attention in the months
ahead.

First, we need to ensure an effective response
to the challenges posed by the increasing flow of
foreign terrorist fighters returning to their homes or
travelling to third countries. The Council took decisive
steps in resolution 2178 (2014) to address the flow of
foreign terrorist fighters into conflict zones. With
an estimated 30,000 foreign fighters from more than
100 countries currently active and as the tide in the
battle for territory turns, we must have strategies to
address the enormous social challenges and security
risks that will be posed by returning former fighters.
Security- and law-enforcement measures will be
important, but rehabilitation and reintegration also
need to form a significant part of our response, if we
are to prevent further alienation and radicalization. We
must also ensure that our response is compliant with,
and deeply grounded in, the values that are central to
the Organization: respect for the rule of law and for
fundamental human rights. International cooperation in
the form of information-sharing, the exchange of good
practice, judicial cooperation and targeted capacity-
building also has a central role to play. Those countries
most at risk cannot be left to face these challenges alone.
Secondly, the Council needs to play its role in
taking forward recommendations from the Secretary-
General's recent report on preventing violent extremism
(A/70/674). We cannot hope to meet the unprecedented
terrorist threat we currently face without reducing the
appeal of terrorist narratives and addressing the factors
that drive vulnerable young people to join such groups.
That is long-term work across decades and generations
that requires a commitment to building social cohesion
and engagement and to fostering inclusive, tolerant
communities. We need national responses targeted to the
circumstances of specific countries and communities.

The Council also needs to consider what role it can
play in supporting such efforts and how its actions,
statements and decisions can support our collective
response to countering these insidious narratives. Those
are issues that we consider warrant serious reflection
by the Council.

