Mr. Wu Haitao (China)(spoke in Chinese):
China welcomes your initiative, Mr. President, to
convene today's open meeting on the prevention of
the destruction and trafficking of cultural heritage by
terrorist groups and in situations of armed conflict. We
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Voronkov,
Director-General Azoulay, Executive Director
Fedotov, Secretary-General Stock and Mr. Bianchi for
their briefings.

Our rich cultural heritage is the very fabric of
human civilization and the embodiment of equality,
tolerance and cultural diversity. In recent years, we
have witnessed frequent acts of destruction of precious
examples of cultural heritage by terrorist groups and
in the course of armed conflicts. Terrorist groups also
use the smuggling and trafficking of cultural heritage
as a source of financing. This not only threatens
international peace and security but also shows
contempt for the world's cultures and civilizations.
The international community should work together to
combat such destruction by terrorist groups, and take
effective measures to block any channels they use to
smuggle or traffic cultural heritage, and protect cultural
heritage in conflict situations.

First, we should implement the relevant Security
Council resolutions in earnest and make full use of
the relevant Council mechanisms. Resolution 2347
(2017) provides a framework for cooperation on the
protection of cultural heritage. Member States bear
the primary responsibility for this task and should
work to effectively implement the provisions of the
relevant Council resolutions, improving their domestic
legislation, establishing early-warning mechanisms,
strengthening law enforcement and resolutely
combating the destruction or smuggling of cultural
heritage by terrorist groups. The Security Council and
its affiliated mechanisms should play their full part
by helping Member States to enhance their relative
capacities to build and block all channels through which
terrorist groups smuggle or traffick in cultural heritage
to finance terrorism.
Secondly, we should take effective measures to
protect cultural heritage in conflict zones and promote
international cooperation in that regard. Countries
in conflict situations face a more serious challenge
in protecting their cultural heritage. The countries
affected should develop security policies for the
protection of cultural heritage and participate in the
relevant international cooperation frameworks as
soon as possible. The international community should
provide constructive support, based on respect for the
sovereignty of countries in conflict situations and their
ownership of their cultural heritage. UNESCO, the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, INTERPOL
and the World Customs Organization should leverage
their advantages by establishing databases on criminal
activities such as illegal trade, exchanging intelligence
and information and generating international synergy for
the protection of cultural heritage in conflict situations.

Thirdly, we should strengthen dialogue between
civilizations and promote stability and development in
conflict areas. Countries should collectively promote
the diversity of civilizations around the world and foster
mutual respect and consultation on a basis of equality
so as to address gaps and conflicts through exchanges
and mutual learning between civilizations. All parties
should advocate for the democratization of international
relations and, based on the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations, assist countries in
conflict situations in promoting political processes
and realizing national reconciliation with a view to
restoring peace and stability as quickly as possible. The
international community should help affected countries
improve their sustainable development capacities
in order to enable them to fully implement the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, swiftly reduce
poverty and achieve common prosperity.

Cultural heritage is the shared patrimony of
humankind and terrorism is its common enemy.
China has always actively supported and participated
in international cooperation for the protection of
endangered cultural heritage. We stand ready to work
with other nations to contribute further to preventing
the destruction and trafficking of cultural heritage by
terrorist groups in situations of armed conflict.

