Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): I thank you,
Sir, for your comprehensive concept note (S/2014/869, annex) and for having organized this open debate. I
would also like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Jeffrey Feltman and the Permanent Observer of the
African Union for their informative briefings.

Terrorism must be condemned in all its forms
and manifestations. The repudiation of terrorism is
enshrined in the Brazilian Constitution as a guiding
principle of our foreign policy. Brazil is signatory to
14 international legal instruments against terrorism
negotiated under the auspices of the United Nations
and has been engaged in prevention domestically and
at the regional and subregional levels. The prevention
of and combat against terrorism must be undertaken
with due respect for the Charter of the United Nations,
international refugee and humanitarian law, as well as
human rights, including the right to privacy.

Brazil also recognizes the importance ofpreventing
and combating transnational organized crime. Brazil is
party to international and regional treaties related to
transnational organized crime, such as the Palermo
Convention, of 2000, and its additional protocols,
some of which were adopted by the General Assembly
through resolution 55/25.

It was a wise choice by the Security Council
to favour the concept of transnational organized
crime - consistent with the Palermo Convention
and previous decisions by this Council - over that
of cross-border crimes, which raises doubts about its
precise definition. Notwithstanding the importance
of combating terrorism and transnational organized
crime, it should be clear that they are different
problems, which require different remedies. While
terrorism is essentially fuelled by political and
ideological considerations, transnational organized
crime is motivated by the expectation of financial
gains. Aiming for distinct goals, terrorist groups and
criminal organizations usually operate differently and
through their own methods. Brazil therefore stresses
that there are no automatic or intrinsic linkages
between terrorism and transnational organized crime.
The interrelationship between them may obviously
arise under specific circumstances, but should in no
way be deemed universal.

It is also important to pay attention to the forum
in which these issues should be primarily discussed.
International terrorism as a threat to international
peace and security should be addressed in the Security
Council. Brazil is a staunch defender of the United
Nations centrality in the coordination of global efforts
against international terrorism. Organized crime, in
turn, is primarily a domestic public security issue.
Transnational organized crime requires coordinated
international action, pursuant to the framework
established by the Palermo Convention, its additional
protocols and other relevant international legal
instruments. It is more appropriately addressed as a
matter of enhanced International cooperation than as
an issue pertaining to collect security. In both cases,
the international community does well in emphasizing
prevention. Repressive measures and law enforcement
alone cannot offer a comprehensive strategy against
those crimes. They could actually be ineffective if not
coupled with efforts to tackle the structural factors and
root causes that lead to terrorism and transnational
organized crime, which include social and economic
exclusion.

Brazil reiterates its commitment to a
multidimensional response to the challenges posed by
terrorism and their possible circumstantial linkages to
transnational organized crime. We remain convinced
that we will succeed only if we join efforts on the basis
of shared values and enhanced multilateral cooperation.

