The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity as Minister of Defence and Military
Veterans of South Africa.
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf
of the three African members of the Security Council,
C6te d'Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea and South Africa.

I thank Secretary-General Anto'nio Guterres for his
report (S/2019/759) on strengthening the partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union
(AU) on issues of peace and security in Africa. I also
thank Ambassador Fatima Mohammed, Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations,
and Ms. Hanna Tetteh, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General to the African Union, for their
briefings today.

While the Charter of the United Nations gives
the Security Council the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
Chapter VIII of the Charter also recognizes the
complementarity between the roles of the United Nations
and regional organizations. In that regard, the African
Union and regional economic communities throughout
the continent are engaged in the resolution of conflicts
in their respective regions. Regional organizations
are often those most affected by the conflicts in their
respective regions. In most circumstances they are also
best placed to address those conflicts, because that
action is linked to their own stability, development
and prosperity.

The African Union has developed an expansive
Peace and Security Architecture for ensuring
sustainable peace on the continent. Its mechanisms
form part of the concerted efforts of the African Union
to achieve peace and realize its aspirations to silence
the guns by 2020. It is in pursuit of that aspiration
that in Malabo on 2 and 3 December the Government
of Equatorial Guinea will host a ministerial-level
conference on the topic of silencing the guns by 2020,
the same theme that the African Union Summit will
adopt for 2020. There can be no question that the active
engagement of the continent together with its external
partners, including the United Nations, has led to the
resolution of long-standing conflicts. The political and
strategic alignment between the Security Council and
regional organizations has been effective, as we have
seen in Somalia, the Central African Republic and
the Sudan. What is also clear, however, is that this
collaboration should be formalized and structured if
it is to be efficient. Over the past 12 years, much has
been done to improve that collaboration. The adoption
of resolutions 1809 (2007) and 2033 (2012) has given
impetus to the implementation of Chapter VIII of the
Charter with regard to the partnership between the
United Nations and regional organizations, particularly
the African Union.

We recognize the positive impact that the Joint AU-
United Nations Framework for Enhanced Partnership in
Peace and Security has had in elevating the cooperation,
coordination and collaboration between the two
organizations into a strategic partnership, particularly
at the level of the United Nations and AU Secretariats.
The increased collaboration and strategic partnership
have contributed positively to both the United Nations
and the AU in terms of developing common objectives
and seeking sustainable solutions to the complex
conflicts on the African continent. It is clear that the
complex peace and security issues facing the continent,
including the necessity for the prevention, resolution
and management of conflicts, require effective and
meaningful partnership and collaboration among the
United Nations, the AU, regional economic communities
and regional mechanisms. The three African members
of the Security Council therefore welcome efforts that
seek to strengthen the strategic partnership and ensure
that all concerned genuinely accept the leveraging of
the complementary roles and comparative advantages
of both the United Nations and the AU, including
in areas such as mediation, preventive diplomacy,
peacekeeping, peace enforcement and peacebuilding.

The key principles that should direct and shape
the partnership and cooperation between the two
organizations going forward are meaningful and
inclusive collaboration, shared and common approaches,
and effective consultative mechanisms. One of the most
critical areas where the strategic partnership between
the United Nations and the AU on peace and security
in Africa continues to grow and must be enhanced is
that between the Security Council and the AU Peace
and Security Council. On 21 and 22 October, members
of both Councils met within the framework of the
thirteenth annual joint consultative meeting in Addis
Ababa. During that meeting, members of the Security
Council and the AU Peace and Security Council
discussed various situations of conflict in Africa,
specifically those in the Central African Republic,
Libya, South Sudan and the Sahel region.

With regard to the issue of South Sudan, there
was convergence between the Security Council and
the AU Peace and Security Council on what ought to
happen in the lead-up to the 12 November deadline for
the formation of a revitalized Government of National

Unity, demonstrating that both Councils can have a
shared understanding and common positions on peace
and security matters in Africa. However, there are areas
where the two Councils are at opposite ends. The issue
of Libya is an illustration of a situation where interests
other than the advancement of the peace process have
the potential to undermine the strategic partnership
between the Councils. In the efforts to resolve the issue
in Libya, it is imperative that the Security Council
take into account the roles and contributions of the AU
Commission and the AU Peace and Security Council,
including by considering the request to appoint a joint
special envoy.

The two Councils also exchanged views on
thematic issues, including the African Union's flagship
initiative to silence the guns by 2020 and the modalities
for joint field Visits by both Councils. As a follow-up
to those consultations, the three African members
of the Security Council would like to emphasize the
following points.

First, we need to translate and elevate some of the
commitments made by both Councils into tangible
outcomes. To do that, we have to evaluate the extent to
which the principles of cooperation and commitment to
the partnership between the United Nations and the AU
have translated into the development of practical and
shared purposes within both Councils. In that regard,
the Security Council should endeavour to give effect
to the commitments it has already made in previous
resolutions, especially resolution 2033 (2012).

Secondly, the focus of the debate on strengthening
the United Nations-AU partnership must move away
from generalities about partnership and cooperation and
towards decisive and practical steps that the Security
Council, in particular, and the United Nations and AU,
in general, can take to realize the full implementation of
this strategic partnership. The three African members
of the Security Council welcome the Secretary-
General's undertaking to conduct an assessment of
the United Nations-AU cooperation, including the
structure and capacity of the United Nations Office at
the AU, as requested by the Council in resolution 2320
(2016). It is also imperative that the Security Council
outline its own perspectives regarding the efficacy of
the partnership between the two Councils, based on the
experiences and outcome of the recently held thirteenth

joint consultative meeting, among other things.

In conclusion, the three African members of the
Security Council commend the continued engagement
between the Secretary-General and Mr. Moussa Faki
Mahamat, Chairperson of the AU Commission, in
order to improve the synergy between the Secretariat
and the AU Commission, and to encourage continued
consultative meetings between the Councils. As we
have heard from the briefers, both secretariats have
executed their tasks diligently. We urge all parties
concerned to work towards the effective strengthening
of the partnership so that it contributes to real peace
and security in Africa.

The meeting rose at 11.50 am.
