Mr. Argiiello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
First, allow me to congratulate you, Madam President,
on presiding over the Security Council for September.
As we always do, we would like to say that we are
grateful to be able to participate in meetings of the
Security Council, in this case to analyse the current
situation of and challenges facing the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) in light of
the most recent report of the Secretary-General
(S/2011/540). Allow me, first of all, to welcome among
us today Mr. Mariano Fernandez Amunategui. When
that distinguished Chilean official was appointed as the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Haiti, Argentina felt that he was representing us. He
fully represents us all, we are sure. Despite the obvious
difficulties that he will have to face in the future, we
are sure that he will be able to fulfil his task
successfully, namely, by achieving the objectives of the
international community in Haiti.

My delegation would like to associate itself with
the statement be read shortly by Ambassador Jose' Luis
Cancela, the Permanent Representative of the Eastern
Republic of Uruguay, on behalf of the Group of
Friends, so I am just going to share a few brief
additional thoughts with the Council.

Allow me to reaffirm, therefore, Argentina's firm
commitment to Haiti's institutional stability. This has
been evident over the past 17 years and can be seen
today in our continued participation in MINUSTAH
and in technical and bilateral cooperation with the
Haitian Government.

As the Secretary-General pointed out in his
report, my delegation believes that MINUSTAH
continues to be a decisive factor for finally establishing
a secure and stable environment in Haiti. Likewise, we
believe that the Mission contributes in a special way to
maintaining peace and bringing about recovery and
reconstruction of the country following the 2010
earthquake, while also providing essential support to
the electoral process.

For this reason, Argentina supports the extension
by one year of the mandate of the Mission. Its presence
continues to be required by the Haitian Government.
While we support this renewal, my delegation also
feels that it would be possible, as suggested by the
Secretary-General in his report, to reduce the number
of troops and to redirect the efforts of the Mission
towards the development of institutional capacity and
the strengthening of the Haitian State without
undermining security and stability in Haiti.

Argentina realizes that the political and social
situation in Haiti continues to be a complex one, but
we would like to stress the achievements since the
earthquake, particularly in the area of strengthening
democracy with the holding of peaceful elections and
the peaceful passing of power from one democratically
elected leader to another one who belongs to the
opposition party. This further underlines the important
contribution that the military component of
MINUSTAH makes to reconstruction, a task that
should be given adequate funding through the
Mission's budget. In that respect, my delegation feels
that it is necessary to analyze future aims in greater
depth in order to develop an orderly strategy for
gradual withdrawal that will meet the needs of the
authorities and people of Haiti and will address the
situation of the country in terms of security and its
interrelationship with sustainable development. In that
respect, Argentina feels that the strengthening of the
institutional capacity of the Haitian Government in
accordance with national priorities and in the
framework of appropriate coordination of international
systems by the United Nations should be an essential
component of that strategy. Furthermore, Argentina
believes that institutional strengthening, among other
aspects, in the area of the administration of justice, the
promotion and protection of human rights and
economic and social development is the key for
fulfilling the mandate of the Mission.

I conclude by stating, as my delegation has said
on many occasions in the Council, that the objective of
our work in Haiti is for the presence of the United
Nations and of the international community not to be
needed anymore owing to the ability of the Haitian
authorities themselves take care of their economic and
social development in that they have strengthened their
own political institutions.

