Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): First
of all, I thank you, Mr. President, for convening today's
meeting. I welcome Vice-President Oscar Naranjo
Trujillo to the Council and thank Special Representative
Arnault for his briefing.

The peace process in Colombia is a fine example of
the Council's successful response over recent years to
regional hotspot issues through collaborative efforts. It
is of crucial importance not only to the achievement of
comprehensive peace and development in the country,
but also to the maintenance of stability in the region
as a whole. China commends the efforts of President
Santos, the Colombian Government and all parties
concerned in this regard.

In recent months, positive progress has been made
in the Colombian peace process, and the presidential
elections were held without incident. The Government
and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia
(FARC) have agreed on a strategy for the reintegration
of former combatants. Encouraging progress has also
been achieved with regard to the ceasefire between
the Government and the National Liberation Army.
Healing the wounds of war, however, will not be an
easy task. The comprehensive implementation of the
Peace Agreement requires efforts at the political,
security and development levels as well as in the area
of social cohesion. As such, it is a long-term project
that requires a systematic approach and the sustained
efforts of all parties in Colombia as well as members of
the international community.
The peace process is irreversible: such is the
consensus of the entire Colombian population and the
international community. China hopes that all relevant
actors in Colombia will remain firmly committed to
the peace process, continue to actively implement
the Peace Agreement and resolve any issues, as they
arise, through dialogue and consultation. The Security
Council and the international community should remain
seized of the situation and give continued support to
the pursuit ofpeace in Colombia, respect the ownership
of the Government and the people of Colombia of the
peace process, and provide constructive assistance to
facilitate their efforts.

China commends Special Representative Arnault
and the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia
for their important roles in promoting the peace process.
We hope that the Mission will continue to enhance its
communication with both the Government and FARC,
build mutual confidence and work with both sides for
the active implementation of the Peace Agreement.

In closing, let me say that China stands ready to
work together with other members of the Council
to make its contribution to continued progress in the
Colombian peace process and the early achievement of
comprehensive peace and stability in the country.

