Mrs. Le Fraper du Hellen (France) (spoke in French): I should like to thank Mr. Valentin Inzko,
High Representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina, for
his briefing. France certainly fully echoes his statement
on the unity of the international community.

I would like to associate myself with the
statement to be made by Mr. Mayr-Harting on behalf of
the European Union.

A 15-month period during which an outgoing
Government was only able to deal with daily business
has come to an end in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
situation on the ground has remained calm and stable
in spite of the nationalist rhetoric intended to challenge
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Unfortunately, the process of reforming
and strengthening the country's institutions lost
momentum long ago.
As Mr. Inzko highlighted, however, the
establishment of a Government led by Prime Minister
Bevanda, the vote on the State Aid Law and the Census
Law and the agreement reached on 9 March on
principles to be used to resolve the issues of ownership
and use of defence and State property are steps that
have served to place the country back on track towards
Euro-Atlantic integration. Progress has also been made
towards establishing a budget for 2012 and a fiscal
framework for the period 2012-2014.

Mr. Bevanda's statement during his swearing in
speech that his country's European perspective and, in
particular, the entry into force of a stabilization and
association agreement would be his Government's
priorities deserves our encouragement. We call on
Bosnian authorities to pursue their efforts to bring their
Constitution into line with the European Convention
for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental
Freedoms. We also encourage them to prepare for the
local elections of 7 October as well as possible and to
find lasting compromises for particular local situations,
such as specifically that in Srebrenica.

I also welcome, as High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina Inzko has done as well, the
efforts deployed since September by Mr. Peter
Sorensen, European Union Special Representative and
Head of its Delegation to Bosnia and Herzegovina,
who has contributed to that country's progress towards
a European future. The European Union's commitment
is bearing fruit and must continue.

As in any other place where the Council is
engaged, it is important that the United Nations adapt
is presence to developments in the political and
security situation. For its part, the European Union has
understood that in adjusting its civilian and military
presence. The Office of the Special Representative will
be further strengthened this summer, in particular with
regard to the rule of law. Contingents to the European
Union Force and Operation Althea will be further
reduced, with refocus on training and advice for
Bosnian armed forces while of course retaining the
capacity to take on tasks in support of Bosnian
authorities, should that become necessary.

Taking into account that the security situation has
been calm for several years now and that there has
been progress on political dialogue and reforms,
including moving towards the five objectives and two
conditions established by the Peace Implementation
Council (PIC) in 2008, there is justification for
enhanced commitment by the European Union, and it
calls for the continued reconfiguration of the
international presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The High Representative is the guarantor of
peace agreements on behalf of the international
community. His efforts and his dialogue with Bosnian
political representatives have our full support. His
mission and the resources available to him obviously
have to develop in accordance with the situation. We
trust that a first step in that direction will be taken
when the PIC Steering Board meets in Sarajevo next
week. A first step would be to decide on the end to
international supervision on the Brcko district.

Five months after the European Union Council of
Foreign Ministers adopted clear conclusions on
reducing the size of Office of the High Representative
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, on 5 December 2011, it is
time to move on to action. We should recalibrate the
work of the Office with a view to creating
complementarity vis-a-vis the work of the European
Union.

In conclusion, I would like to reassert our
commitment to the independence, unity and territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Like other
countries in the Balkans, that country has cast its sight
towards the European Union and its values. As a
Security Council member, it recently demonstrated that
it is also a responsible member of the international
community and of the United Nations. It has become
an important factor in regional stability, as was shown
by its hosting in April of the International Donors
Conference on Durable Solutions for Refugees and
Internally Displaced Persons. At a time when we have
just commemorated, among other events, the sad
anniversary of the beginning of the siege of Sarajevo,
we can only be grateful for the road travelled since
those terrible days.

