Ms. Lej (Denmark): We did not intend to touch
upon the situation in Lebanon in our statement today,
since the Council will soon revert to the matter when
we take stock of the implementation of resolution 1701
(2006). However, today's assassination of the Lebanese
Minister for Industry requires that we react.

First of all, we reconfirm our condemnation of
terrorism and encourage all parties to refrain from
using violence as a tool to achieve political goals. The
situation in Lebanon is already very fragile. Whoever
is responsible for today's assassination is adding to an
already tense situation. Such an act is not just a crime
that must be condemned; it is also very irresponsible,
since it adds to the instability. It confirms that it is
important that the International Independent
Investigation Commission also assist the Lebanese
Government in identifying those responsible for
attacks other than that which led to the tragic death of
former Prime Minister Hariri.

Denmark continues to be committed to
supporting the legitimate and democratically elected
Government under Prime Minister Siniora and his
efforts to stabilize the situation in the country. We
encourage all Lebanese parties to reach consensus and
to resume the process of national dialogue.

Denmark aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Finland on behalf of
the European Union.
When we discussed the latest developments in the
Middle East in this Chamber on 9 November 2006 and
again on 11 November, I expressed our deep concern
about the continuing violence that has led to the
increasing and tragic loss of civilian life. The
importance of bringing and end to violence cannot be
overemphasized. All sides must cease the use of force
for political purposes. That requires an immediate halt
to the attacks on Israel. The continuing rocket attacks
from the Palestinian territory into Israel are
unacceptable. They must be condemned, and the
Palestinian Government must take action to ensure that
such attacks are stopped. At the same time, Israel must
halt its military operations that endanger the
Palestinian civilian population. Denmark encourages
Israel to ensure that short-term measures aimed at
improving the security of Israeli civilians are
implemented in accordance with international law and
that they do not undermine a lasting solution to the
conflict.

In that regard, it is of great concern that the
number of Palestinian civilian deaths is increasing.
Denmark condemns the loss of civilian lives resulting
from the Israeli military operation in Beit Hanoun. We
have noted that Israel has admitted that it was a tragic
mistake, and we look forward to the publication of the
results of the thorough investigation into that horrific
incident.

The right of a State to defend itself against
terrorist threats does not justify the disproportionate or
indiscriminate use of force or action. The
disproportionate use of force is contrary to
international humanitarian law and tends to defy the
very political purpose it is supposed to serve, by
fuelling further hatred and conflict.

The challenge is to support and strengthen those
forces that are committed to a political solution. That is
the only way out of the current stalemate of violence.
As a first step, the kidnapped Israeli soldier must be
released immediately. Likewise, the Palestinian
ministers and legislators in Israeli custody must be
freed promptly.

However, in order to pave the way for lasting
progress, we must revive the vision of two independent
States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace
within recognized borders. That vision is a core
principle of the Road Map. Certainly, the continued
violence is leading us in a wrong and worrisome
direction.

Increasingly, collapse of the Palestinian Authority
and chaos in the territory seem imminent. It is a social,
economic and political collapse that is about to become
a grim reality. Clashes among Palestinian factions only

aggravate the human suffering and desperation. They
run counter to the interests of the Palestinian people.
Thus, we support President Abbas's attempt to build
national unity and to establish a credible Palestinian
government with a platform that reflects the principles
laid down by the Quartet.

A functioning Palestinian government is essential
for the governing of the Palestinian territories. It is
equally critical as a viable partner for the international
community in the efforts to alleviate the dire
humanitarian situation, to breathe life into the
Palestinian economy and to relaunch the peace process.
The international community stands ready to support
such a government.

Israel has a crucial role to play in improving
Palestinian economic prospects. The tax and customs
revenues now being withheld should be released
immediately. Those revenues can be channelled
through the temporary international mechanism, which
has proved itself valuable in targeting aid directly to
the Palestinian people. Moreover, the Agreement on
Movement and Access must be implemented fully and
immediately.

In conclusion, I would re-emphasize that all
parties must participate if the peace process is to
succeed. Regional players should do everything they
can to support efforts that could lead to a resumption of
the peace process. Neighbours, including Syria, must
play constructive roles. And the international
community, led by the Quartet, must be willing and
able to provide whatever incentives are needed to set
the healing process in motion. It is my hope that the
Quartet can soon announce when a meeting will take
place.

