Mr. Ward (Jamaica): My delegation also welcomes
the format of today's meeting, which enhances the
transparency of the Council's work and which allows
countries with particular interests in the matter under
consideration an opportunity to participate in the
discussions.

We thank the Secretary-General for his report and
Mr. Annabi for his update on the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We also commend Mr. Jacques Paul Klein
and the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH) for their work in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which we fully support. We recognize the
important role it has played in an effort to return
normalcy to Bosnia and Herzegovina.

We attach great importance to the ongoing efforts to
consolidate peace and stability and create a multi-ethnic
society and multi-ethnic institutions in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Implementation of the New York
Declaration is critical to this process.

We note the efforts made at police restructuring and
reform, and in particular the screening for law
enforcement personnel, as well as the incremental
progress being made in changing the composition of the
police force to reflect the multi-ethnic character of the
communities it serves. The initiatives to improve their
technical and democratic policing skills are noteworthy.
We attach importance to the continued emphasis on
training of the police officers and agree that the key to
self-sustaining police reform is professional training.

We are concerned about the issues raised in
paragraphs 10 and ll of the Secretary-General's report,
specifically the difficulties with the integration of Bosniac
and Croat police officers in canton 7 and the political and
administrative delays in the establishment of the State
Border Service. We note that the latter issue is being
addressed, as referred to by Mr. Annabi in his briefing.

 

We agree that police restructuring and reform must be
complemented with judicial reform. Political, institutional
and technical impediments to the effective functioning of
the judiciary must be removed. The entrenchment of law
and order is contingent upon an efficient and organized
judiciary, and we look forward to being briefed in the
future on progress in judicial reform.

It is encouraging to note that the level of coordination
between UNMIBH, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and the Office of
the High Commissioner for Human Rights has been
increasing, particularly on issues such as refugees and
human rights training. We wish to emphasize that the work
of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
and the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) is
critical in the areas of capacity-building and training and
that the long-term development and sustainability of Bosnia
and Herzegovina lies in its human resources and the
strengthening of its institutions.

We are aware that there are numerous challenges in
the discharge of UNMIBH's mandate. We remain
convinced that the cooperation of all groups is needed, and
we urge those in authority and in positions of influence to
strengthen their collaboration with UNMIBH.

