As we commemorate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations, we must aspire to the commitment of the Charter of the United Nations to building a world where all humankind is able to live in peace and enjoy the protection of their fundamental human rights, including their right to development, as guided by Declaration on the Right to Development. In that respect, it is in the interest of all humankind that for many years women across the globe have been committed to advancing the goals of equality, peace and development for all women everywhere. Despite the progress that has been made in advancing gender equality and women's empowerment, particularly following the 1995 Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, we must be cognizant that women continue to face discrimination and inequalities, hampering their full involvement in building sustainable societies. Women and girls continue to bear the brunt of poverty, inequality and underdevelopment. In conflict situations, their personal, economic, civil and political security is persistently undermined. Regrettably, the coronavirus disease pandemic has laid bare the disproportionate impact that women face in situations of crisis. Our efforts must continue to be geared towards finding sustainable solutions to the challenges that women continue to face. Resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security, adopted 20 years ago, was aimed at addressing the challenges faced by women in armed conflict and post-conflict situations. The subsequent nine resolutions adopted by the Council collectively represent the international community's commitment to holistically addressing such challenges. In that regard, South Africa reiterates its unequivocal and firm support for the women and peace and security agenda and all resolutions adopted by the Council to further the agenda. South Africa appreciates the efforts undertaken by the Russian Federation, as President of the Security Council for October, in putting forward a draft resolution to commemorate the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000). The initiative to submit a draft resolution on the occasion of the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) is not only timely but also necessary for the Security Council to reflect on the implementation of the women and peace and security agenda, as well as to reaffirm the Security Council's commitment to all previous resolutions adopted on the matter. In our view, draft resolution S/2020/1054 safeguards the entire normative framework of the women and peace and security agenda by urging the implementation of all previous resolutions on that agenda adopted by the Council to date. It thus preserves the gains made through not only resolution 2493 (2019), which was unanimously adopted by the Security Council in 2019, but also all Security Council resolutions on the women and peace and security agenda. We are reassured by the fact that each of the resolutions on the women and peace and security agenda maintains its relevance and none are superseded by the current draft resolution. The draft resolution could have been more ambitious by advancing the framework that we already have. The references to the human rights of women and the participation and protection of civil society, including women peacebuilders, as well as initiatives to address structural and institutional barriers, could have been strengthened. In addition, the draft text should have paid attention to emerging issues that impact the women and peace and security agenda, such as the coronavirus disease pandemic, particularly as it relates to sexual and reproductive health and rights, as well as gender-based violence. While the draft resolution put forward does not adequately address those issues, we recognize that it reaffirms, and does not negate, all previous resolutions that already cover such matters, particularly resolution 2493 (2019), adopted unanimously by the Council a year ago. South Africa therefore regards this draft resolution as the bare minimum required for sustaining the women and peace and security agenda. It is for that reason that South Africa voted in favour of the draft resolution before us today, as it reaffirms and preserves the entire body of resolutions on the women and peace and security agenda and, importantly, commemorates the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). To conclude, it is unfortunate that petty geopolitical differences have resulted in many Council members not being willing to constructively engage and seek compromise on the draft resolution. Such differences undermine the spirit of collective multilateral action that is required for us to address the challenges facing women.
