Mr. Van Shalkwyk (South Africa): It is a pleasure
to see you here with us again, Mr. President, and we
thank you once more for your generosity and having
hosted us last night - we really appreciate that.

I wish to begin by thanking the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ozerdem and Ms. Elman for their briefings on
this very important topic on the role and value of
reconciliation in the maintenance of international
peace and security. South Africa recognizes and values
the importance of national reconciliation processes in
achieving sustainable peace, especially in countries
transitioning from conflict to post-conflict situations.

As the Security Council will be aware, South
Africa went through its own process of reconciliation
after having dismantled the oppressive system of
apartheid. Our Truth and Reconciliation Commission
was established with the aims of granting amnesty
from criminal and civil liability to people who made
full disclosures of acts committed with a political
objective during the course of conflicts of the past;
affording victims an opportunity to relate the violations
they suffered; taking measures aimed at granting
reparations to victims; restoring the human and civil
dignity of the victims of human rights violations; and
making recommendations aimed at preventing the
committing of gross human rights violations. Many
South Africans had an opportunity to appear before
the Truth and Reconciliation Commission in a series of
public hearings, either as victims or as perpetrators of
acts that had violated human rights. State institutions,
political parties, organizations and the business sector
were also required to elaborate on their respective roles
in the past.

The Truth and Reconciliation Commission had to
deal with the question of reconciliation and the future,
on the one hand, and the necessity to establish the truth
in relation to past events and ensure reparations to the
victims of gross human rights abuses, on the other
hand. Those issues had to be carefully considered and
balanced, both during and after the historic transition
from apartheid and oppression to a constitutional
democracy. The compromises were sometimes painful,
as was confronting the truth of past oppression. However,
for us, based on our own national circumstances and
history, it was our way of reconciling the decades-long
oppression and proceed with nation-building.

Reconciliation measures during transitions from
post-conflict situations are crucial to ensuring long-
term stability. However, it is equally important to
realize that one size does not fit all. Transitional justice
processes must respond to the specific context of the
country in transition. The creation of the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission in our country was the
manner in which we chose to deal with our own past
and future. Countries emerging from conflict must
find their own ways of bridging the past with new
possibilities for the future in the context of their own
unique circumstances.

The debate on peace and justice still continues,
and each State needs to take broad ownership of
its particular transitional processes and find its
own balance in the sequencing of peace, justice
and reconciliation. While human rights norms have
strengthened transitional justice, and although that
has become an acceptable response during political
transitions, they have also shaped the transition process
into a largely legalistic field with an often-narrow
accountability and justice-based focus. It is also
necessary to consider that there is a political necessity to
promote alternative means of accountability. Focusing
on prosecutions alone can destabilize transitions.
Therefore, the whole spectrum of transitional justice
needs to be explored, including truth commissions and
reparations for victims. In addition, it is important to
recognize the value and importance of community-
based or traditional justice mechanisms, whereby local
conflict-resolution and healing practices are adapted to
address grave violations. Equally important are efforts
to ensure the representation of women and youth, not
only in transitional justice processes but also at the
negotiating table beforehand.

As Archbishop Desmond Tutu, who chaired the
Truth and Reconciliation Commission, has written,

"The establishment of South Africa's Truth
and Reconciliation Commission was a pioneering
international experiment, with a potentially far-
reaching effect on the way we all deal with conflict.
Normally, when countries move through the
difficult transition from oppression to democracy,
they deal with the past in one of two ways: either
the leaders of the old order are put on trial or dealt
with summarily, or previous events are swept under
the carpet and the suffering of those subjected to
violence is ignored. South Africa followed a third,
unique way when it ended apartheid. To those who
had committed grave violations of human rights, it
offered amnesty in exchange for public disclosure
of the truth about their crimes, and to the victims it
gave an unusual opportunity to be heard, as well as
hope for reparations."

The international community, and the United
Nations in particular, has an important role to
play in creating an enabling environment in which
reconciliation can occur. Durable peace cannot
be achieved simply through the signing of peace
agreements. It also requires a comprehensive approach
that involves the active participation of the broader
multilateral system in addressing peace and security
and sustainable development needs. As in peacekeeping
operations, different situations require different
responses in dealing with post-conflict reconciliation
and development.

On our continent, the African Union seeks durable
peace and sustainable development through the
mechanisms and structures it has put in place for conflict
prevention, peacemaking, peace support operations
and intervention, as well as peacebuilding and post-
conflict reconstruction. It is important to strengthen
the linkages between regional and global mechanisms
if we want to ensure that the United Nations system,
and in particular the Security Council, is able to help
establish enabling environments in countries plagued
by conflict and in order to support nationally owned
reconciliation processes and bring about sustainable
peace and security.

