Ms. Soderberg (United States of America): I want to
thank Mr. Annabi not only for his briefing today but also
for the amount of time and energy he and his staff have put
into trying to give the United Nations operation in Sierra
Leone the ability to carry out the mandate that the United
Nations has given it. It is a very difficult Mission, and they
certainly deserve our full support in their efforts. I think it
is one of the most difficult missions out there today and
one that deserves the full attention of the Council.

I appreciate the holding of this briefing today, and I
think we should all commend Ambassador Greenstock for
taking the time to go to Sierra Leone. There is nothing like
seeing the situation on the ground. I think it is informative.
I myself was there about six months ago. You cannot come
back from a trip like that and not determine to do
everything you can to try to help ameliorate the situation.
I certainly share Ambassador Greenstock's view that the
people of Sierra Leone are committed to achieving the
peace that they so rightly deserve. I think it is incumbent
on all of us to do what we can to give it to them.

I would underscore what others have said, and
certainly the Secretary-General's report and Mr. Annabi's
briefing. But I think it boils down to two real problems in
Sierra Leone. One is the failure of Foday Sankoh to live up
to his commitments in the peace process. From that failure
stems a myriad of problems that we are dealing with. But
until he begins to live up to the commitments that he has
made, as well as the Revolutionary United Front (RUF), the
mission given by the Security Council to UNAMSIL is not
going to be fulfilled. I would certainly join the Secretary-
General and others in calling on Foday Sankoh to abide
by his commitments.

Looking at the Secretary-General's report, we see
that he is very blunt about raising serious doubts about
the commitment of Foday Sankoh to the faithful
implementation of the peace accord. He is talking about
the main obstacle to the extension of State authority being
the continuing refusal of access by the RUF. I think it is
important for us to be as blunt about this as possible, both
in our private discussions with him as well as publicly.
Along those lines, I would fully support the proposal for
a press statement that Ambassador Greenstock put
forward, which I think rightly includes a call for Foday
Sankoh and the RUF to fulfil their commitments.

The second problem that we face there is the fact
that the United Nations operation is not fully up and
running. That is no one's fault in particular. It is just a
long process. It takes several months for the United
Nations to expand a mandate such as the one the Security
Council gave it. I think we all need to do more within our
own Governments, and in the region, to provide the
resources so that they can get fully deployed. I think none
of us want to see a repeat of the United Nations
peacekeepers being disarrned by the RUF, as opposed to
the other way around. I therefore commend the British
Government for calling the donors' conference at the end
of this month. I certainly hope that the Deputy Secretary-
General will be in a position to go there. I think that until
we have a full peacekeeping force on the ground there, it
is going to be very difficult to have it carry out its
mandate, much less overcome the continuing problems
going on there.

I would also second something that others have said.
I think we need to look at the travel restrictions on the
RUF leaders. It is our strong View that such leaders
should be able to travel only upon prior consent of the
sanctions committee. The recent travel schedule of Mr.
Foday Sankoh is one that surprised our delegation at
least, and I think a number of other members of the
delegations on the Security Council. I think we need to
reiterate our commitment there, and I would perhaps
underscore that in the press statement, if others would
agree, in order to remind Member States that there are
travel bans on some of these leaders.

Lastly, I will just underscore the situation on human
rights in Sierra Leone, particularly with regard to women,
girls and child soldiers. It is one of the more horrific
situations with respect to abuses of human rights, and I

 

think we should remember that when we look at trying to
contribute to the Trust Fund or help the United Nations
mobilize. It is a very serious situation. As Ambassador
Greenstock said, the world is focused on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, but the real test of the moment is
whether or not Sierra Leone is going to work. It is one that
we all have a responsibility in helping the parties fulfil.

