Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Moussa, for his briefing.

The general situation in the Central African region
has recently been mixed. While China welcomes the
clear improvement in the Great Lakes region and
the progress in regional integration, the situation in
the Central African Republic remains volatile, with
increasing regional terrorist activities and transnational
organized crime. Central Africa continues to face
multiple challenges, some of which are common, to
a certain extent, throughout Africa. This requires
continued concerted efforts on the part of countries
of the region and the international community. In that
regard, I would like to emphasize the following three
points.

First, in settling the issues in Central Africa, the
imperative must be to stabilize the regional situation
as soon as possible. Stability is a precondition for
development. The deterioration of the situation in the
Central African Republic and the troubles created
by the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) have had a
disastrous effect on the countries in the region and their
population. China expresses its concern in that regard.
We call on the international community to expedite its
support to the Central African Republic so as to help
the country promptly restore its normal security and
social order. We also hope that the United Nations
and the African Union will further strengthen their
cooperation and work in synergy so as to eradicate the
threat posed by the LRA.

Secondly, economic development is key to
solving the issues in Central Africa in the long term.
It is fundamental for long-term security and stability.
The lack of development is one of the root causes of
conflicts in Africa. A few days ago, Chinese Premier Li
Keqiang visited Africa and announced that the Chinese
Government would provide an additional $10 billion
in loans to African countries, to be used in such
projects as infrastructure development, agriculture and
poverty eradication. China hopes that the international
community will fulfil its assistance commitments
to African countries to help them accelerate
socioeconomic development and create employment
opportunities, which would in turn eradicate the root
causes of conflicts.

Thirdly, in tackling the issues in Central Africa,
the ownership of the countries concerned should be
rigorously respected. In recent years, regional and
subregional organizations, such as the African Union
(AU) and the Economic Community of Central African
States, have come together to promote prosperity
through self-reliance, while seeking African solutions
to African problems. They have made tremendous
efforts to promote peace and development in the
region. The international community, in supporting the
search for solutions for Central African issues, should
fully take into account the opinions of the countries
concerned, and maintain close communication the AU
and subregional organizations, as well as help them
build their capacity to take the lead in solving their own
problems.

In its three years of existence, the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) has done
a great deal of work in coordinating and promoting
the maintenance of peace and security in the region,
and Mr. Moussa has made a tremendous personal
contribution to that effort. China appreciates those
endeavours. We also welcome Mr. Bathily as the
incoming Special Representative for Central Africa
and Head of the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa, and expect that he will guide the Office
in continuing to proactively implement its mandate. As
always, China will continue to support UNOCA's work.

