Mr. Petkus (Lithuania): I would like to begin by
commending Indonesia, as President of the Security
Council for the month of May, for convening this
exceptionally important open debate. I would also
like to thank the Secretary-General, the President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross and
the Executive Director of the Center for Civilians in
Conflict for their contributions to our discussion.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2019/373) devoted to the seventieth
anniversary of the four Geneva Conventions,
which form the universally accepted cornerstone of
international humanitarian law. Today, 70 years later,
it is still relevant that the Conventions' guarantees are
provided for all protected persons, and particularly
civilians who do not take a direct part in hostilities, as
well as civilians living under occupation. I would like
to focus on the protection of populations in the hands
of an occupying Power. That is the general subject of
the Fourth Geneva Convention, which requires the
humanitarian treatment of civilians throughout a period
of occupation.

Lithuania, as a country once illegally annexed
and occupied by the Soviet Union, has a particular
understanding of the crimes and horrors that can be
committed without regard to the law of occupation.
One does not even have to refer to the pages of history
to find relevant case studies, as Georgia, Ukraine and
other countries are suffering from the same illegal
conduct in today's world. We therefore call on all States
Members of the United Nations to uphold international
humanitarian law in occupied territories.

The duties of the occupying Power under the Fourth
Geneva Convention are numerous. The lack of ongoing
hostilities should not prevent us from making sure that
the rights of the civilian population are respected, as
the established protection guarantees are applicable for
the whole duration of occupation. One example stands
out in particular in that regard. This year, on 24 April,
a decree was issued to facilitate the acquisition of
Russian nationality by residents from various districts
of Ukraine's Donetsk and Luhansk regions, notably
without taking up residency in Russia. That ongoing
mass extraterritorial naturalization - the so-called
passportization policy - by the Russian Federation in
the occupied territories of Ukraine is a clear violation
of the law of occupation and must be condemned
immediately by the Members of the United Nations.
The granting of nationality is a manifestation of the
conferring State's sovereignty. Historical experience in
Georgia shows that it may be employed as a rhetorical
justification for the use of force.

Let me turn to peacekeeping. Last year, Lithuania
adhered to the Kigali Principles on the Protection of
Civilians - a best-practices initiative for protecting
civilians in peacekeeping operations. Since then,
nearly 200 Lithuanian peacekeepers have been
comprehensively trained on their legal commitments in
respect of the civilian population on the ground. The
protection of civilians requires the commitment of the
members of the Security Council to find consensus
around the language and implications of peacekeeping
tasks, including by providing clarity on the expectations
of peacekeepers and the recognition of situations that
may be outside of their capacity to respond. We are
nevertheless convinced that the mandated protection
of civilians must become a task of every United
Nations peacekeeping mission. In that respect, the
commitments under the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative also provide a foundation to tackle some of
those challenges and further strengthen the protective
role of peacekeepers.

The Security Council's efforts to give practical
meaning to the protection of civilians agenda would
be fruitless without enhancing accountability for
serious violations of international humanitarian law
and international human rights law. Irrespective of
the challenges faced by the International Criminal
Court, we must continue to support its mandate. We
call on States to adhere to the commitments established
by the Rome Statute and to cooperate fully with the
investigative bodies of the Court.

In addition, the Council has promoted and
encouraged support for accountability at the national
level, while emphasizing the responsibility of States
to investigate, prosecute and punish the perpetrators
of serious violations. The commissions, mechanisms
and other investigative bodies established by the
United Nations are also important tools that must
be encouraged in order to ensure the preservation of
evidence for future investigations. Enhancing and
ensuring respect for the law and accountability for its
violation are two of the greatest challenges we face in
strengthening the protection of civilians. Yet efforts to
ensure accountability remain insufficient and do not
meet the bar set by binding international treaties, as we
observe growing resistance from different States and
non-State actors in implementing their commitments to
that end.

The international community must collectively
turn this worrisome tide. We urge Security Council
members, the Secretary-General and all Member States
to take determined action to strengthen the protection
of civilians and stand up for the norms and laws that are
essential to safeguarding civilians in conflict.

