Mr. Guehenno: Several representatives
mentioned the fundamental issue of the elections. The
Chinese delegation raised two questions linked
specifically to the issue of elections. I would like to
answer the second question first, namely, the impact on
stability and elections of refugees from the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.

All the information we have shows that the
estimated 8,000 refugees from the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia have been absorbed very
peacefully in host Albanian families; that their needs
are being cared for by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and other
humanitarian agencies; and that they have indeed been
registered. I believe that most of those refugees will
indeed return to the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia as the situation returns to normal there. At
any rate, they are not residents of Kosovo and there is
no way in which they could, or should, have an impact
on the elections. I think that they are out of the picture,
both from a law-and-order standpoint and from the
more formal standpoint of the legal issue of
participation in elections. They should remain out of
the picture and I would expect that by the time
elections can be held, there will no longer be any
refugees there anyway.

With regard to the first question - namely, what
the effects of non-participation by Kosovo Serbs in the
elections would be - I think that if a second election
were held in Kosovo without the participation of
Kosovo Serbs it would indeed send a very bad signal
and would not bode well for the goal of a multi-ethnic
Kosovo as envisaged in resolution 1244 (1999). That is
why we make every effort to engage the Kosovo Serb
community and to convince that community to
participate actively. As I said, we are very encouraged
by the results of the meeting in Belgrade.

Here, I would like to make a more general point
on the issue of elections. It is indeed essential that the
next elections, the Kosovo-wide elections, have the full
participation of all those who have a right to participate
in them. That indeed includes internally displaced
persons not presently in Kosovo who left Kosovo
before 1 January 1998. An election that fails to make
efforts to have them participate would not be right and,
as has been said, would increase the divide. That is
why we are working actively to that effect with the
Government in Belgrade. There is indeed a need for
very close cooperation between the mission and that
Government in Belgrade to ensure such participation.

On the other hand, having come back from
Kosovo, my personal perception is that any undue
delay in the holding of elections would give more
power to the gun than to the vote. That is the danger.
Elections will enable the various communities to have
a say, and we see this in the number of moderates in
Kosovo. Properly held elections can thus be a way to
alleviate tensions. Undue delay might lead to violence.

In Kosovo I was struck by the fact that if we want
to rebuild a measure of trust between the various
communities fl and that in itself will take time, as
there is no question that at the moment that trust does
not yet exist - that will have to be based on some
measure of self-confidence. Elections in which all
communities can participate will help to do precisely
that, rather than intimidation with the power of the gun.

