Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): Please allow me to
begin by commending you, Madam, for organizing this
wrap-up meeting.

Actually, I would like to begin with a plea to my
colleagues to try as much as possible to institutionalize
these wrap-up meetings, because they can be useful on
many counts. First, of course, we can review what we
did, where we succeeded and where we failed during
the month. Secondly, I think we can also reflect on
long-term trends and on how our work is going over
the longer term. Thirdly and equally importantly, this is
probably the only window that we have in the course of
the month to reflect on how we can improve the work
of the Council. Clearly, we do need to develop some
kind of culture of innovation within the Council. These
sort of meetings, if they are institutionalized, can
provide us the opportunity to do so.

But to do that, at some point in time we do need
to have a very serious discussion within the Council on
what exactly our priorities are. I notice that
Ambassador Chowdhury of Bangladesh said that our
primary responsibility is to handle threats to
international peace and security, but are we primarily a
deliberative body, a legislative body or an operational
body? I think we do bits of all three, but we have to
figure out what our priorities are; then, we can decide
how we allocate our time. I hope that, at some point,
we will get to such a discussion.

In this regard, I must say that I, like Ambassador
Greenstock, regret the lack of participation of the
Member States at this meeting. It is, unfortunately, a
bad sign and what makes it sad is that, by having it
open to the Member States, we thought that we could,
in a sense, engage them. But we have not done so yet. I
would also like to appeal to the Members that are not
here to take such wrap-up meetings more seriously.

For example, we are in the middle of the plenary
session of the General Assembly and I am told that, in
one of the discussions in the Third Committee, there
was apparently an effort to mention a Security Council
resolution on women and peace and security. Several
members of the General Assembly said: "No, that is the
job of the Security Council. We will not endorse what
the Security Council does." I think that represents a
very unhealthy disconnect between the Security
Council and the rest of the United Nations community.
The representative of France also referred to that. We
have to address that disconnect. Perhaps one way of
doing that is through these wrap-up meetings and by
making them open and interactive. In that way we can
probably engage the non-members.

Coming to the work of this month, you, Madam,
have been praised so much I am not so sure that I can
add very much. What really impressed us was your
time management. Increasingly, frankly, in the work of
the Council, the most valuable and precious commodity
we have is time. Indeed, we have found that, since we
joined the Council, it is like a sponge, soaking up all
our time. We just find it very difficult to manage all our
other duties, but you, Madam, did it brilliantly in a
month when you also had to deal with the ministerial
week and, of course, the Thanksgiving holiday. Thus,
in a very truncated month, you did a tremendous
amount of work and we commend you for that. Of
course, we commend you for producing, at the very
beginning of month, the objectives paper and, at the
end of the month, notes for the wrap-up meeting. This
sort of systematic approach, we hope, will also become
institutionalized,

What I would like to do now is talk a bit about
the successes of the month in procedural and
substantive issues. I think that, if these meetings are to
be useful, we should also talk about failures. Let me
reassure you, Madam, it is not about the failures of the
presidency; it is about the failures of the Council.

As to the successes on the procedural issues,
there have been several and they are, I think,
significant ones. First, of course, is the setting up of the
Security Council presidential web site. I think it is
better to have one web site permanently on the United
Nations web site, rather than to have it switch from
month to month to different missions. It provides one-
stop shopping for the Council's provisional programme
of work, outputs, press statements, presidential
statements and resolutions. I think that is a very
important innovation, but we do need to try to develop
it a bit further.

Ambassador Chowdhury talked about how we can
make our informal consultations more transparent. We
can do what France did when it held the presidency of
the Council. On the French web site, it provided a daily
summary of what was discussed and said in the
informal consultations - of course, without revealing
any names or countries. We know that this is time-
consuming because we tried it during the Singapore
presidency and we could not do it. Small missions do
not have the resources to do it, but it is something that
the Secretariat could try to do.

At the same time, of course, I think that we really
made a very important innovation with the speakers'
list. I am glad that Ambassador Koonjul referred to
this. It may seem to be a small thing that we switched
from whatever system we had in the past to drawing
lots, but frankly, because it has created regularity and
predictability and we can actually know when we are
going to speak during the course of the day, it has made
everyone feel that we have a level playing field when it
comes to the selection of the speakers. I think it has
also helped to improve the chemistry among the
members and to make them feel that we were all
equally treated and that we do not just belong to class
A or class B within the Council.

We also thank you, Madam, for convening the
informal working group on documentation and
procedures, despite the busy month - and that is why
it is quite remarkable. The working group, as members
know, has begun work on the report of the Security
Council to the General Assembly.

One point we do want to emphasize is that if, just
after a massive debate in the General Assembly on the
report of the Security Council to the Assembly, we
decide to ignore the views expressed and proceed to do
exactly the same thing next year as we did in previous
years, then we reinforce the views of those who say the
Security Council does not listen to the members of the
General Assembly. If we want to show that we are
listening, then it is time for us to produce some real
changes. And it can be done. Frankly, there is no
reason why we should spend $600,000 a year for that
report. It should cost us no more than $50,000. This
can be done, and we have discovered in the course of
working on it that there is much duplication that can be
cut out.

Let me turn briefly to the successes on the
substantive front. Here, clearly, I think the work we did
on Afghanistan, including the meeting with Lakhdar
Brahimi on 13 November and of course the adoption of
resolution 1378 (2001), was very important. But
equally important were the discussions we had in
informal consultations. In the course of the discussions,
I thought we were moving towards developing a sort of
informal consensus among member States about what
was doable and what was not doable within
Afghanistan. The tragedy is that that institutional
memory is lost. There is no agreed record of it. No
summary points of it are kept. And when we come to
making the big decisions on what kind of peacekeeping
operations are to be set up in Afghanistan, we will not
have an institutional memory to draw upon.

But, here, I am glad, Madam, that you organized
the candid discussion that we had yesterday, together
with the International Crisis Group (ICG) and the
World Peace Foundation. I thought the level of the
discussion was quite remarkable. I have never seen a
better discussion of the question, "Can the United
Nations say no?", as we had in yesterday's meeting,
and I hope that some of that will be recorded and kept.

The other major decision we made was on Iraq,
where we unanimously adopted resolution 1382 (2001).
We know that the key provisions of the resolution lie in
operative paragraph 2 and operative paragraph 6 - and
I will not go into the details here. In this regard, we
would like to commend the permanent five for working
closely together and producing a consensus text for us.
We are aware that they must have worked very hard;
there must have been very complex trade-offs. We do
not know what happened behind the scenes, but we do
know that the result was a good one. We also know
that, frankly, we have a massive job ahead of us over
the next six months, if we are to finalize work on the
next Iraq resolution. I understand that some of my
colleagues have actually read the Goods-Review List. I
must confess that I never had the chance to read it
before we adopted it. It is too big a volume. But we
will all have to read it at some point in time.

Very briefly, on the other issues that we
discussed, such as Kosovo, we thank you, Madam, for
giving us the time to reflect on them before we adopted
the presidential statements. But I want to add a small
footnote on the Kosovo issue. This represents a small,
personal discovery. When we were discussing the
results of the elections in Kosovo, I asked my
colleagues when we were going to renew the mandate
of the Kosovo peacekeeping operation. Then I
discovered - and this reflects my ignorance - that
while in every other mandate, there is a six- or three-
month time limit, in Kosovo, there is no time limit. It is
in perpetuity. Now there must have been some good
reason why this was done. But I could not figure out
why, nor who did it. Again, because of the lack of
institutional memory, I'm not sure whom to turn to. But
clearly we are meant to turn to those that were
members of the Council at that time to ask them the
reason for these double standards.

I also want to respond briefly to the comments
made by Ambassador Doutriaux on the Group of
Friends. I agree with him that the Group does play a
useful role. I also agree that they help, in a sense, to
link the Security Council with the General Assembly
members. But I also would like to make a plea for
greater transparency in their work. Sometimes we are
not quite sure how they arrive at the various decisions
that they present to us. Some indication of the
background that went into their thinking would be
useful to us.

Finally, turning to the failures - and as I have
said, it is also very important to address failures 4 the
biggest failure of the Council this past month was not
to complete our work on the Working Group on
Sanctions. The deadline for the work was November
2000. Now it is November 2001. But what is even
more tragic is that the people who actually worked on
this Working Group on Sanctions, especially
Bangladesh and the others - all the elected members
who can actually remember what work they did will all
be gone in a month. Then we have to start from scratch
again. That, I think, is something that we should not
accept.

I also want to touch a bit on the work of the
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations. Here, I
would like to pay tribute to Ambassador Ward for the
incredibly hard work that he has done. The only
tragedy here is that the Working Group has still not
made much progress on the establishment of a new
mechanism of cooperation between the Security
Council and the troop-contributing countries. I recall
Ambassador Chowdhury's call for stronger efforts to
be made in that direction, because we were, in a sense,
moving towards a relationship of greater trust between
the troop-contributing countries and Security Council
members. That movement has stalled because of the
fear that their views are not being heard in the Working
Group.

I have a quick note on the thematic debates. We
think that the debates held on children in armed
conflict and the protection of civilians were very
important. Certainly, the presence of the child soldier
from Sierra Leone was a dramatic event. But we also
believe - and we said this when the debate took
place - that it is time to start clustering these thematic
debates on issues involving the protection of civilians,
of women and of children and organizing them in such
a way as to respond to Ireland's call for reducing the
workload; the workload is obviously becoming too
great for the Council.

Let me end with one concrete suggestion.
Fortunately, we are having this meeting in the open.
There will be a record of what has been said here, but
we think that there have been many valuable, specific
suggestions that have been made on how to improve
the work of the Council. I hope we can try to make a
kind of catalogue of the suggestions. We tried this in
January at the closed, wrap-up meeting we had. We
should begin to institutionalize this, and we hope that
this can be done.

We will not join in the debate between
Bangladesh and France on whether or not we should
bid you farewell, Madam, but we look forward to
continuing to work with you.

