Mr. Latortue (Haiti) (spoke in French): Allow
me at the outset to thank you, Mr. President, for having
invited me here today, which will allow me not only to
provide the Council with firsthand information on Haiti
but also give me the opportunity to correct the wrong
impression that is sometimes given by the headlines of
the international press, which has long been
accustomed to projecting a negative image of Haiti and
which sometimes has trouble grasping and conveying
the real and deep-seated changes that have been taking
place in that country, especially during the last two
years of democratic transition.

I should like to thank in particular the Security
Council, as well as the international community, which,
in two years, have not once hesitated to come to the
rescue of my country. Indeed, the Council adopted a
number of resolutions that made it possible to set up
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) and enabled cooperation with Haiti. I
wish in particular to thank the Council for its most
recent resolution - resolution 1658 (2006).

I should like to convey the gratitude of the
Haitian people to the 43 countries, representing all
continents, that are contributing troops and police to
ensure the country's stability. I take this opportunity to
reiterate once again the condolences and to convey the
sympathy of the Haitian people in connection with
those MINUSTAH soldiers - those soldiers of
peace - who gave their lives in the accomplishment of
their noble mission. I should like in particular to
express my condolences to the Government and the
people of Brazil in connection with the death of the
Brazilian general killed in circumstances we are
familiar with.

This spirit of solidarity on the part of the Haitian
people has a real value, especially in times of tension,
such as when accusations were made that led to an
improvement in the relations between MINUSTAH
forces and the Haitian national police and helped us in
particular to make their joint action more effective.

I must also congratulate in particular the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ambassador
Juan Gabriel Valdes, who, as the civilian Head of
MINUSTAH, was able to establish relations with the
various segments of Haitian society - in the public
and private sectors alike - that have made it possible
truly to achieve the highest level of effectiveness in the
work that MINUSTAH is doing in Haiti.

After two years of a transition that was more
eventful than we would have liked, the time of
reckoning has come. The Council is aware that the
main task facing the Transitional Government was to
organize free, fair, democratic, transparent and, most
important, inclusive elections with the participation of
all Haitian political actors.

I can inform the Council this afternoon that that
mission was accomplished even more successfully than
we had hoped. There were many threats to the holding
of the elections - primarily institutional and
organizational problems, which made people fear, until
the very last minute, that it would be impossible
successfully to hold the elections.

I should like to thank the Security Council, which
last month issued a statement by its then President, the
Ambassador of Tanzania. Indeed, the Council
supported the holding of the elections, which were
scheduled to take place on 7 February at the latest.

There were other problems as well, such as
insecurity, which affected a number of neighbourhoods
in the capital. For a long time, we were afraid that that
insecurity would lead to a very low participation rate,
which, as the Council can imagine, would have
undermined the legitimacy of the process. Fortunately,
however, once again MINUSTAH did a wonderful job,
and, thanks to cooperation with the national police,
under the leadership of Mr. Mario Andresol, we were
able to maintain a level of security that made it
possible for the people to go and vote in large numbers.

Press reports all stated that Haitian people from
every walk of life voted in large numbers on the day of
the elections. Of course, they did so because there was
security, but there was another reason as well: the
Haitian population trusted the Transitional
Government, which, on many occasions, had
reaffirmed its neutrality vis-a-vis the electoral process.
The Haitians knew that their votes would count and
that there would be no attempt on the part of the
Government to manipulate the expression of their will.

Once again, we have to say that the results
exceeded all of our expectations. The participation rate
was greater than 65 per cent of registered voters. As
the Council knows, this percentage is rarely achieved,
even in countries with a long democratic tradition.

But the Haitian people understood - and the
Government told them as well - that the only way that
we could bring about change in Haiti was to vote.
Personally, on many occasions I reminded the Haitian
people that there was only one really effective weapon
to bring about the desired change, and that was their
ballot. The Haitian people showed this in a remarkable
way.

Elections took place smoothly, with a bit of a
delay at the start of the operations. This was due
primarily to a lack of organizational ability, which
exists in all Haitian institutions. Instead of beginning at
6 a.m., the voting really began around 8.30 or 9.00. In
spite of everything Haitian voters proved to be very
patient. Imagine this - voters who left home at 3 am.
and sometimes walked for two hours in order to arrive
at 5 am. at a voting centre that did not open until
9a.m. And still, all you had to do was see the
conviviality in the faces of the voters. There was no
sign of impatience, there was no sign of violence. In
fact, a large number of foreign journalists who were
expecting to see blood and violence in Port-au-Prince
that day wondered, "Well, what did we come to look
for in this country? Nothing is happening" - as if
something only happens when that something is bad.
Well, to the world's great surprise, Haitians showed
their good faith and, above all, their confidence in the
democratic process, and that they had recognized the
need to vote for the candidate of their choice.

The concern for transparency in organizing the
elections almost led to a lack of understanding on the
part of the people. Why? Because using rather
advanced technology for the first time in an election
campaign, the Electoral Council, with the help of the
Organization of American States and MINUSTAH,
decided not to proclaim the results at one time, when
all of the ballots had been gathered. They decided to
provide partial results, and this led to enormous
problems.

How did this happen? Well, the partial results
began in Port-au-Prince, where one of the candidates,
Mr. Rene Preval, was unquestionably the most popular.
In some neighbourhoods in Port-au-Prince he managed
to get almost 80 or 85 per cent of the votes. But as one
moved away from Port-au-Prince and as the votes came
in from the interior, this percentage decreased. Then
too, the Director of the Provisional Electoral Council
had announced that the results would be proclaimed in
three days. Five days went by without the Council
being able to get the final results, and Mr. Preval's
percentage declined every time. This created a
problem. The population thought that the time beyond
the three days was time that the Government wanted to
use in order to steal Mr. Preval's victory.

Despite a message to the nation in which I
pointed out to the people that the Government was
completely neutral and would respect the people's will,
people did not believe this, and things almost turned
sour. But happily the Provisional Electoral Council, in
its wisdom, was able to find a formula that made it
possible to announce the results, by sharing the blank
ballots in a proportional way. Here, perhaps, an
explanation is needed.

Our Constitution demands that all blank ballots
have to be counted, without specifying how they are to
be counted. At some voting stations, there sometimes
were almost 40 per cent of blank ballots. Now, I am
sure that all members know that blank ballots are a
way for a sophisticated electorat to express rejection.
But that is not the case in Haiti. Imagine, as I said a
few minutes ago, these voters who left their homes at
three o'clock in the morning, who sometimes walked
two or three hours and who waited three hours to vote.
One can guess that they did not do that in order to
submit a blank ballot. It was to express their will.

The results of the presidential election were
finally announced, and Mr. Rene Preval, former
President of the Republic, leader of the Lespwa party
and former Prime Minister under Mr. Aristide, was
declared the winner of the elections, with 51.2 per cent
of the votes that were cast. The second candidate, after
him, obtained barely 11 per cent of the votes. I think
that the choice of the Haitian people was clear,
unambiguous and in accordance with a legal
interpretation of the Constitution.

And so, we have a President-elect who will be
sworn in on 29 March, Constitution Day. For us, this is
the way of symbolically showing that Haiti is returning
to a constitutional order. A second round of elections
will take place on 19 March to elect deputies and
senators, and the President of the Republic will be
sworn in before parliament. We hope that there will be
no problems and that the second round will take place
on 19 March, as planned, and that power will be
transferred on 29 March.

I would like to take this opportunity to invite the
Security Council to visit Haiti - just as it did some
months ago. If the Council could only be with us in
Port-au-Prince to celebrate this victory for democracy,
I am sure that it would be an important sign of the
international community's support for the democratic
process. We will need that support, because today the
Haitian people, who wanted to express their devotion
to the principles of democracy, need the support of the
international community to be able to continue to move
in that direction. As Council members know, elections
are only a first step along the long path that can lead us
to stability, to democracy and to economic and social
development.

Democracy, as members know, is not simply the
organization of an election, however free it may be.
Now we need to work to establish and strengthen
democratic institutions. I call for the understanding and
the solidarity of everyone here. We will need to be
accompanied by the international community for some
time yet. The international community should not make
the same mistake that it did 10 years ago by
abandoning Haiti to its fate once an elected
Government was in place. Democracy is taking its first
steps in my country. It needs to be accompanied and
supported in order to grow, to develop and, above all,
to become irreversible.

I welcome the Security Council's decision to
extend the mandate of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) for six months. But I
believe that possible new changes to support
MINUSTAH will have to be considered, in particular
with the new Government. Indeed, resolution 1658
(2006) states that very clearly.

But that does not prevent us from beginning to
think now about a certain number of post-election
activities - particularly the assistance that will need to
be given to the new democratic institutions, such as the
parliament, whose members will need training, the
municipalities and communities. True democracy must
begin with the communities, continue at the level of
the commune, arrive at the Senate and the department
level and finally reach the President of the Republic if
we are to have democratic management of public
affairs.

The United Nations already has a mission in Haiti
that is studying changes to be made to ensure that there
will be a certain number of post-election activities to
bolster the new parliamentarians, newly elected
officials and new mayors. Then we will have to set up
a permanent electoral council and thus make permanent
the gains of the process now under way.

We will also need such assistance in the area of
justice. If there is still a weak spot in Haiti today, it is
surely the judicial system and the need to
professionalize the national police. Those are the two
important points that I would like the Council to think
about a bit as it takes decisions concerning Haiti in the
future: professionalization of the police and reform of
the judicial system.

We in the Transitional Government have tried
very hard to improve the quality of good economic
governance. I hope that the new Government will go in
the same direction, but it will need the support of the
international community in that area as well. From the
information that I learned last night, after the World
Bank meeting on Haiti's future held yesterday in
Washington, I believe that all donors have recognized
the need to establish a programme to support
democracy in Haiti beyond the elections.

Already, in Brussels, at our most recent meeting
with the European Union, we have agreed to extend the
Interim Cooperation Framework beyond the date
initially planned, September 2006, to December 2007.
Here again, I appeal urgently to the international
community to review the mechanisms for international
assistance and cooperation. We must, at all costs, avoid
sprinkling little projects here and there and must come
up with a comprehensive development plan that could
be discussed with the newly elected Government.

I am already convinced that, in Haiti in the
coming months, we will need fewer military personnel
but many more engineers - many more men and
women dedicated to solving the problems of economic
and social development. I wish to reiterate what many
others have said before me: the root cause of the
problems of instability in Haiti does not have only
military solutions. We must search for the deep-rooted
cause of instability in the poverty, unemployment and
social inequality that exist in Haiti.

Because today is surely my last opportunity to
speak before the Security Council, I would like all
members to take note of these points so that, in the
programmes to be established, high priority will be
given to the basic infrastructure that is essential for the
economic and social development of Haiti.

Finally, I simply wish to tell the Council how
pleased I am with the cooperation that the Security
Council has extended to my country over the past two
years - cooperation on the part of all Council
members in support of the actions we have taken. I
hope that it will continue and that the entire
international community will continue to support Haiti.

