Mr. Tom Jimenez (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank
the Chairpersons of the Committees established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and
1540 (2005) for their useful briefings. It is our
understanding that one of the main purposes of those
Committees is to find more effective ways to prevent
and eliminate terrorism. However, we cannot ignore
the fact that the monitoring and combating of that
phenomenon should be directed not only at individual
or "private" terrorism, but also at those States that
shelter terrorists. That should apply also to
international State-led terrorism and its damaging
consequences, which are witnessed daily by the entire
international community.

Thus, we note the superficiality of the oft-
repeated statement that the scourge of terrorism should
be condemned wherever and by or against whomever
committed. That works well as a rule, as long as it is
not distorted, in whole or in part. This requires the
striking of a balance; it requires equality - in other
words, the exercise of concrete justice when that rule is
applied by United Nations bodies and entities.

We are convinced that the United Nations, if it is
to remain a meaningful and ethical institution, must act
in accordance with the general interests of all of its
Members. Its actions should not be determined by the
political agendas of certain Members of the
Organization. For that reason, in the exercise of its
functions, the Counter-Terrorism Committee should not
adopt - that is, it should avoid - policies based on
double standards. Such policies undermine the
credibility and reputation of and confidence in the
Committee by ignoring State terrorism - the
fundamental form of terrorism of the twenty-first
century.

From the standpoint of international law, it is
unacceptable, for example, that shelter should be
provided to a terrorist such as Luis Clemente Posada
Carriles, who, despite the extradition request made by
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on the strict basis
of prevailing international agreements in that area,
remains on United States territory. The Government of
that country has failed to comply with its obligation to
try or extradite him. That is a clear case of the
disregard of resolution 1373 (2001), which, in
paragraphs 2 (c) and 3 (g), prohibits States from
offering safe haven to those who commit terrorist acts.
It also prohibits recognizing political motivations as
grounds for refusing extradition requests for terrorists.

Likewise, it is utterly incomprehensible that the
Reverend Pat Robertson, who is associated with the
highest spheres of the Republican Party of the United
States, has publicly called for the assassination of the
President of our country, Hugo Rafael Chavez Frias.
Yet, the Government of the United States has not taken
any action under resolution 1624 (2005) or under
United States legislation to punish that act as a crime.

If we look back at history, another example of an
act of State terrorism masterminded in Latin America
by the Government of the United States of America
was directed against Nicaragua. It was condemned by
the International Court of Justice; despite that fact, it
remains unpunished. A similar and much more recent
act was the Anglo-United States invasion of Iraq. The
international community has still not responded to that
threat to international peace and security.

Rather, it seems that the well-known resolutions
and conventions on terrorism are being selectively
applied within the Organization. We urge the
Committees - specifically the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, which is responsible for implementing
resolution 1373 (2001) - to carry out a visit to the
United States of America to monitor, in the most
effective manner, the implementation of that
resolution. By doing that, the international community
would demonstrate objectivity and impartiality in
tackling the issue of terrorism.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, in its firm
resolve to fight terrorism, has ratified many
international conventions. At the domestic level, we
have developed a broad set of norms to combat this
phenomenon and have created a national authority
responsible for that area. Thus, our Government has
adopted a diligent, responsible and consistent approach
to this issue. We have also regularly submitted the
relevant reports to the Security Council's Counter-
Terrorism Committee and to the Inter-American
Committee against Terrorism. With the same
conviction and perseverance with which we are
fighting against this scourge, we wish to express our
condemnation and repudiation of the use of terrorism
as a tool to murder in cold blood or intimidate
innocent, weak and helpless people anywhere in the
world, including, of course, actions that some seek to
justify as "collateral" effects, which are ultimately the
main effects: civilian deaths.

We also repudiate and combat as terrorism the
day-to-day system of lies, evasions, half-truths,
disinformation and manipulations of all kinds
promoted and disseminated by national and
international media companies, which, in the service of
imperial domination, conceal and twist information and
prevent the peoples and public opinion from
understanding the truth about those who are working
together, within their rights, exercising self-
determination, to build their own future and to make a
different world possible.

For all those reasons, it is wrong to say, at least in
an arrogant, disrespectful, provocative and, indeed,
irresponsible manner - and we dare to say this with
the President's permission, and not without a certain
humorous tone - how useless it would be to assert
that our country lacks adequate credentials to
contribute effectively to the Security Council's
operations. Our diligent, consistent and responsible
attitude has opened ways and established guidelines of
dignity in the Organization concerning this issue.
Venezuela's position is one of principle, in contrast to
the double standards, discrimination and selectivity
which some are trying and have tried to apply to the
issue of terrorism. It is that perspective, once
Venezuela has been elected a non-permanent member
of the Security Council for the period 2007-2008, that
will shape the quality of the conduct of our
contribution to the work of this body.

I cannot conclude without alluding to a reflection
by Saint Augustine, who told the story of a pirate
captured by Alexander the Great, who asked him,
"How dare you disturb the sea? How dare you disturb
the whole world?" And the pirate replied, "I have a
small boat, so they call me a thief; you have a whole
fleet, so they call you an emperor".

