Mr. Amorim (Brazil): Let me state first of all that on
repeated occasions the Brazilian Government has deeply
deplored the nuclear tests conducted on 11 and 13 May by
India, and on 28 and 30 May by Pakistan. That expression
of concern and consternation was forthright and
unequivocal.

Once more, the Brazilian Government calls upon both
India and Pakistan to sign and ratify the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test- Ban Treaty and to contribute towards the
entry into force of that instrument. Brazil also appeals to
both Governments to exercise restraint, reduce tensions,
promote dialogue on the peaceful settlement of all
bilateral issues and engage in a process of meaningful
cooperation. Such steps would not only bring concrete
benefits to the peoples of the two nations, but also
enhance their status and prestige before the international
community.

When President Fernando Henrique Cardoso asked
for Congressional consent to the text of the Treaty on the
N on-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) on 20 June
1997, he stressed that in today's world, nuclear weapons
represent only "a drain in resources and a source of risk
and uncertainty".

We therefore noted with extreme concern a chain of
events that brought South Asia to the brink of a nuclear-
arms race, endangered the nuclear non-proliferation
regime and made global efforts towards nuclear
disarmament even more difficult. These regrettable events
reinforce the urgency of the adoption by all nuclear
Powers of concrete measures for the complete elimination
of nuclear weapons.

Brazil associates itself with the statements of the
Permanent Mechanism for Consultation and Policy
Coordination - the Rio Group - issued in Panama City,
and with resolution C/E/Res.39 of the Council of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in
Latin America and the Caribbean (OPANAL).
The Rio Group deplored the conduct of nuclear tests
anywhere in the world and the negative effects of any
such tests on international peace, the environment and
human health. The Rio Group also appealed to the
international community to start immediately negotiations
on nuclear disarmament, with a view to setting up
concrete measures for the elimination of nuclear weapons,
thereby strengthening the nuclear non-proliferation
regime.

Brazil took an active part over the last three decades
in the campaign for a comprehensive nuclear-test ban, and
most recently in the initiative that led to the adoption by
the General Assembly of resolution 50/70 A, of 12
December 1995, on "Nuclear testing". That resolution,
besides deploring the nuclear testing then being conducted
by two nuclear Powers, reaffirmed in its second
preambular paragraph that

 

"the cessation of all nuclear testing will contribute to
the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons in all its
aspects, to the process of nuclear disarmament leading
to the ultimate objective of the complete elimination
of nuclear weapons and therefore to the further
enhancement of international peace and security".

This remains our view.

We welcome, in this context, the statement of the
Foreign Ministers of the five nuclear Powers on 4 June
1998, in which they reiterate their determination to fulfil
their commitments relating to nuclear disarmament under
article VI of the NPT. By endorsing in operative paragraph
2 the Joint Communique issued by the Foreign Ministers of
those countries, the draft resolution before us enhances the
legal value of that statement.

Brazil will vote in favour of the draft resolution.

