The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of March, I should like to
take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to His Excellency Mr. Denis Dangue Rewaka,
Permanent Representative of Gabon to the United Nations,
for his service as President of the Security Council for the
month of February 1998. I am sure I speak for all members
of the Security Council in expressing deep appreciation to
Ambassador Dangue Rewaka for the great diplomatic skill
with which he conducted the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation between Iraq and Kuwait

Letter dated 25 February 1998 from the Secretary-
General addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/1998/166)

The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Argentina, Malaysia, Mexico and Pakistan in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the
item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the discussion,
without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Petrella
(Argentina), Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia), Mr. Tello
(Mexico) and Mr. Kama] (Pakistan) took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council Chamber.


The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on the agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them a letter
dated 25 February 1998 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
document S/ 1998/ 166. Members of the Council also have
before them document S/l998/l75, which contains the
text of a draft resolution submitted by Japan and the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.

I now give the floor to the Secretary-General.


