Mr. Yel'chenko (Ukraine): My delegation is
pleased to see Mrs. Sadako Ogata addressing this
Council once again, though sadly, for the last time.

I would like to express our gratitude to the High
Commissioner for her briefing. Her statement reaffirms
our conviction that the refugee problem is complex and
urgent from a humanitarian standpoint and from the
perspective of providing protection and that this
problem can be solved only when Governments are
committed and resources are available.

The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) can carry out its
mandate only if States fulfil their obligations. The
backing of the international community, both in
financial terms and in summoning up the political will,
is essential for UNHCR to be able to address the causes
of mass displacement, to provide international
protection and to contribute to durable solutions to
refugee problems and sustainable peace.

Mrs. Ogata once again highlighted the essential
role of the Security Council in solving the problems
leading to forced human displacements by taking a
clear, strong and united position; by supporting more
decisively, rapidly and substantively the follow-up to
peace agreements; and by promoting the mobilization
of resources for reconstruction and peace-building.

Her briefing was, as usual, thought-provoking
and the proposals she made deserve serious study. For
example, I think that the Security Council should take a
serious look at the proposal with regard to an expanded
concept of peacekeeping, as she put it, addressing in
particular the problem of cross-border flows of
refugees. As Ambassador Greenstock pointed out, the
members of the Security Council mission to West
Africa witnessed for themselves the acuteness of this
problem.

We are convinced that States should work with
UNHCR to adopt and improve the comprehensive
approaches needed to address refugee crises by
creating, inter alia, a stronger relationship between
relevant actors of the humanitarian system, better
linkages between humanitarian assistance and
development cooperation, and an enhanced relationship
between States, civil society and the refugees
themselves.

It is also essential to create a secure environment
for refugee-populated areas and for humanitarian
operations. The tragic incidents last September
involving UNHCR personnel in West Timor and in
Guinea were painful reminders of the serious safety
and security risks with which humanitarian workers
must live. Ensuring the safety of humanitarian
personnel surely falls within the solemn obligations of
the international community, and of the Security
Council in particular. As one of the initiators of the
1994 Convention on the Safety and Security of United
Nations and Associated Personnel, we could not agree
more with the observations in that regard made by
Ambassador Listre of Argentina.

These are all issues for future discussion and
consideration, and for careful work. Now, as we speak,
the Third Committee of the General Assembly is
considering a number of important draft resolution on
the questions of refugees, returnees and displaced
persons, and on the activities of UNHCR. Among them
are decisions on the fiftieth anniversary of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and on World Refugee Day.

My delegation takes this opportunity to commend
the staff of the Office and their implementing partners
for the competent, courageous and dedicated manner in
which over the past 50 years they have discharged their
responsibilities: to provide protection and assistance to
refugees and other persons of concern and to promote
lasting solutions to their problems. In their operations,
people from UNHCR have helped a total of roughly 50
million refugees to salvage and restart their lives, in
some cases paying with their own lives.

Our special sincere gratitude goes to Mrs. Sadako
Ogata for her unrelenting efforts, throughout her tenure
as High Commissioner for Refugees, to promote
innovative humanitarian solutions to refugee problems
in various part of the world and for her inspiring
example in performing her functions. Her tenure
coincided with one of the most turbulent periods in
UNHCR's history and included such major
emergencies as the aftermath of the Gulf war, the
break-up of the former Yugoslavia, the African Great
Lakes crisis, Kosovo, East Timor and many others.

We very much appreciate her courageous efforts,
and we hope that her successor, Professor Ruud
Lubbers, whose nomination we warmly welcome, will
continue the important activities of the High
Commissioner for Refugees in the same effective
manner. I hope that he too will be a frequent guest of
the Security Council.

