Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation)(spoke in Russian):
Today's meeting is in response to the abrupt worsening of
the situation in East Timor. The Government of the
Russian Federation is seriously concerned at the reports
reaching us from there regarding massive upheavals,
attacks on peaceful civilians and the United Nations
Mission and the murders of completely innocent people.
We believe that acts of violence must be immediately
halted and that necessary steps should be taken to ensure
the safety of the population and of international personnel.

Russia, together with the entire international
community, welcomed the conclusion of the Agreements
of 5 May 1999 between Indonesia and Portugal and
between those countries and the United Nations on East
Timor. We note the constructive role played by the
Government of Indonesia in working out these
Agreements which put an end to the conflict that lasted
24 years and provided the basis for the popular
consultation on the future status of that territory.
However, the results of the consultation have caused a
sharp escalation in violence by those opposing
independence for East Timor.

In the view of Russia, assistance should be given to
the Government of Indonesia to help restore proper order
in East Timor and to carry out the results of the

 

consultation. In these circumstances, efforts should be
directed primarily at activating the entire arsenal of political
means available to the United Nations to redress the
situation. Russia is actively trying to assist in this. We hope
that the Government of Indonesia will immediately utilize
all the means at its disposal to halt the disturbances in East
Timor and to comply with its obligations under the 5 May
1999 Agreements.

If the situation develops according to a different
scenario and the question arises regarding the dispatch of
an international force to East Timor, in Russia's View, this
will only be possible if two conditions are met: consent is
received from the Indonesian authorities for the acceptance
of such a force, and there is endorsement by the Security
Council of an appropriate resolution setting forth its
mandate. Russia will be prepared, together with other
members of the Council, to expeditiously consider
additional measures to resolve the East Timor crisis,
including in the light of the report of the Security Council
mission dispatched to Indonesia.

