Mr. Regis (Haiti) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I should like on behalf of the Government of the
Republic of Haiti to thank the Secretary-General for his
excellent report (S/2014/162), submitted to the Security
Council pursuant to resolution 2119 (2013), extending
to 15 October 2014 the mandate of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).

The Haitian Government has examined with great
interest the content of that report, which provides clear,
balanced and objective observations of the political
and security situation in Haiti; the status of economic,
humanitarian and recovery plans; and an update on the
various aspects of MINUSTAH activities through the
primary pillars of its 10-year-old mandate.

The Haitian Government also takes note of the
various options for reconfiguring MINUSTAH,
desired from all sides, that are being considered. On
those issues, I would like to voice the position of the
Haitian Government and, if necessary, provide some
clarification and new information that will complete the
data contained in the report and allow for an evaluation
of recent developments in the situation in Haiti.

First of all, however, let me express the gratitude
of the Haitian Government to all Member States
that, through their generous contribution of human,
financial, technical and material resources since 2004,
have provided unwavering support to MINUSTAH,
thereby accompanying the Haitian people in its march
towards the establishment of the rule of law and a truly
democratic society.

The Haitian Government welcomes the general
observation made by the Secretary-General on the
evolution of the situation in Haiti. Despite the problems,
he writes, progress towards stabilizing the situation in
Haiti since the first initial deployment of MINUSTAH,
in 2004, has been considerable.
We have taken note of the remaining issues and
certain concerns mentioned in the report, for example,
the "slowness of the political process", the "tensions"
between the Parliament and the executive branch and
the "delays in holding elections". In that regard, I wish
to emphasize that the call by the Secretary-General for
elections in 2014 as being essential for the continuity
of democratic institutions was heard and has had deep
resonance among the country's political stakeholders in
particular and in Haitian society in general.

A major turning point has just occurred on the
political scene in Haiti. An important agreement, the
El Rancho agreement, was signed on 14 March by
the main stakeholders in Haitian political life as a
culmination of the process of political dialogue launched
two months ago by President Michel Joseph Martelly,
under the auspices of the President of the Haitian
Episcopal Conference, Cardinal Chibly Langlois.

The horizon has now become much clearer. From
now on, the political obstacles that were holding back the
elections have been removed. The agreement expressly
provides for the establishment of a "Government of
openness, capable of creating the conditions necessary
to achieve free, fair and democratic elections". The
already enacted electoral law should be subject to
some agreed amendments. Other provisions of the
agreement are aimed at governance, the separation of
powers, judicial and institutional guarantees and the
settlement of all contentious issues, all of which were
factors that led to the deadlock. The consensus that
was reached should allow us to make up the time lost
and hold elections in 2014 for the renewal of two thirds
of the Senate, the entire House of Representatives, all
municipalities and other local authorities.

The Head of State has made a solemn commitment:
the Government will fully assume its responsibility
with regard to the electoral process and the national
institutions responsible for carrying it out.

MINUSTAH's support, indirect though it may have
been, in the successful process of political dialogue,
deserves special mention. The Government of Haiti can
only welcome the recommendation of the Secretary-
General that the Mission should undertake "a more
focused and strategic use of available assets in support
of efforts by the national authorities" (S/2014/162, para. 26) with a view to holding the next election.

At a different level, the Government of the
Republic of Haiti expressed its deep appreciation for
the remarkable support that the United Nations and
other international and regional organizations, such
as Caribbean Community, have given to Haiti in
connection with the decision of the Constitutional Court
ofthe Dominican Republic of 23 September 2013 on the
nationality ofmore than 200,000 Dominicans ofHaitian
descent. We reiterate our deepest gratitude. Haiti, like
the international community, awaits the supplementary
law promised by the Dominican Government that will
ensure the rights of citizens who are at risk of finding
themselves stateless.

With respect to security, the report of the
Secretary-General indicates "relatively stable" security
conditions, illustrated by a number of positive elements
that I will now stress. There was a significant downward
trend in the crime rate - the number of homicides
in 2013 was 21 per cent lower than in 2012, thereby
reversing the trend over the past five years in terms of
crime - and the total number of kidnappings in 2013
was 53 per cent lower than in 2012. There is no doubt
that the MINUSTAH forces' operational support for
the Haitian National Police contributed to those results.
The Secretary-General is also right to welcome the
achievements in terms of the professionalization of the
Haitian Police, which has been a priority area in the
consolidation plan.

I am also pleased that the Secretary-General
mentions in his report the progress made and the long
series of measures taken by the Haitian Government
in terms of improving human rights in the country.
Besides the establishment of the Haitian Office of the
Ombudsperson as a national human rights institution
and the operationalization of the interministerial
commission on human rights, the Government of Haiti
signed, on 16 August 2013, the Convention against
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment. It has also acceded to the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights and ratified The Hague Convention on
the Protection of Children and Cooperation in respect
of Intercountry Adoption.

Quite appropriately, the Haitian Government just
completed, on 21 March - three days ago - here in
New York, the signing of the Arms Trade Treaty, that
major legal instrument first open for signature by States
on 3 June 2013. In so doing, the Government remains
deeply concerned about the proliferation and spread of
conventional weapons and ammunition, having always
wished for a treaty that regulates trade in weapons in
order to improve the overall human security by reducing
losses oflife resulting from a strict control of shipments
of arms and ammunition. The Haitian Government
welcomed the conclusion of a legally binding treaty
that takes into account human rights and international
humanitarian law.

The foregoing are all measures that demonstrate the
unequivocal commitment of the Haitian Government in
the promotion of human rights and respect for the shared
democratic values of freedom, political pluralism, the
rule of law and a balance of power as the foundation of
our democracy under construction.

In the same vein, the report of the Secretary-
General notes the progress made on the humanitarian
front, in particular the resettlement of the vast
majority of people displaced by the 2010 earthquake,
largely through return and resettlement programmes
implemented by the Government, the United Nations,
the Canadian Government and non-governmental
partners. The decline in the total number of people
suffering from severe food insecurity fell 1.5 million in
early 2013 to 600,000 by the end of the year.

At the same time, despite the many constraints,
gaps and structural handicaps in infrastructure, the
Haitian economy has begun to recover after decades of
stagnation, with 4.3 per cent growth for 2012-2013. In
addition, despite the limited resources, sustained efforts
have been made by the Government in the social sphere,
including programmes to reduce poverty and to combat
hunger, violence against women, marginalization and
exclusion.

Furthermore, the Government welcomes the fact that
MINUSTAH, under the wise leadership of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Sandra
Honore, has been actively involved in those efforts and
continues to provide highly appreciated support in all
areas covered by the Mission. That support is reflected
not only in terms of security and stability, but also
in areas as varied as technical and logistical support
to the Government to launch various programmes;
interventions aimed at improving the living conditions
of the population; technical support to the Parliament,
the Ministry of Justice, the Ministry of Health and
several other ministries and Government agencies;
support for civil society and various local partners;
and, finally, participation in various humanitarian,
rehabilitation and development activities. We are
encouraged by the United Nations efforts to contribute
directly to the implementation of the 10-year National
Plan for the Elimination of Cholera in Haiti, as the
cholera epidemic continues afflict the population.

Ten years after the creation of MINUSTAH, it is
widely recognized that undeniable successes have
been achieved in the priority areas assigned to the
Mission. Those successes, however, do not obscure the
magnitude of the tasks that remain or the challenges
still facing Haiti. For example, the Secretary-General's
report highlights, in its security assessment, that
further progress is needed before the Haitian National
Police is able to provide the same level of security as
MINUSTAH. That is only one of the elements that
illustrate the need for a redefinition of the objectives,
nature and components of the Mission.

The time has thus come for a calm review of
MINUSTAH's work over the past decade. As we
approach the end ofthe mandate entrusted to the Mission
by the Security Council, the time seems particularly
ripe for the necessary examination and re-evaluation, of
which the principles are already accepted. For its part,
the Haitian Government is ready to participate in such
an exercise on the basis of the preliminary elements for
reflection that it has submitted to the Security Council
and in the light of the five reconfiguration options
presented by the Secretary-General in his report.

Any reconfiguration of the Mission should, in
the opinion of the Government, take into account the
requirements of the times, which are no longer those
of 2004, and reflect the particular needs of Haiti at
this stage in its development. As Haiti has reached the
milestone of a democratic transition, it is important to
identify its new priorities and the means necessary to
sustainably consolidate the indivisible foundations of
democracy, the rule of law, security and economic and
social development. Haitian national institutions, of
course, must fully shoulder their responsibilities and
their role in that new configuration.

In that vein, the Government will carefully consider
the proposals advanced and give its full support to
the Security Council and the Secretariat with a view
to consolidating the gains made over the past decade,
pursuing a renewed and wider vision of the objectives
and scope of MINUSTAH, and looking forward to
the new momentum expected for 2016. I thank the
Secretary-General for his report, which will certainly
inspire and guide the work of the Security Council in
the coming months, and I reiterate the determination
of the Haitian Government to continue to work with
the Council for the full realization of the mandate of
MINUSTAH.

