The Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict - an informal network of 45 Member States representing the five regional groups of the United Nations - expresses its serious concern over the multifaceted impacts of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic on children, especially those affected by armed conflict. Mitigation measures to curtail the spread of the virus may also inadvertently and negatively impact children. We strongly encourage the protection of children in the response to the pandemic, including through the continuity of child-centred services and rapid, safe and unimpeded humanitarian access to those in need, including children in detention. The Group of Friends reiterates our full support for the Secretary-General's appeal of 23 March for a global ceasefire and urges the Security Council to swiftly endorse the appeal. The Group of Friends is appalled by the scale and scope of the over 25,000 grave violations committed against children, as outlined in the Secretary-General's report (S/2020/525). We are particularly alarmed by the increase in the verified number of attacks against schools and hospitals, as well as the shocking increase in verified incidents of denial of humanitarian access for children. We are further alarmed by the persistence of recruitment and use of children as soldiers and of their killing, maiming and abduction. Moreover, sexual violence, which disproportionately impacts girls, continues to be vastly underreported overall. We urge all parties to armed conflict to fully comply with their obligations under international humanitarian, human rights and refugee law and to put in place concrete and effective protection measures for children in armed conflict. In that regard, we welcome progress in the signing and implementation of action plans by parties to conflict and the engagement of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, the United Nations and other actors in the field. We encourage full implementation of all action plans and commitments. Further, we reiterate that the signing of an action plan should not form the basis for delisting in the Secretary- General's report. The Group of Friends welcomes the release of over 13,200 children from armed forces and armed groups in 2019 and the work of the United Nations Children's Fund, the Global Coalition for Reintegration of Child Soldiers and other actors in promoting effective services for those children. We also welcome ongoing efforts associated with the ACT to Protect campaign. In that connection, the Group of Friends encourages all Member States to strengthen the protection of children in armed conflict, including by acceding to the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict, particularly as we mark its twentieth anniversary, and by considering endorsing and implementing practical protection tools, notably the Safe Schools Declaration, the Principles and Guidelines on Children Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups, the Paris Commitments to protect children from unlawful recruitment or use by armed forces or armed groups and the Vancouver Principles. This year marks the fifteenth anniversary of resolution 1612 (2005). The United Nations-led monitoring and reporting mechanism and the Security Council's Working Group on Children in Armed Conflict continue to be essential tools for the protection of children affected by armed conflict. The Group of Friends reiterates the importance it attaches to the independence, impartiality and credibility of the monitoring and reporting mechanism. It is crucial that the mechanism continue to be able to document grave violations against children impartially and objectively, based on the facts on the ground. We welcome the increased regularity of reporting by the Secretary-General to the Working Group, as well as the associated conclusions reached by the Working Group. We extend our thanks to Belgium in its capacity as Chair for ensuring that the Working Group continues to deliver on its mandate. The Group of Friends encourages the full implementation of Working Group conclusions, as well as systematic follow-up in that regard. Furthermore, we emphasize the importance of mainstreaming concerns facing children affected by armed conflict throughout the work of the Council and encourage more regular briefings to the Council by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General. The protection of children should be an important aspect of any comprehensive strategy to resolve conflict and sustain peace. The Group of Friends welcomes the practical guidance for mediators to protect children in situations of armed conflict. We encourage the broadest possible dissemination of the guidance and its full use in peace and mediation processes. The Group of Friends also strongly supports the child protection mandate in United Nations peace operations. We welcome the manual for child protection staff in un peace operations in particular. The Security Council and Member States should continue to support the implementation of child protection mandates in United Nations peace operations, including through the deployment of child protection teams and advisers. We call for the adequate resourcing of these capabilities, including in the context of transition and downsizing. Consolidation efforts that would undermine the ability of the United Nations to deliver on the child protection mandates should be avoided. Combating impunity and ensuring accountability, including through international justice mechanisms, such as the International Criminal Court, are key to preventing grave violations against children. We call for dedicated child rights expertise within investigative and accountability mechanisms. True justice also involves reparations and mental health and psychosocial support for survivors of grave violations, whose trauma may endure for years. The Group of Friends also welcomes the decision of the General Assembly to establish 9 September as the International Day to Protect Education from Attack. Finally, the Group of Friends recognizes the efforts of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General to ensure the timely release of the annual reports of the Secretary-General. We encourage the Secretary-General to ensure that these reports are released to Member States earlier and in advance of scheduled Security Council open debates.
