Mr. Al-Attiyah (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): We were
distraught today to find out that the bombing campaign
in the countryside of Horns and Hama - including
the village of Restan - resulted in 40 deaths and 276
wounded, most of whom were women and children,
according to preliminary reports. In that connection,
we remain concerned and condemn that unjustified
bombing, and we call upon States involved militarily
to be on the side of the people of Syria, who are pitted
against a regime turned criminal. In its criminal actions,
the regime has gone beyond the atrocities committed by
the terrorist groups in Syria.

The United Nations efforts to maintain peace and
security in the world are now of the utmost importance.
While they have resulted in success in some instances,
it is regrettable that, in some regions, the peace and
security operations of the United Nations have either
arrived too late or have been ineffectual. It is also
unfortunate that every time the suffering of the people
caused by the conflict increases, so does the impotence
of the United Nations. If we look into the problems of
peace and security in the Middle East and in the world,
we must admit that there are many weaknesses and
vulnerabilities within institutional legal systems, and
especially within the Security Council. If we look at
our failures in the Middle East - in Palestine or in
Syria, for example - we find that we are entirely
powerless, given the gap between the magnitude of
the Violations committed and the weak stance taken
by the international community. Double standards
have engendered a growing frustration and feelings of
doubt regarding the international community's sense of
justice, which leads us back to reiterate the importance
of reforming the United Nations, starting with the
Security Council.

The Arab-Israeli conflict has gone on for too long.
It has also affected peace and security in the world. It
has had an extremely negative impact on the region
and the entire world. The tragic consequences of the
conflict will continue as long as a comprehensive
and just resolution is not found. We are quite familiar
with the obstacles, which come from the side of Israel.
Clearly, a just solution can be found if we defer to the
resolutions pertaining to the formation ofa Palestinian
State within the 1967 borders, with the Holy City of
Jerusalem as its capital and in line with the two-
State solution, which has received the blessing of the
international community.

The inability of the Security Council to establish a
just and lasting peace in the Middle East, especially in
the context of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, represents
a threat to the principles of the peaceful resolution of
conflicts. It also gives extremists pretexts to mobilize,
as they take advantage of injustice and conflict. The
Security Council therefore must focus more closely on
the Palestinian question, as it has on other conflicts
in the region, by taking the measures necessary to
relaunch the political process in order to achieve peace
and security and put an end to the occupation.

It is no longer acceptable, no matter what pretext is
invoked, not to help the people of Syria and help them
emerge from their suffering, in a situation that has gone
out of control. All red lines have been crossed, without
any moral or principled inhibitions or consideration
for humanitarian or international law. The impotence
of the international community in the face of the war
crimes and genocide committed by the regime and the
humanitarian crimes committed in Syria show that
the international system has crumbled and highlight
the absence of an international conscience. That
compromises the collective security system.

We can also ask, how can we shoulder our
collective responsibility to the people of Syria, who, in
an inhuman spectacle, are being subjected to all forms
of persecution and massacres? Faced with this painful
situation, the international community must take all
dissuasive measures possible in order to put an end to
this tragedy, which has lasted for far too long. The time
has come for the world to say "enough" to the Syrian
regime.

The phenomenon of terrorism poses a threat to
peace and security in many regions of the world. We all
are aware of the root causes of this phenomenon, which
include religious exclusion, social marginalization,
injustice, lack of development, absolutism, the
crumbling of the international security system and
the lack of effective methods for resolving conflicts
peacefully. We must combat all of the causes of this
phenomenon. We need policies that will put an end
to all manifestations of terrorism by drawing a clear
distinction between terrorism and peoples and their
right to resist and put an end to occupation.

Dealing with the dangerous aftermath in Iraq,
including the proliferation of terrorist acts, requires the
participation of all segments of the Iraqi population.
The most effective way to meet these challenges is to
launch a comprehensive national dialogue leading to
reconciliation among all of the different groups in Iraq;
that would also strike a blow against terrorism. That
will be possible only if there is security and stability in
Iraqi society.
In Libya, since the outbreak of the crisis, we have
stressed that it is crucial to start a comprehensive
dialogue that would create a national unity Government
that would restore peace and stability, one that would
have international assistance in facing terrorism. We
commend the role of the United Nations, represented by
the Special Envoy, who has been quite efficient in his
efforts towards reconciliation. Let us hope that those
efforts will be successful and will re-establish stability.

The revolt of various factions against the legitimate
regime in Yemen and their domination of legitimate
State institutions have led to an environment conducive
to terrorism. That has led in turn to a regional and
international response based on United Nations
resolutions and international law. The only way of
putting an end to the conflict in Yemen is to help the
legitimate Government; the initiative of the Gulf States
is the result of the National Dialogue Conference and is
fully in line with resolution 2216 (2015).

I wish the Council every success in this meeting.

