The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Albania and Italy, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kulla (Albania)
and Mr. Fulci (Italy) took seats at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations, having
before it the request contained in the letter dated 13 March
1997 from the Permanent Representative of Albania to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council, document S/1997/215, and also the request
contained in the letter dated 12 March 1997 from the
Permanent Representative of Italy to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
document S/1997/214.

Following consultations among the members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council, having considered the
letter of 13 March 1997 to the President of the
Council from the Permanent Representative of the
Republic of Albania (S/ 1997/215) and the letter of
12 March 1997 to the President of the Council from
the Permanent Representative of Italy (S/1997/214),
expresses its deep concern about the deteriorating
situation in Albania. It urges all concerned to refrain
from hostilities and acts of violence and to cooperate
with diplomatic efforts to reach a peaceful solution
to the crisis.

"The Security Council calls upon the parties
involved to continue the political dialogue and to
live up to the commitments undertaken on 9 March
1997 in Tirana. It urges all political forces to work
together to lower tension and facilitate the
stabilization of the country.

"The Security Council calls upon the parties
not to impede the provision of humanitarian
assistance to the civilian population and, in this
context, recalls the importance of keeping open all
means of communication in the country. It
encourages Member States and international
organizations to help with the provision of
humanitarian assistance.

"The Security Council stresses the importance
of regional stability and fully supports the diplomatic
efforts of the international community, in particular
those of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and the European Union, to
find a peaceful solution to the crisis.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to keep the Council informed of

developments in the situation in Albania.

"The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1997/14.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The meeting rose at 8.40 p.m.

