Mr. Wittig (Germany): I will be brief. Most of
the things I want to say have been said before, so I will
focus on a very few points.

Germany warmly welcomes the peaceful voting
during the referendum and joins others in
congratulating the parties to the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA) and, above all, the people
everywhere in the Sudan. We are encouraged by the
responsible behaviour of the Government in Khartoum
over recent weeks. Again, we extend our gratitude to
the Southern Sudan Referendum Commission and its
Bureau. We commend the United Nations Mission in
the Sudan and Special Representative Menkerios for
their crucial contribution, as well as the Panel under
President Mkapa.

After the pronouncement of the official results,
all parties in the Sudan and the international
community now need to focus on the future, the
consolidation of peace, good relations and coexistence
between the North and the South, and capacity-
building for a wholly new State. In this enormous
endeavour, all parties need to continue to cooperate in
good faith.

The forthcoming creation of an independent State
in South Sudan will redraw the political and economic
landscape of Africa. At the same time, we see the
opportunity for the development of peaceful
neighbourly relations. Many serious challenges remain.
In particular, there is a need for a durable solution to
the question of Abyei. We urgently call upon the
parties to the Comprehensive Peace Agreement to
complete the popular consultations in South Kordofan
and Blue Nile and to reach an agreement on Abyei. The
other remaining post-referendum issues - such as
citizenship, the rights of northerners in the South and
of southerners in the North, wealth sharing, border
demarcation and security arrangements - must be
addressed without further delay.

The Council's decisions have been crucial for the
peaceful referendum process. But the Security Council
will have to continue to assume responsibility and
extend its support to institution-building in the soon-to-
be new independent State in South Sudan. Germany
stands ready to contribute.

Finally, we must not divert our attention from the
situation in Darfur. We are very concerned about the
continuing violence in the region and the displacement
of thousands of people. We urge the Government of the
Sudan and all groups in Darfur to provide for the safety
and security of the civilian population and to ensure
unhindered access for the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and for
humanitarian aid.

We are encouraged to hear that the peace talks in
Doha are about to gain new momentum. We continue to
urge all parties to the peace talks to conclude a
comprehensive ceasefire and agreements on all other
outstanding issues. The people of Darfur deserve peace
and they deserve it right now.
