Mr. Touray (Sierra Leone): Let me start by
registering my delegation's sincere appreciation, Sir, for
your having organized this debate, which in our View is
a clear manifestation of the Council's commitment to
monitoring and sustaining the momentum of the
peacebuilding efforts in Sierra Leone. My warmest
felicitations go to you on your assumption of the
presidency for the month of February 2009. It is a
pleasant coincidence to see you directing the affairs of
the Council on a topic of this nature, given that you
were the immediate outgoing Chair of the
Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission. I assure you of my delegation's fullest
support and cooperation during your tenure.

I would like to pay special tribute to the
Permanent Representative of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands to the United Nations, Ambassador Frank
Majoor, and his dedicated team for their untiring
efforts and sustained commitment to implementing the
Sierra Leone Peacebuilding Cooperation Framework,
particularly, during the two challenging formative
years of the Peacebuilding Commission's engagement
with Sierra Leone.

My appreciation also goes to the Secretary-
General for his very comprehensive report and
observations on the implementation of the mandate of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL), contained in document
S/2009/59.

I also wish to thank the Executive Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Michael von der
Schulenburg, for the statement he has just delivered
and to re-echo his call for a steady hand, patience and
the need to avoid an undue rush, as peacebuilding
needs to be nurtured and needs time. Sierra Leone is
entering its eighth year of peace and stability and, by
any yardstick, has been a success story of United
Nations peacebuilding efforts. Despite that, there are
still serious challenges to grapple with. We cannot
afford to sacrifice the gains we have scored over the
last eight years of peace in Sierra Leone out of inertia
and self-satisfaction.

The adoption of Security Council resolution 1829
(2008) establishing UNIPSIL was another significant
step in the United Nations peacebuilding engagement
in Sierra Leone. UNIPSIL is effectively the fourth-
generation phase of United Nations presence in Sierra
Leone, which is a clear manifestation of the
Government's cooperation and determination to make
meaningful change and move the country forward from
its dark recent past.

The second biannual review of progress in the
implementation of the Cooperation Framework was
conducted on 15 December 2008, a few months after
the operationalization of the integrated peacebuilding
mission, UNIPSIL, in October. That review
acknowledged the strides Sierra Leone has made since
the end of the war in 2002. We have witnessed two
highly acclaimed democratic electoral processes at both
the national and local government levels, unparalleled
in any post-conflict setting. Except for the all
important issue of reparations, other key aspects of the
Truth and Reconciliation Commission recommendations
are being implemented. The Human Rights
Commission is fully operational in all four provincial
headquarters, and its first report has been presented to
parliament for consideration. The most important phase
of the constitutional review process, namely,
identifying the pitfalls and shortcomings of the 1991
constitution, has been completed, and steps are under
way for the next stage of national consultation and
possible amendments. However, we must not forget that
addressing the political concerns of the populace and
their basic socio-economic needs are inextricably
linked and need to go hand in hand.

A number of gender-related laws have been
enacted to address problems of gender-based Violence
and exclusions or disparities based on gender. The
judiciary, police and military have all undergone
significant reforms, which are currently paying
beneficial dividends. Security and stability in the
country have improved considerably. The climate is
now conducive to investment, both in terms of the
security situation and the improved conditions for
doing business in the country. Stringent laws have been
enacted to tackle corruption and the emerging threat of
narcotics and drug trafficking in the subregion. More
importantly, in addition to the important prosecutorial
independence of the Anti-Corruption Commission, the
Commission has demonstrated sufficient commitment
and determination in the ongoing implementation of
the National Anti-Corruption Strategy.

We have not been alone in the process. Without
partnership with the United Nations, our multilateral
and bilateral partners, including the international
financial institutions, such progress would not have
been achieved.

Despite the progress made thus far, the challenges
facing the Government are daunting. Though internal
revenue generation is improving, the Government's
capacity to address the commitments contained in the
Framework, including tackling other programmes
aimed at achieving internationally agreed development
goals and the Millennium Development Goals, remains
grossly inadequate. The much-needed budget support
to Government is waning. Such a situation exacerbates
the risk of heightening the threats associated with
increasing youth unemployment and the new wave of
drug trafficking in the subregion.

With the recent developments in the neighbouring
sister countries and the members of the Mano River
Union, security in the subregion is a cause for concern.
More than ever, Sierra Leone, like other members of
the Union, requires greater international attention if the
Mano River basin is to attain peace, security and
stability, as well as meaningful growth and
development. For our part, His Excellency President
Ernest Bai Koroma has, through his Agenda for
Change, clearly and succinctly articulated his strategic
vision for turning the country around. Furthermore, the
Government, together with the Peacebuilding
Commission, also endorses the supporting role of
UNIPSIL on the ground and of the Joint Vision of the
United Nations Family for Sierra Leone, formulated
under the leadership of the Executive Representative of
the Secretary-General.

My delegation urges the Peacebuilding
Commission and all international and bilateral partners,
including our traditional and non-traditional donors, to
rally support behind the Agenda for Change and the
United Nations Joint Vision. The Government is fully
cognizant of the fact that the responsibility for
consolidating the peace and bailing our people out of
poverty lies primarily with it. Indeed, it is committed
to the full implementation of the Peacebuilding
Cooperation Framework as a necessary requirement for
the promotion of peace, stability and sustainable
development in the country, as well as the attainment

of the internationally agreed development goals,
including the Millennium Development Goals.

The biannual review of the Peacebuilding
Commission in December 2008 reaffirmed the need for
all parties - the Government of Sierra Leone, the
Peacebuilding Commission, the United Nations,
bilateral and multilateral partners and other relevant
stakeholders - to remain focused and as dedicated as
ever and to be promptly forthcoming in addressing
their respective commitments.

I should like to conclude by noting that, building
on the meaningful gains already achieved, it is the
avowed pledge of the Government of Sierra Leone to
continue to work in collaboration with all our
development partners to sustain the momentum by
moving forward the Agenda for Change, together with
the Joint Vision of the United Nations Family. My
Government supports the holding of the proposed
special session of the Peacebuilding Commission,
either in Freetown or in New York, in order to rally
international support for the Agenda for Change and
the United Nations Joint Vision.

