Mr. Thoresson: I would like to begin by expressing
my deepest condolences to the families and friends of
all those who have perished in the Ebola epidemic. I
would like to commend the Government of Liberia and
all Liberians for their resilience and determination, and
I pay tribute to the many brave health-care workers
engaged in the medical response. I would also like to
express my appreciation for the support provided by
the United Nations and other international partners.
While there seem to be some encouraging signs, it is
far too early for the international community to lower
its guard. Continued attention and massive efforts are
still needed.

On 3 November, the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) country configurations of Guinea, Sierra Leone
and Liberia held a second joint meeting on the Ebola
crisis. The joint format of the meetings underlines the
importance of the regional dimension of the crisis,
and the need for continued close regional cooperation.
Lessons should be drawn from the regional approach
in the international response to Ebola so that we may
also enhance regional coordination in our support for
peacebuilding.

At that joint meeting, we identified three
priority areas for the PBC. The first is delivering
on commitments. We should urge that the generous
commitments and pledges made to the global Ebola
response be translated into action on the ground as
quickly as possible, and that a strong international
presence remain to facilitate effective delivery of that
support.

Secondly, we should address immediate
peacebuilding needs. A comprehensive approach
that meets the broader security, developmental and
governance challenges alongside the medical public-
health response is critical. One example, which we
highlighted previously in our statement to the Council
in September (see S/PV.7260), is the time-dependent
urgency of addressing the capability and mobility
gaps of the Liberia National Police. Efforts to ensure
the rule of law and the protection of civilians, as well
as confidence-building measures aimed at preventing
further social unrest, should also be encouraged and
supported.

Thirdly, we should prepare for the medium term.
We must begin planning for enhanced and accelerated
peacebuilding support in the immediate aftermath of
the crisis now, not least because of the severe impact
the epidemic has had on the economy, which will
have consequences for Liberia's ability to implement
its commitments. The PBC will therefore request the
Secretary-General to make a comprehensive assessment
of Ebola's impact on peacebuilding priorities, including
with recommendations for focused and effective
international support.

Considering the importance of the economic
dimension to this crisis, we had invited senior
representatives from the World Bank to our meeting
last week to provide an assessment of the economic
impact. According to the World Bank, the two-year
regional financial impact could reach $32.6 billion
by the end of 2015. The World Bank also indicated
that Liberia's revised 2014-2015 budget has an unmet
financing gap of more than half of the budget deficit
projected at over $300 million. A recent assessment by
the United Nations Development Programme points to
the negative impact on domestic revenue generation
and increased pressures on State expenditures.

As the Permanent Representative of Liberia,
Ambassador Kamara, stated at our meeting last week,
tensions will be rising and public confidence will be
eroding as the gaps between the expectations of the
people and the capacity of the Government to deliver
grow wider. Social cohesion in Liberian society is being
tested by this crisis, with increasing risks for disorder
and political instability. As partners, we should help
counter these risks, including by supporting efforts
to improve State-society relations. Full transparency
in the implementation of our support will be one
important factor to help restore public confidence. As
we have stated before, it is the Ebola virus that should
be isolated, not the countries affected. Strengthening
international and regional cooperation will continue
to be vital to ease the burden of the crisis. We must
help create the necessary conditions and advocate for
businesses to return to Liberia. Suspended flights to
Liberia should resume to facilitate this cooperation.

Due to the increasing risks for instability and the
continued need for effective delivery of support, there
is great need to maintain strong international presence
in Liberia. The decision to extend the mandate of the
UnitedNations MissioninLiberiais thereforewelcomed.
We must also ensure that no gaps are left when the
drawdown of the Mission eventually resumes, not least
in View of the upcoming presidential and parliamentary
elections. A new approach to international development

cooperation may be needed to ensure that support is
effective and contributing to sustainable results.

The PBC will continue to apply available
peacebuilding instruments flexibly, adapting to evolving
needs. The Statement of Mutual Commitments, with
targets on strengthening the rule of law, supporting
security sector reform and promoting national
reconciliation, will have to be reviewed and updated.
The Peacebuilding Fund-supported projects currently
being implemented in Liberia should also be calibrated
and tailored to meet the needs in the current situation.
The requested assessment from the Secretary-General
on the impact of Ebola on peacebuilding will in this
regard be a critical input to our continued efforts.

