The President (spoke in Spanish): Before we begin
our consideration of the topic of today's open debate,
I would like to take a few minutes to commemorate a
very important date, namely, the seventieth anniversary
of the first meeting of the Security Council, which was
held on 17 January 1946.

Days after the holding of the first meeting of the
General Assembly, on 11 January 1946, the Security
Council met to elect its first non-permanent members.
As a result of those elections, Australia, Brazil, Egypt,
Mexico, the Netherlands and Poland joined the five
permanent members at the Council meeting a week
later. At that historic meeting it was decided that the
presidency of the Security Council would rotate each
month among the members in alphabetical order.
Therefore, Australia became the first country to assume
the presidency of the Council.

In 1946, this body was composed of 11 members,
which represented 22 per cent of the Organization's
membership. Uruguay was part of the Security Council
for the first time in 1965. It has returned this year to be
a member of this organ after a 51 absence. Today, the
Security Council's 15 members represent 8 per cent of
the 193 States Members of the United Nations.

What is truly important today is to ask ourselves
to what extent, throughout its 70 years of existence, the
Security Council has fulfilled its primary responsibility
of maintaining international peace and security, as set
forth in the Charter of the United Nations. Throughout its
history the Council has mounted some 70 peacekeeping
operations, the vast majority of which successfully
implemented their mandates. In other situations, the
Council has used measures within its scope, pursuant
to Chapters VI and VII of the Charter, to put a halt to
conflicts. However, situations of grave conflict, which
continue to be on the Council's agenda, testify to the
work that remains to be done for the maintenance of
international peace and security.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Report of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2015/453)
Letter dated 6 January 2016 from the

Permanent Representative of Uruguay
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2016/22)

The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Albania,
Armenia, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bangladesh, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile,
Croatia, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iraq, the Islamic Republic
of Iran, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait,
Latvia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Maldives, Mexico, Montenegro, Morocco, the
Netherlands, Nigeria, Pakistan, Paraguay, Peru, Poland,
Qatar, the Republic of Korea, Romania, Rwanda, Saudi
Arabia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Sweden,
Switzerland, the Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand and
Turkey to participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Christine
Beerli, Vice-President of the International Committee
of the Red Cross, and Ms. Eveline Rooijmans, Senior
Humanitarian Policy Advisor at Oxfam.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the
following to participate in this meeting: Mr. Joao Vale
de Almeida, Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations, and Mr. Tete Antonio,
Permanent Observer of the African Union to the United
Nations.

I also propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in this meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in that regard.

I further propose that the Council invite the
Permanent Observer of the Observer State of the Holy
See to the United Nations to participate in this meeting,
in accordance with the provisional rules of procedure
and the previous practice in that regard.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2015/453, which conains the report of
the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.

I also wish to draw the attention of Council
members to document S/2016/22, which contains the
text of a letter dated 6 January 2016 from the Permanent
Representative of Uruguay to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept note on the item under consideration.

I warmly welcome Deputy Secretary-General Jan
Eliasson, to whom I now give the floor.


