Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): First of all, allow me to express my gratitude to the Chinese delegation for the initiative to convene a Security Council debate on the urgent issue of countering terrorism and extremism in Africa. We would like to thank today's briefers, Ms. DiCarlo, Ms. Fatima Mohammed and Mr. Abdoulaye Dieye, for their interventions. We align ourselves with presidential statement S/PRST/2020/5, which was _ promptly prepared by our Chinese colleagues. Along with the other Council members, we reaffirm our solidarity with the Governments of the countries of the Sahel, the Lake Chad basin and the Horn of Africa in their legitimate efforts to combat the threat of terrorism. At the same time, we would like to emphasize that the challenges and security threats that we are discussing today are unfortunately becoming just as relevant to the entire African continent. I would like to take this opportunity to express our sincere condolences to the families and friends of the civilians and military and law enforcement personnel of African countries whose lives were taken in the wave of violence and terrorism that has swept across the continent in recent months. The devastating impact of extremism and terrorism is today particularly evident in West Africa, where there has been a significant increase in the number of terrorist crimes in just a few years. The situation is complicated by a number of radical forces joining the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), its transformation into an extensive underground terrorist network and the establishment of new regional affiliates. In that regard, the presidential statement adopted today highlights the need for comprehensive implementation of Security Council sanctions against ISIL cells in West Africa, the Greater Sahara and Libya. Following the military defeat of ISIL in Syria and Iraq, the flow of foreign terrorist fighters into Africa has increased. Disguising themselves as migrants and refugees, they carry out sabotage and recruitment activities, spreading extremist and terrorist ideology among young people and vulnerable groups. Our Western colleagues regularly promote numerous technical assistance projects for African countries based on the politicized concept of preventing violent extremism. In that regard, we would like to note a few points. First, any technical assistance in that area should be provided only at the request of the States concerned. It should also be borne in mind that not all States have prevention mechanisms in which non-State actors play a leading role. Civil society should clearly be involved in preventing extremism and terrorism. For example, the clergy, opinion leaders, the media, educational institutions and sports organizations make a significant contribution to that task. However, all that will be meaningless if Government agencies do not coordinate such efforts, acknowledging their primary responsibility for maintaining public safety. I will not focus in detail on Russian approaches to preventing the spread of terrorist ideology, since that topic will be the subject of a separate open briefing, organized jointly with the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism, on 16 March. Secondly, in assessing the external assistance needs of States in the region, priority should be given to implementing universal counter-terrorism conventions and protocols and Security Council resolutions, as well as regional instruments. We note the African Union's own efforts in that context. In addition, we call on States of the region to look more closely at the innovative Shanghai Convention on Combating Terrorism, Separatism and Extremism of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, which is open to accession by all interested parties. Thirdly, in line with the presidential statement adopted today, States and the relevant international organizations should take a balanced approach to analysing conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism, paying equal attention to internal and external factors. Clearly, resolving socioeconomic problems, including reducing unemployment, wouldhelp to eradicate the breeding ground for terrorism. At the same time, as I have already noted and as the presidential statement rightly states, the current rise in terrorism is largely due to the phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters and the expansion of major terrorist groups, that is, external reasons. In fact, there are many more such factors. In the past, certain countries did not take into account that attempts to establish a system of "managed chaos" would inevitably be followed by a loss of control over the situation. The destruction of statehood in Libya determined the nature of the current terrorist threat in Africa. It is evident that it is difficult to talk about progress in the fight against terrorism in the region without progress in the reconstruction of that country. The Libyan context can also not be overlooked with regard to the priority task of combating the flow of arms to terrorists, in accordance with the document adopted today. In his most recent report on small arms and light weapons (S/2019/1011), the Secretary-General expressed serious concern about the enormous quantity of weapons from Libyan stockpiles that illegally enter the countries of the Sahel and beyond. In other words, that flow has not decreased even nine years since the beginning of the civil war in Libya. Unfortunately, not all countries are equally concerned about that problem. In conclusion, I would like to note that Russia is closely monitoring developments in key regions of Africa. We already provide appropriate military and technical assistance to a number of countries and training to military and police personnel. We call on the international community to pool its efforts in providing technical assistance to African countries and to focus it on the truly important aspects of combating extremism and terrorism.
