Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
would like to begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for
taking the necessary steps to ensure that the situation
in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea could
be formally placed on the Council's agenda and this
briefing meeting held at the request of 10 members
of the Council, including my country, Luxembourg. I
thank Mr. Taye-Brook Zerihoun, Assistant Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, and Mr. Ivan Simonovic',
Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights, for their
briefings on the situation in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea and its implications for international
peace and security.

In the past decade, the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea has worked methodically to flout international
law, undermine the nuclear non-proliferation regime
and challenge the Security Council's decisions. Since
2006, in defiance of its international obligations, the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea has carried
out various nuclear and missile tests. It has refused to
engage in constructive dialogue with the international
community and continues to issue regular threats of
nuclear strikes. Such an attitude aggravates the risks
of conflict and is a threat to peace and international
security, which no one can deny.

But there is more, and it is just as serious. For
several decades, the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea has been violating its people's most basic rights
on an unequalled scale. That is what the devastating
report (S/2014/276, annex), published on 7 February
by the commission established by the United Nations
Human Rights Council to investigate human rights in
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, documents
methodically, rigorously and transparently.

I will not list the macabre inventory ofthe atrocities

committed in North Korea. They make one sick. I would,
however, like to make three points that emerge from
the commission of inquiry's detailed report. The first
is that the Commission finds a series of violations that
meet the criteria established by international law and
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
for the existence of crimes against humanity. Secondly,
the perpetrators of those crimes enjoy total impunity,
since their actions are conducted pursuant to policies
established at the highest level of the State. Thirdly,
the violations affect the most vulnerable parts of the
population indiscriminately - first of all women, who
are subject to systematic discrimination and intolerable
abuse, often of a sexual nature, and then children, who
are the first victims of famine and who have not been
spared the hell ofpolitical prison camps.

In that regard, I would like to cite the testimony of
Mr. Shin Dong-hyuk, an escapee from Political Prison
Camp No. 14. His testimony concerns a small 7-year-
old girl who had the audacity to pick up grains of cereal
to quash her hunger. I will quote from the testimony
found in in the detailed conclusions of the commission
of inquiry:

"[A]bout twice a week, [the guards] would choose
one kid and do the inspection to see if this person
is stealing something or hiding something, but she
was so unlucky that she was chosen as the kid to
be inspected. And, in her pocket there were some
grains and then the guard asked where she got it.
Then, she told the guard that she picked them up on
the street. There was a wooden stick that the guards
used. And, the guard says that's not the way I taught
you, so you went against my teaching. So, she was
beaten so badly that she fainted, and we had to take
her to her mom. When she didn't come to school the
next day, we learned that she had died." (A/HRC/25/ CRPJ, para.772)

We cannot separate the bellicose posture of
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea on the
international front from the appalling human-rights
situation that reigns within the country at the instigation
of the leaders of the North Korean regime. Respect for
human rights is a hallmark of a stable society, willing
to live in peace with its neighbours. Inhumane living
conditions imposed on large sectors of the population of
North Korea represent, over time, a risk to the stability
of the country, and based on that, the entire region.

The Security Council must therefore consider

the recommendations contained in the commission
of inquiry's report. One recommendation, which is
explicitly mentioned in General Assembly resolution
69/188 on the human rights situation in the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, adopted by a large majority
of the General Assembly on 18 December, calls for the
International Criminal Court to be seized of the matter.
Luxembourg fully supports that recommendation,
as it is absolutely essential that those responsible for
such atrocities, unequalled in our contemporary times,
committed by the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea, should, to use the language of the commission
of inquiry, be held to account for their acts.

We also believe that the Security Council should
consider the option of imposing targeted sanctions
against those who are most responsible for the crimes
against humanity committed in the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea. We also invite the North
Korean authorities to authorize the visit of the Special
Rapporteur on the human rights situation in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea without delay,
within respect for the modalities of the United Nations
applicable to fact-finding missions. That would be the
sign that the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
authorities are sincere in their willingness to cooperate
with the special procedures of the Human Rights
Council. Further, given the scale of the discrimination
suffered by women and the scale of the violation and
abuse of which they are victims, we believe that UN-
Women should be officially seized of the matter as well
and act within the scope of their competencies.

Today's meeting, a first of its kind, should not
be without a follow-up. Now that this item is on the
Security Council's agenda, we encourage the Council
to be briefed regularly in the future on the situation
in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. The
briefings that we have heard today have strengthened
our conviction that it is the duty ofthe Council to closely
follow the changing situation, which has an intrinsic
link to peace and security, development and respect for
human rights, to paraphrase former Secretary-General
Kofi Annan.

To conclude, I should like to commend the work
of the commission of inquiry, composed of Justice
Michael Kirby, Madam Sonja Biserko and Marzuki
Darusman. They have enabled us to look at the reality
of North Korea from the perspective of the mistreated,
the powerless, the voiceless and those excluded by the
North Korean regime. Their work and that of the Human
Rights Council, the General Assembly and today of the
Security Council have allowed for a voice to be given
to those without voice in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea. The message that we can send today
is simple. The international community cannot be deaf
to the suffering of the North Korean people. We will not

forget them. We will not abandon them to their sad fate.

They are worthy of our attention and our continuing

support until their ordeal comes to an end.

