Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I wish to join my
colleagues in congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
February and the French mission on its excellent
stewardship of the Council last month. It is a great
honour to welcome Mr. von der Schulenburg back to the
Council in his new capacity as head of a very important
integrated mission, the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL), which
is something of an experiment. Therefore, not only do
we wish it well, but it is only natural that we should also
follow its progress with great interest. In addition, I
would like to thank Ambassador Majoor and
Ambassador Touray for their briefings.

We have heard a lot from previous speakers
today. Much of what I wanted to say has been said by
others, so I will be brief this morning. However, I do
not want my brevity to be taken as any indication of a
lack of interest in what is happening in Sierra Leone.
On the contrary, Sierra Leone is an important partner
for my Government and for the United Kingdom
generally. There is great interest and support within the
United Kingdom for Sierra Leone and its people, and
the peaceful transition that has been made to President
Koroma is to be welcomed. It was very good to be able
to hear from Ambassador Touray about the prospects
for constitutional change.

We would like to use this occasion to urge the
Government to reinvigorate coordination with its
development partners, particularly in order to realize
President Koroma's Agenda for Change. The United
Nations has an important role to play here, and the
Government of Sierra Leone should feel able to make
full use of UNIPSIL in that regard.

Some very good work has been done by UNIPSIL
over the past few months. It has begun to work with
the Political Parties Registration Commission and has
made very good use of the election basket fund, and its
work to help with the biannual review of the
Peacebuilding Cooperation Framework has been very
important for Sierra Leone's continued journey towards
effective development.

Along with others, we hope that UNIPSIL will
engage in further high-level advocacy on countering
the threat of narcotics, on conflict prevention and
resolution and on ensuring that the Anti-Corruption
Commission actually delivers. Unless those three
critical areas of work are taken forward, it will be
impossible for UNIPSIL to deliver on its other targets.

I have three questions that, I hope, the Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General might be able
to address in his later remarks.

With regard to the assessment of peacebuilding so
far and the objectives for this year, what other
indicators of success does he think we should be
following, and what other objectives, if any, would he
like to see added for 2009?

Secondly, we would be interested to hear a little
bit more about the military coup in Guinea. What is its
impact on Sierra Leone and on the work of UNIPSIL?

Finally, I wish to make two process points. First, I
would be grateful for an assurance that in the next
report, there will be some agreed outputs and indicators
of success. As I said at the beginning of my statement,
it is important that this new, experimental integrated
mission be properly evaluated to see if it can be used as
a model in other areas. We obviously hope that it can.
But, as I said, proper monitoring will be key to that.

Lastly, I would just like to place on record our
disappointment that, although UNIPSIL has finally
deployed, it took such a long time to reach that stage.
We recognize that the appointment of the Executive
Representative also took a long time to be confirmed
and that some positions in UNIPSIL are still not filled.
We do not believe that, in a small mission such as
UNIPSIL and in a country such as Sierra Leone -
which still has its fragilities - that is a tenable way to
proceed. Thus, either now or at some later point, we
would be very interested to hear how the United
Nations might change its processes to improve the way
in which it carries out this sort of thing in future.

