Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2366
(2017), which it co-sponsored, and the establishment of
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia,
mandated to observe and verify compliance with the
Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building
a Stable and Lasting Peace. The Mission is entirely
consistent with the laying down of arms by the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia on 27 June,
which is a vital step in the establishment of a sustainable
peace in Colombia.

Once again, we welcome the efforts of the parties in
their pursuit of peace regardless of the challenges they
face. Colombia is proving to the world that it is able to
close the chapter of war and to move resolutely towards
peace. I reiterate my thanks to the parties in Colombia
and, in particular, hail the visionary and courageous
commitment of President Santos Calderon, whom the
Foreign Minister represents here today.

The peace process under way in Colombia represents
a great source of hope and encouragement for the
Council, which has seen so many crises in the course
of fulfilling its role as guarantor of the maintenance of
peace. Much is at stake and there will be challenges. It
is now a question not just achieving peace but, above
all, building it and allowing it to take root over the
long term. The remarkable commitment of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Arnault and
his team alongside the parties is a good example of our
ability and the ability of the United Nations to provide
support. The exemplary results on the ground of the
first Mission, deployed in a timely fashion, show that
the United Nations is up to the expectations and the
trust of the parties.

The adoption of the resolution, in response to the
request made last month, allows us to renew our resolute
commitment. The new mission that we are setting up at
the request of the parties will contribute to verifying
the implementation of the guarantees and dividends of
peace. France is gratified in that regard and would like

to thank the United Kingdom penholder. France is fully
invested in helping Colombia pave the way for peace
and will continue to provide its full support to sustain
that peace.

French aid now stands at €820 million in loans and
donations linked to post-conflict scenarios. We have also
contributed €3 million directly to the European Union
Emergency Trust Fund for Africa. The resolution that
we have just adopted represents an essential building
block for a process where the United Nations plays an
essential role in helping Colombia along the path to a
sustainable peace. Please be assured that the United
Nations will respond to the call that was made. France
will continue to mobilize decisively to ensure that the
process is a success, with a view to helping Colombia to
open and to win this new chapter in its history.

