Mr. Luksic' (Montenegro): Montenegro is pleased is
pleased to contribute to this important open debate and
commends Venezuela's strong commitment to the issue
before us. We thank the Advisory Group of Experts
on the Review of the Peacebuilding Architecture for
its valuable review report (see S/2015/490), as well as
today's briefers for their valuable presentations, which
have reminded us of the relevance of this agenda item
to the Security Council.

Montenegro aligns itself with the statement to
be delivered by the observer of the European Union.
However, I would like to make some additional remarks
in my national capacity.

The challenges that we face today are real and
serious. The effects of the evolving nature of modern
conflicts and the more complex security landscape will
be felt for years to come, but the landmark achievements
of the past year, especially those marked by the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/ 1), offer hope and an opportunity
to make substantial changes for the common good. The
three reviews initiated under the peace and security
pillar are also critical to our work within those valuable
guidelines and to efforts to improve our response to the
changing global security environment. The time has
come, therefore, for challenges to be addressed more
decisively by a strengthened and more effective United
Nations, as the vision of our founding fathers has not
yet been fully carried out. Allow me to concentrate on
several issues.

I find the Advisory Group of Experts' report
particularly relevant to our discussion today and as well
as to our future activities with regard to peacebuilding.
It is striking that, after all of our accumulated experience
and institutional memory, we have stated today that
peace is underrecognized, underprioritized and
underresourced, not only globally but also within the
United Nations. That especially concerns the prevention
of conflicts, and that is why I would like to underline
the significance of the United Nations early detection
and early warning mechanisms. The Security Council
must consider how to make better use of the options at
its disposal for preventing the emergence of conflicts.
We believe that a shift from the perception of failures to
act to a culture of prevention or early action continues
to be essential and require political will and leadership
on the part of all actors. Montenegro highly values the
Human Rights Up Front initiative and strongly supports
efforts to make it a greater priority. Mediation must
also receive greater attention and resources, because it
represents such a cost-effective tool.

Another aspect to consider is the establishment
of closer and more frequent dialogues between the
Security Council and the Geneva-based human rights
architecture, especially with special procedures mandate
holders and with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights. Their capacities and
recommendations can prove to be valuable in directing
attention to the human rights violations and risk
factors that could cause the escalation of crises. As a
member State of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC),
Montenegro believes that the Commission's potential
could be better exploited by keeping in mind its unique
role. We also believe that it is necessary to further
improve the complementarity of the work carried out by
the PBC and the Security Council, in order to maximize
theirj oint impact in preventing conflict and in sustaining
peace. The cooperation partnership between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations in
the area of peacebuilding should also be strengthened,
based on each party's comparative advantage, with a
view to enhancing their global impact. They possess
valuable assets, such as knowledge and understanding
of the crisis; but, of equal importance, they ensure the
involvement of the countries that are directly affected.

It is a fact that development is considered to be the
best resilience-builder of all. That is why achieving
sustainable development is seen as an essential
conflict-prevention tool. Addressing human rights
violations as early as possible and ensuring respect
for human rights are also crucial to peacebuilding.
That brings us to the very pertinent, yet challenging,
issue of the interconnectedness and reinforcement of
the three pillars of the United Nations. There is an
obvious need for a more comprehensive and integrated
approach to peacebuilding through peace and security
development and human rights engagement within the
prescribed mandates. We must work towards enhancing
partnerships among the main United Nations bodies in
order to avoid fragmentation and build coherence in
collective efforts at intergovernmental and operational
levels. Without that kind of approach, our progress
will be limited in its results and effects. However, the
maintenance of international peace and security is not
only a task to be carried out by the United Nations and
other international organizations. It is a process of
individual, collective and institutional transformation, a
process of inclusive development based on the universal
values of the respect for life, justice, solidarity, human
rights and equality between women and men.
We should keep in mind that the risk of extremism,
terrorism, organized crime and conflict increases where
people have no education and no hope for the future, and
where there is exclusion and a lack of development. It
drives migration from countries emerging from conflict,
experiencing fragile peace and institution-building, and
where reform is of crucial importance. The promotion
of efforts to sustain peace must be broadly shared and
involve all groups of society, particularly women and
youth. We should recognize women as vital assets for
societies, and not simply as victims. The potential of
youth should also be utilized and not undermined, as
is often the case. We believe that it is crucial to involve
women and youth in the peacebuilding process as
stakeholders and decision-makers. That enables them
to acquire ownership of the policies that affect them
and all of us.

Montenegro will continue to play its part in
efforts to contribute to a more effective peacebuilding
architecture and ensure a comprehensive approach
to peacebuilding.

