Mr. Begec (Turkey): Turkey aligns itself with
the statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union. I will speak in my national capacity.

At the outset, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for holding this useful meeting. Today,
the international community is facing increasingly
complex challenges to peace and security that are
outpacing the current capacity of the United Nations.
The United Nations has administrative and budgetary
constraints, in addition to structural problems in
addressing those global challenges.

The recent peace and security reviews have
confirmed that partnerships and cooperation with
regional and subregional organizations are key factors
for the success of the United Nations. The report of the
Secretary-General on cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations on mediation (A/70/328)
also underlines the need for enhanced partnerships.
It also calls for strengthening the existing strategic
mechanisms between the United Nations and the
African Union (AU), especially in the field of peace
operations and in finding lasting political solutions to
the continent's problems.

While discussing the ways to achieve peace and
stability in Africa, we must emphasize the role of the
continent's own peace and security arrangements. In that
context, the African Peace and Security Architecture
(APSA) embraces a comprehensive agenda for peace
and security in the continent. We believe that the APSA
road map for 2016-2020 will contribute to achieving
the goals of the African Union initiative Silencing the
Guns. We also believe that APSA will contribute to
the realization of the goals within the African Union
Agenda 2063 in the long run as well. Furthermore,
covering cross-cutting issues - such as gender
and youth mainstreaming in peace and security, the
possible consequences of climate change and natural
resource management on conflict, and migration
flows - highlight the significance of the road map.
Efficient early warning systems are fundamental
for Africa. To that end, We are pleased to see that
APSA and its two key components, the African Standby
Force and the Continental Early Warning System, have
been put into operation. We likewise welcome the
appointment of the new High Representative for the
African Peace Fund, Mr. Donald Kaberuka. As part of
APSA, it is important to maintain coordination among
the partners, regional mechanisms and the African
Union so that, in particular, the partners can receive
updated information regarding the process of the
implementation of the road map.

Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations
provides the legal framework for the United Nations to
enter into regional arrangements in the maintenance of
international peace and security. We are glad to observe
the positive trend in the past decade on the partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union to
find solutions to ongoing conflicts in Africa on the
basis of such a legal framework.

In 2011 and 2012, the Secretary-General and the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission released
their respective reports on how to enhance relations
between the two organizations. In that regard, progress
in implementing the recommendations of the Secretary-
General's report on the future of peace operations
(S/2015/682), which includes work on developing a
joint United Nations-African Union framework for an
enhanced partnership in peace and security, is crucial.
The establishment of the United Nations-African Union
Joint Task Force on Peace and Security in September
2010 was perhaps the most practical step at improving
bilateral cooperation.

Turkey encourages the expansion of the United
Nations-African Union partnership so as to include
areas such as institutional capacity-building, security
sector reform, the protection of civilians, human rights,
gender mainstreaming and combating organized crime.
Turkey also contributes bilaterally to peace and security
in Africa. In the second Africa-Turkey Summit, held in
Malabo in November 2014, we reiterated our desire to
continue cooperation in all fields of peace and security
through the exchange of expertise, information and
training programmes. The Joint Implementation Plan
of Africa-Turkey Partnership, adopted at the Summit,
outlines the way ahead to further strengthen our
comprehensive collaboration.

Peace and security are an important pillar of that
cooperation. Since 2008, when Turkey became one of
the strategic partners of the continent, we have been
providing financial assistance to the African Union.
Turkey also allocated resources to the East African
Standby Force activities from its annual contributions
for the years 2015-2016. We are also working on
providing further support to the African Capacity for
Immediate Response to Crisis .

Turkey takes part in the United Nations missions
deployed in the continent. We are currently providing
personnel and contributing financially to seven of
the nine existing peacekeeping missions in Africa.
Moreover, Turkey also takes part in five out of six
country-specific configurations of the Peacebuilding
Commission. Turkey has been chairing the Horn of
Africa Working Group within the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Forum, with the EU. Within
the framework of the peacebuilding and State-building
efforts in Somalia, Turkey is co-chairing the Security
Sector Working Group with the United States.
Moreover, Turkey contributed $2 million in total to the
African Union Mission in Somalia in 2009 and 2012 to
ensure the improvement of the security environment in
Somalia and an effective fight against Al-Shabaab.

Turkey will continue to do its utmost to contribute
to peace and security in Africa. We will also
constructively participate in international and regional
initiatives to that end.

