Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, for giving me this opportunity to
brief the Council on the situation in Mali, just a short
time after the important visit that the Council carried
out in Mali and in the West African subregion at the
beginning of the month of March. I should like also to
welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs, International
Cooperation and African Integration of the Republic
of Mali, Mr. Abdoulaye Diop. I take this opportunity
to convey to him the satisfaction of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations at the excellent cooperation
with the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).

As the members of the Security Council noted during
their recent visit to Mali, and as is underscored by the
report ofthe Secretary-General (S/2016/281), significant
progress has been made in recent weeks in implementing
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.
Carrying on from the consultative meeting of the
Agreement Monitoring Committee, held in Algiers on
18 January under the auspices of the Algerian Foreign
Minister, Mr. Lamamra, the Malian authorities made
official on 19 January the establishment of two new
regions, Taoudenni and Me'naka. On 27 February,
President Ibrahim Boubacar Keita called for a meeting
in Bamako with the Coordination des mouvements de
l'Azawad (CMA) and the Platform coalition of armed
groups, during which the parties to the agreement
announced that they had set an implementation timeline
for March and April, with a focus on the establishment
of interim authorities in the north, improving security
conditions, cantonment and the swift implementation of
the peace agreement provisions relating to preparations
for local elections.

Following lengthy consultations between the
Government and the signatory armed groups, which,
incidentally, were expanded to civil society and
political parties, on the process of the establishment
of the authorities responsible for administration,
municipalities, communal circles and the regions of the
north during the interim period, the National Assembly
adopted on 31 March a law modifying the territorial
municipalities code. This was followed by the adoption
of a decree on the modalities for implementation of the
interim authorities in territorial municipalities.

All of these texts define the functioning of the
transitional administrations, which will be composed
of representatives of the Government, the CMA and
the Platform, and will be limited to municipalities,
communal circles and the regions of Gao, Kidal,
Menaka, Taoudenni and Timbuktu. This is therefore a
decisive stage that should be welcomed. It is now up to
the parties to implement this law as soon as possible
and to make concrete progress on implementing other
important clauses of the peace agreement, in particular
on defence and security matters.

In order to fully cover all of these institutional
developments, I wish also to commend the appointment
on 23 March, following a consultation process with
the signatory groups, of a new Governor of Kidal,
Mr. Ag Ahmadou. His arrival in Kidal will symbolize
a gradual return of the State Administration. I should
like to assure the Council that MINUSMA will spare
no effort to facilitate the full implementation of all of
these measures.

Although significant measures have been taken
in recent weeks, in particular the establishment
of committees on integration and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR); a Government
allocation for the pre-cantonment of signatory
armed groups; the construction of the first three
pre-cantonment sites and the beginning of work this
week on five others, progress in the area of security
forces remains too slow, given the security challenges
in the north of Mali. Almost 10 months after the signing
of the agreement in May, it is urgent to quickly make
the Operational Coordination Mechanism functional
and, above all, to begin the joint patrols, which will
play a crucial role in securing the cantonment and the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process,
in addition to making things visible to the population. I
therefore appeal to the Government and to the signatory
armed groups to create the conditions required to carry
out those steps. As to the armed groups themselves, I
call on them to provide without delay the list of their
representatives to the integration and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration commission, as well
as - no less important - the list of their fighters
who are to be part of the cantonment process. In that
regard as well, MINUSMA will continue to play its
full role in facilitating the process as part of its good-
offices mandate. I therefore urge the Government
and the signatory armed groups to quickly set out an
implementation timetable for all pending matters set
out in the peace agreement.

When I previously briefed the Security Council
(see S/PV.7600), I raised the alarm with regard to the
worrying security situation in Mali. Each day that
passes without the peace agreement being implemented
is a day gained for extremist and terrorist groups, which
are betting on the failure of the peace process in Mali
and are indiscriminately targeting representatives of
the Malian State, signatory groups and the international
forces of Operation Barkhane and MINUSMA. In that
regard, I should like to pay homage to the victims
of the terrible attack by terrorist groups in Kidal on
12 February. Many Guinean peacekeepers died during
that attack on our camp. I also pay tribute to the victims
among Mali's defence and security forces, who paid
a very heavy price in the face of repeated attacks by

Ansar Eddine and the Al-Mourabitoun. We should also
point out, as we say almost every day, that the delay
in implementing the peace agreement and the ongoing
insecurity also have an impact on intercommunal
conflicts, which continue to increase, especially in
the areas of Gao and Mopti, with sometimes alarming
consequences for the civilian population.

Beyond the commitment and political will of
the Government and the signatories to speed up the
implementation of the agreement - which I commend
and about which I have no doubt whatever - the
challenge today has to do with trust among the parties,
which we must further strengthen. As such, I regret that
the Kidal forum, which was initially to bring together
all the signatories to the agreement and which I had the
honour to attend, was ultimately transformed into an
internal meeting of the Coordination des mouvements
de l'Azawad held from 28 to 30 March. However, given
the conclusions of the meeting, there is hope that it paved
the way for a strengthening of cohesion among the armed
groups, as well as for their renewed commitment to the
timely and full implementation of the peace agreement.
The effective putting in place of interim authorities,
which signals the return of State services in the north of
the country, the launch, as I mentioned, of joint patrols
and the cantonment and disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration processes should constitute a key step
in the gradual restoration of basic services, including
health and education, and enable the most vulnerable
populations to benefit from the peace dividend they
await so fervently. We encourage the Government of
Mali quickly to launch the preparatory process for the
national reconciliation conference provided for in the
peace agreement, which should contribute to a more
inclusive peace process with regard to the concerns of
other forces of the Malian nation.

The combination of increased insecurity in northern
Mali, but also in the central region of Mopti, and the
increase in terrorism in the subregion, as seen in the
attacks in Ouagadougou at the end of last year and
those in Grand Bassam, in cote d'Ivoire, in mid-March
should prompt us to pay greater attention to the state of
the security threat in the entire West African subregion.
In that regard, we should welcome the increased efforts
by the Malian armed forces, in cooperation with the
armies of neighbouring countries - including Burkina
Faso, Mauritania and the Niger - as part of the regional
initiative by the group of five Sahelian countries and
with the support of the French Operation Barkhane to
conduct operations to reduce the influence of terrorist
groups in the subregion. For its part, MINUSMA is
intensely continuing its efforts for the upgrading of its
contingents to increase their mobility and to further
adapt their available capacities for intelligence and
protection to respond to changing the threat to our
facilities and all our personnel.

Faced with that threat, at a time when United
Nations peacekeeping in West Africa is changing, the
prevalence of terrorist groups and organized crime are
latent threats to the stability of the subregion. In that
regard, we are prepared to continue to explore with
other actors, including the African Union, ways and
means to strengthen cooperation among the countries
of the subregion in terms of intelligence and border
control and security, with a view to contribute to
containing the expansion of the terrorist threat. I note
that the efforts of the subregion have already allowed
for the dismantling of some terrorist cells, as well as
for the arrest by the Malian authorities of the leader
of Ansar Eddine for the southern region, Souleymane
Keita, as well as the bombing suspects in the attack at
Grand Bassam. All of that, of couse, has been part of
separate operations.

We must keep in mind that the non-permissive
environment in which MINUSMA is deployed has its
roots in deeper issues related to political and security
governance in the West African subregion. That is
why I would like to commend China's initiative,
Mr. President, in organizing an open debate on April
25 on the issue of peacebuilding in West Africa, which
I am certain will enable us to further consider together
ways and means to respond in a more integrated and
coordinated manner to all those new threats to peace
and security in the subregion.

Finally, I take this opportunity to officially
inform the Security Council that the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations has initiated a strategic
review of MINUSMA. Over the next two months, we
will focus on further reflections in our consultations
with the Government of Mali and other partners. We
will share the recommendations of the strategic review
in the next report of the Secretary-General, whose
publication is expected in late May, a month before the
Mission's mandate comes to an end.

