The President (spoke in Chinese): On behalf of
the members of the Security Council, I wish to express
my profound concern about the devastating earthquake
that took place yesterday in Haiti. Members of the
Council are deeply saddened by the reported loss of
life and injuries, including among United Nations
peacekeeping and civilian personnel. Members of the
Council convey their heartfelt condolences to the
Government and the people of Haiti. I now invite
members to stand and observe a minute of silence.

The members of the Council observed a minute of
silence.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in
maintaining international peace and security

Letter dated 4 January 2010 from

the Permanent Representative of China
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2010/9)

The President (spoke in Chinese): On behalf of
the Security Council, I wish to warmly welcome the
Secretary-General and the representatives of the
regional and subregional organizations participating in
today's Security Council meeting. Their presence is an
affirmation of the importance of the subject matter
being discussed today.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend invitations under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to: His
Excellency Mr. Amre Moussa, Secretary General of the
League of Arab States; His Excellency Mr. Ramtame
Lamamra, Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union Commission; His Excellency
Mr. Le Luong Minh, Permanent Representative of Viet
Nam, on behalf of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations; His Excellency Mr. Nikolai Bordyuzha,
Secretary General of the Collective Security Treaty
Organization; Mr. Pedro Serrano, acting head of the
2

European Union delegation to the United Nations; His
Excellency Mr. Claudio Bisogniero, Deputy Secretary
General of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization;
Mr. Victor Rico Frontaura, Secretary for Political
Affairs of the Organization of American States; His
Excellency Mr. Ekmeleddin Ihsanoglu, Secretary
General of the Organization of the Islamic Conference;
His Excellency Mr. Oleksandr Pavlyuk, head of the
External Cooperation Department of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe; His
Excellency Mr. Gary Quinlan, Permanent
Representative of Australia, on behalf of the Pacific
Islands Forum; and His Excellency Mr. Muratbek
Sansyzbayevich Imanaliyev, Secretary-General of the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization.

It is so decided.

I invite the aforementioned representatives to
take the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of members to
document S/20lO/9, which contains the text of a letter
dated 4 January 2010 from the Permanent
Representative of China addressed to the Secretary-
General, transmitting a concept paper on the item
under consideration.

In accordance with the United Nations Charter,
the Members of the United Nations confer on the
Security Council responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. Member States expect
the Security Council to meet the challenges before it
and to play a bigger role in strengthening international
peace and security and in responding to global threats
and challenges. At the same time, members strive to
promote regional peace and development through the
strengthening of regional organizations.

In today's world, regional organizations are
playing an increasingly important role in preventing
and resolving conflicts, deploying peacekeeping
operations, promoting post-conflict reconstruction and
easing humanitarian crises. It is of great significance
and relevance for the Security Council to hold this
thematic debate to explore ways to strengthen the
10-20793
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations.

I now give the floor to Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon.


