Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
Mr. Feltman for his briefing this afternoon.

We congratulate the Ukrainian people on the
success of their historic presidential elections on
Sunday, 25 May. The elections have been endorsed
by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) as having been held largely in line with
Ukraine's international commitments and with respect
for fundamental freedoms. After the turmoil of recent
months, that is an outstanding achievement, which
demonstrates the determination ofthe Ukrainian people
to exercise their democratic rights and to set Ukraine
on a new path towards stability. They have produced
a Government whose legitimacy cannot be questioned
and that deserves the full support of the international
community. The decisive victory of Mr. Poroshenko
sends a clear signal that the Ukrainian people are united
in their demand for reform.

We congratulate Mr. Poroshenko on his election. We
welcome his commitment to reaching out to all regions,
to normalizing relations with Russia and to working to
restore stability and calm. The United Kingdom remains
firmly committed to the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of the whole of Ukraine. We
look forward to working with Mr. Poroshenko and the
Ukrainian Government in their efforts to build a safe,
independent and prosperous country. We also pay tribute
to the staff of the Ukrainian Election Commission and
to the OSCE for their tireless commitment to ensuring
that the elections were a success, and particularly to
those who face threats of violence and intimidation in
the east of the country.

The high turnout on Sunday offers a powerful
rebuke to those illegal armed groups that sought to deny
the citizens of Donetsk and Luhansk their democratic
rights and that continue to pursue an armed campaign to
destabilize eastern Ukraine. Opinion polling in March
showed that 79 per cent in the east of Ukraine wanted
to vote in the elections. In May, despite the rising levels
of intimidation against election officials, activists and
ordinary citizens, 62 per cent still wanted to vote. It is
deeply regrettable that many in Donetsk and Luhansk
were prevented from doing so. The elections gave
Ukrainians the opportunity to express their views in a
peaceful and democratic manner.

It is telling that the response of illegal armed
groups to that display of national unity was an attempt
to seize control of Donetsk international airport. While
Ukraine sought a national consensus through the ballot
box, those groups immediately resorted to violence.
We respect the Ukrainian Government's right to
respond to such armed attacks, to protect its citizens
and to reassert control over its sovereign territory. No
country could possibly accept illegal armed insurgents
taking control by force of public buildings and a
key national infrastructure, such as an international
airport. The Ukrainian authorities have acted with
admirable restraint in the fact of repeated provocation.
We continue to urge them to ensure that their security
response remains measured, proportionate and respects
the safety and security of non-combatants.

Since 21 February, the Ukrainian authorities have
repeatedly demonstrated that they are committed to
deep-rooted reform of Ukraine's political system and
to making a decisive break with past corruption and
injustices. The issue of granting greater autonomy to
Ukraine's regions has been on the agenda from the
start. In line with its commitment and those undertaken
in Geneva, on 17 April they embarked on an intensive
effort to initiate an inclusive national dialogue. That
process represents a genuine opportunity for all
Ukrainians to address their grievances peacefully.
There can therefore be no justification for armed groups
to continue to press their cause through violence. We
therefore call on the insurgents to lay down their arms,
renounce violence and join in this debate. We also call
on the Russian Federation to take immediate action to
prevent illegal crossings of insurgents and weapons
across its border into Ukraine.

We are deeply concerned by two separate incidents
of abduction involving monitors from the OSCE special
monitoring mission in eastern Ukraine. We welcome
the release of 1] monitors after their detention earlier
today in Donetsk, but four others who went missing
on Monday are still unaccounted for. The detention of
OSCE personnel is completely unacceptable, and we
call for their immediate and unconditional release. The
special monitoring mission has a vital role to play, often
under difficult circumstances. We pay tribute to their
continuing work.

Sunday's elections provide us all with an
opportunity to look past the turmoil of recent months
and to focus on the future. We welcome the recent
statements by the Russian Federation of its intention
to respect the right of the Ukrainian people to choose
their new President and its commitment to reduing the
threat of further external intervention in Ukraine's
internal affairs by withdrawing its forces from the
Ukrainian border. Those are positive steps towards
de-escalation, but more action is needed. Continued
instability is not in the interests of the people of
Ukraine or in the interests of its neighbours and those
countries that value their relations with Ukraine. The
actions of illegal armed groups have resulted in scores
of tragic and unnecessary deaths and the disruption of
the Ukrainian economy and public services in the east.
That is hurting the very people that those groups claim
to represent and is denying them a voice in determining
Ukraine's future.

Following the Geneva agreement of 17 April
and the OSCE road map of 7 May, we have a viable
political framework in place. Ukraine has already
made much progress towards implementing these
agreements, including notably the adoption on 20 May
of the memorandum of peace and concord. Our focus
must now be on promoting an inclusive, transparent
and accountable national dialogue as an alternative
to violent insurgency. We welcome the three rounds
of dialogue that have already taken place with OSCE
facilitation. That national dialogue should allow all
parties to contribute their views on issues such as
decentralization, local self-governance, language and
national minorities, balance of powers, State society
relations and Ukraine's role in Euro-Atlantic and Eur-
Asian security.

The past few months have seen deep divisions
in the Security Council over Ukraine. Some of those
divisions will undoubtedly persist; in particular, along
with the overwhelming majority of the international
community, the United Kingdom will not recognize or
accept Russia's illegal annexation of Crimea. However,
Sunday's elections provide the Council with a basis for
coming together behind some key principles: respect
for the will of the people of Ukraine, recognition of the
legitimacy ofthe new authorities in Ukraine, rejection of
armed insurgency and attempts to destabilize Ukraine
and undermine the rule of law, and strong support for
the efforts of the authorities in Ukraine to tackle the
many formidable challenges that confront them in an
inclusive and democratic manner.

The frameworks are in place to take those principles
forward. The United Kingdom urges all Council
members and the international community as a whole
to join wholeheartedly in a concerted, constructive and
united international approach.

