Mr. Niehaus (Costa Rica) (interpretation from Spanish): The delegation of Costa Rica is grateful for
your decision, Mr. President, which has made it possible
in a short period of time to have this open debate with the
presence of the Secretary-General in order to consider and
adopt a draft resolution consistent with the responsibilities
of the Security Council for the maintenance of
international peace and security.

Costa Rica, a sponsor of the text before us, would
like to express on this occasion its gratitude to the
delegations of Japan, Sweden and Slovenia, whose active
leadership was an essential factor in order for us today to
be considering this draft resolution.

In addition, we thank the other members of the
Security Council who have once again given proof of
their firm commitment to the cause of international peace.

My country has made disarmament more than just a
foreign-policy objective. We have been a disarmed
country for 50 years, and accordingly, on both the
national and international levels, have maintained a
constant, invariable policy in favour of disarmament of all
kinds. On every occasion and in every forum we have
expressed our rejection of the arms race in all its forms.

In this regard, we have been firm in stating that the
arms build-up is contrary to the modern world's
objectives of peace, security and development. Time and
again we have said that the economic resources that the

 

world devotes to conventional and nuclear weapons should
be redirected in order to promote genuine economic
development and social equity for all peoples.

This constant policy of Costa Ricans has been applied
with particular intensity to the question of nuclear weapons,
which are an irrational instrument that threatens the
existence of all of humanity and the world as we know it.

In the case now unfortunately before the Security
Council, we are facing the sad reality of two countries of
the developing world which have pressing and urgent
economic and social needs to take care of, but which are
instead devoting their financial resources and the
intelligence of their scientists to an objective that is
senseless and shows a lack of commitment to the true
values and principles of coexistence established in the
Charter of the United Nations.

This is no longer a bilateral territorial dispute. Now it
goes much further. On the pretext of maintaining their own
national security, both countries have committed themselves
to beginning a nuclear arms race which, beyond its effect
on regional tensions, is a genuine threat to international
peace and security.

In this connection, Costa Rica would like to use this
opportunity to issue a vehement and vigorous appeal to
India and Pakistan to cease immediately the development of
nuclear weapons and, as soon as possible, to accede
unconditionally to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons and the Comprehensive N uclear-Test-Ban
Treaty.

Faithful to its commitment to the peaceful settlement
of disputes, Costa Rica urges India and Pakistan to resolve
all of their pending disputes, including the question of
Kashmir, through dialogue and negotiation. In this
connection, we would like to underscore the potential role
of the Secretary-General.

The text of the draft resolution we have before us
today is realistic, sensible and balanced. It reflects a clear
commitment on the part of this main organ of the United
Nations to the maintenance of international peace and
security, which, ultimately, is the Council's fundamental
obligation. Costa Rica considers it is important to note that,
while in the past, for reasons of global balance, the Council
has not condemned the conducting of nuclear tests, this
cannot be invoked as a precedent to justify not now
adopting - above all, with a view to the future - a clear,
forceful position against such actions, irrespective of
where they take place or who is responsible for them.

From this moment, which my delegation deems
historic, it should be possible to say that, yes, the Security
Council has a substantive policy of condemning test
explosions of nuclear weapons as well as any other type
of nuclear explosion, in accordance with the provisions of
the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty.

Given the serious and urgent nature of the situation
and in accordance with the provisions of the draft
resolution, we trust that in the very near future the
Secretary-General will be able to inform us that India and
Pakistan have initiated the process of implementing all the
provisions set forth in the draft resolution we are going to
adopt.

For all these reasons Costa Rica has proudly
sponsored the draft resolution before us.

