Mr. Snoussi (Morocco) (interpretation from French):
Allow me, first of all, to express to you Sir, my country's
deep satisfaction upon seeing you preside over the Security
Council, and to extend our congratulations to your
predecessor, Mr. Abdoulie Sallah, for the very efficient
manner in which he conducted the work of the Council.

The Kingdom of Morocco cannot but welcome the
holding of today's meeting concerning a continent of which
we are a part. My country wishes to take this opportunity
to applaud the tireless efforts made by the current President
of the Security Council, Japan, with regard to the
development and prosperity of the African economies,
particularly through the Tokyo International Conference on
African Development.

The meeting of the Security Council at the level of
Ministers for Foreign Affairs on 25 September 1997,
convened on the initiative of the United States and Japan to
examine the issue of joint international action to promote
peace and security in Africa, was a welcome and
necessary initiative. Indeed, it allowed us finally to draw
the attention of the international community to the ills and
the tragic situation currently being experienced by our
continent.

The report of the Secretary-General, which we
welcome, outlines and presents the true problems,
principal causes and realistic and achievable remedies for
meeting the numerous problems faced by African
countries and promoting peace and sustainable
development in Africa.

As everyone knows, despite notable progress
achieved by some African countries in the economic and
political areas, the scope and intensity of armed conflicts
in the continent remain the subject of deep concern to the
international community. The 30 wars which have
ravaged Africa since 1970 have caused hundreds of
thousands of deaths and millions of refugees and
displaced persons and have compromised all the efforts
made by Africa to ensure peace, stability and prosperity.

The tragic state of affairs on the African continent is
certainly the foremost among those questions calling on
the international community to pool its efforts in the
search for effective and practical solutions for improving
the grave economic, social and humanitarian situation on
our continent, which has been exacerbated by such
tragedies as civil wars, rampant epidemics and disease,
and desertification, not to mention the refugee problem
and its related difficulties.
With your permission, Mr. President, a question
comes to mind: Is it not time for us to establish, together,
clear and realistic standards for defining the meaning of
the word "genocide"? These standards would undoubtedly
help us to avoid characterizing as genocide a conflict that
claims 300 victims in one region, while, in another part
of the world - in this case, Africa - we allow 300,000
Victims to fall before crying genocide.

Morocco, as a part of Africa and through its age-old
and diverse links to the other countries of the continent,
is aware of the responsibilities arising from that
connection and expresses its deep concern over the
degeneration of the political and socio-economic situation
in several regions of the continent.

With regard to security and stability, Morocco has
followed with real concern the emergence and longevity

 

of hotbeds of tension in certain African regions and
reaffirms its determination to join and support the efforts of
the international community, and the United Nations in
particular, to find adequate and lasting solutions to these
crises.

With respect to North Africa, it seems undeniable to
us that a situation such as that brought about by the
Lockerbie affair cannot be passed over in silence while we
speak today about peace, security and stability in Africa.
The regional organizations - Arab, Islamic, African and
non-aligned - have all taken a position in favour of a
settlement that we feel is truly just and truly fair. In doing
so, they have yet again demonstrated and strengthened the
notion that negotiation is superior to sanctions and other
coercive measures.

The precarious economic situation in Africa continues
to preoccupy the international community. This situation is
particularly evident in the continent's feeble participation in
international trade, its increased debt burden, a chronic
deficit in its infrastructures, the highly advanced
degeneration of its social and health conditions, and the
paucity of foreign investment despite the massive structural
reforms undertaken by these countries.

In this regard, Morocco welcomed with great pleasure
Portugal's initiative to convene a Euro-African summit to
consider and seek appropriate solutions to the situation on
our continent. This initiative reflects the European Union's
growing awareness of Africa. In this respect, Morocco has
proposed a ministerial meeting to prepare for the summit.
Moreover, we welcome the United Nations initiative for
Africa and believe it imperative that the appropriate
conditions for its success be ensured through the provision
of the necessary financial and technical support by the
United Nations and the international community.

Morocco can only support the Secretary-General's
principal recommendations on Africa, particularly those that
call for establishing structural adjustment programmes that
are fully compatible with peace, in order to ensure that the
assistance is structured to focus on the areas where it will
be most effective and to reduce the dependence of the
African countries.

Furthermore, Morocco fully endorses the idea that the
creditors should consider entirely forgiving the debt of the
poorest countries of Africa and that the most industrialized
countries entertain the possibility of eliminating trade
barriers against African products and ensure that the larger
part of the resources provided for assistance are
effectively spent in Africa.

On the subject of development assistance, Morocco,
as was noted by its sovereign, His Majesty King Hassan
II, was the first, at the Ministerial Meeting of the
Uruguay Round held in Marrakesh in 1994, to call for the
launching of a "Marshall Plan" for Africa and for an
intensification of international efforts to help the African
States to develop their economies and strengthen their
integration into the world economy.

But an undertaking of such scope can succeed only
if the international community, in a massive show of
solidarity, agrees to make an enormous contribution in
order to allow the African continent to become a true
partner and to contribute, in its turn, to overall
development. The United States certainly did so following
the Second World War. Our community, comprising all
the developed national entities, is undoubtedly more
prosperous and stronger. It, too, could do so, but will it
agree to make such a sacrifice to save Africa? That would
require a new spirit, a new philosophy on the part of the
industrialized countries, and the will to leave old notions
and outmoded strategies behind.

Africa did not choose to solve its problems by
incessant wars. Africa certainly did not choose, moreover,
to be underdeveloped, nor did it choose to be stricken by
waves of epidemics and natural disasters. Africa needs to
be helped to avoid the temptation of soliciting help from
the rich and so that its children might no longer be
siphoned off by humiliating and futile emigrations.

In convening this special meeting devoted to Africa,
the Security Council is sending our continent a reassuring
signal full of hope. May that signal be followed by
concrete action to make up the delays and bring us in step
with the twenty-first century.

Allow me to conclude by saying that a
comprehensive effort should be made to give impetus to
Africa's renewed quest for peace and greater prosperity.
As the Secretary-General emphasized, Africa needs
realistic and achievable recommendations for reducing or
even ending conflicts in the long run.

We certainly do not need to keep rehashing the
misdeeds of colonialism, but in order to advance we must
remember them. We must remember that colonialism,
even in its simplest form, bequeathed us a fragile

 

economy and, sometimes, structures and systems that,
undeniably, long hindered our efforts towards development.

A clear understanding of the challenge, the political
will to respond to it and the resources necessary to an
appropriate response are the three bases for any
improvement in Africa's situation. The will exists and
Africa has made enormous efforts to prepare the social and
political environment necessary to development. Our very
tangible progress towards democracy makes us highly
optimistic; increased solidarity and a stronger desire to
succeed will be the best guarantees for our triumph.

