Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I would like
to begin by extending a warm welcome back to the
Security Council to Special Envoy Onanga-Anyanga.
We look forward to working with him on this very
important topic.

I think we all agree that this is a very complex
issue. It also strikes me that this is an interesting time
to be discussing this issue given the major upheavals
in the Sudan, which the Special Envoy referred to. We
share his view that it is absolutely vital for the Sudanese
authorities and the Government of South Sudan to
continue to cooperate, despite what has been happening
on the ground, and to implement their agreements in
relation to the border.

I also very much agree with the tone set by both
of our briefers today on recent developments. There
is much to welcome over the past six months. Overall,
the security situation in Abyei has remained generally
calm, despite sporadic instances of violence. We should
also welcome the improved cooperation between the
Government of South Sudan and the authorities in the
Sudan, and the progress made against the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism benchmarks.
However, we continue to have two major concerns.

First, we share the concerns expressed today by
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix about intercommunal
tensions and the political rhetoric and criminality that
exacerbates them. This remains the largest challenge
to stability, and we think that the support of United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA)
for local mediation, community protection and judicial
initiatives remain absolutely vital, as does the full
deployment of UNISFA's police assets. On that issue,
like Kuwait and the United States, we remain very
concerned about the delays in the issuing of visas for
key personnel, especially for the Jordanian technical
reconnaissance delegation. We urge the Sudanese
authorities to issue those visas without delay. I would
like to request of our Sudanese colleagues to update
the Council on the issuing of those visas during
their intervention.

Our second concern is related to the issue raised by
the Peruvian Ambassador - the humanitarian situation
in Abyei - which, as he said, has been caused by both
rapid inflation and the economic crises in both countries.
The United Kingdom is providing $40 million this year
in emergency humanitarian support to help the Sudan's
most vulnerable and excluded communities with
their basic food and health needs. We urge all States
Members of the United Nations to assist in that regard.

Finally, turning to the question of UNISFA's
upcoming mandate renewal, we commend the really
important work that the mission is doing on the ground,
particularly with regard to mediation among the various
parties. We therefore support the recommendation for a
six-month mandate renewal. We agree, however, with
the Council members who have said that the mission
does need to adapt to the situation on the ground.
Therefore, we also support the recommendation on
enhancing the mission's civilian component in order to
help with its support to the African Union Commission
and its High-level Implementation Panel.

