Mr. Kolby (Norway): Our point of departure
must be full Iraqi compliance with Security Council
resolutions. That must be the clear message that
emerges from this open meeting.

The international community is faced with a
grave threat from the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. We are uncertain and insecure because we
do not know the extent of that threat, apart from its
potentially devastating effects. Iraq is an important
reason for this insecurity.

There is, however, no uncertainty whatsoever
with respect to the obligations of Iraq. Since the end of
the Gulf war, the world community has demanded,
through the Security Council, that Iraq destroy, remove
or render harmless all its weapons of mass destruction.
A system of monitoring and verification - the United
Nations weapons inspectors - was set up to ensure
Iraqi compliance. The inspections are not an end in
themselves, but a means for the international
community to satisfy itself that Iraq no longer
possesses weapons of mass destruction.

For almost 12 years, Iraq has ignored the
demands of the Security Council. Under strong
pressure, the Government of Iraq has now agreed to
receive inspectors without conditions. Norway hopes
that that represents an Iraqi change of attitude and a
willingness to comply with its obligation to cooperate
fully with the United Nations. There are still, however,
practical and unresolved questions to be tackled before
inspectors can start fulfilling their mandate.

As members of the Security Council, we are
faced with the challenge of determining how we can
ensure credible inspections that remove the insecurity
with which we are faced today. In the immediate
future, we should have a clear and unambiguous
Security Council resolution, with a clear and
unambiguous timetable, as a basis for the new
inspections. Another important element must be the
free and unconditional access of the inspectors to the
whole of Iraq. That means the Security Council will
have to repeal the agreement concluded between Iraq
and the United Nations in 1998 on special procedures
for inspecting the so-called presidential sites - which
include several hundred buildings - unless Iraq itself
declares that it will disregard the agreement. No
buildings or sites can be given immunity from
inspections if we are to get definite answers to the
questions linked to Iraq's weapons of mass destruction.
We cannot have an inspections regime with loopholes.
In our view, the mandate of the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
and of the International Atomic Energy Agency must
be fully clarified before the inspectors return.

To summarize, two main concerns must be dealt
with. First, it is essential to work towards the
elimination of Iraq's weapons of mass destruction and
of their delivery systems without using military force.
But if Iraq should yet again fail to comply, there must,
in our view, be absolutely no doubt that that will have
extremely serious consequences for the country.
Secondly, any reaction towards Iraq must be anchored
in international law. The Security Council's demands
on Iraq are clear and precise. We feel strongly that this
matter is the province of the Security Council. In that
regard, it is vital that the Security Council stand united.

