Mr. Rahman (Bangladesh): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM)
in our capacity as NAM. coordinator in the
Peacebuilding Commission.

Let me begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for
organizing this important debate on the issue of
institution-building in the context of peacebuilding in
post-conflict countries. We also thank the Secretary-
General, the Deputy Prime Minister of Timor-Leste
and the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission for
their respective statements delivered this morning.

This debate is a very timely initiative, as it is
taking place as the review of the peacebuilding
architecture has just been concluded and the review of
international civilian capacity is in its final stage. We
believe that this debate will add important value to all
relevant processes in further streamlining
peacebuilding activities and bringing about sustainable
peace in post-conflict countries.

While we recognize that each and every post-
conflict situation is unique, our experience is that there
are some commonalities across all conflict or post-
conflict situations. They negatively impact the regular
work of a society by causing damage to physical,
psychological and social structures. They shatter
institutions, take a toll on human lives, break social
bonds and hinder regular activities. The institutional
and other capacities previously created in society or
embedded in the bond of social dynamics are either
broken or remain dormant, and are not readily
available to steer the peace process or to make it
sustainable.

Therefore, the onus is on us, the international
community, to work towards the achievement of
sustainable peace by enabling national actors to rebuild
their institutions, revitalize their economies and
rejuvenate their peaceful lives. This process entails
ensuring national ownership in all peacebuilding
activities, including institutional capacity-building.

Sustainable peace can be achieved only when the
process is shared and owned by those ultimately
benefiting from the peace dividends. It is national
actors who clearly understand the inherent values and

normative priorities of their particular society. Given
the diversity in post-conflict situations, the
international community, in consultation with the
relevant stakeholders, needs to find commonalities
among national protagonists to advance their common
development agenda. This requires broader political
will within the international community and at least a
minimal willingness on the part of the different
factions in the post-conflict countries.

International support in such dynamic and
evolving situations is to be based on broad political
willingness and adequate and predictable resources.
Efforts skewed towards unduly benefiting one group at
the expense of others are likely to exacerbate a
situation, igniting the causes of conflict. Active
participation by members of civil society and by local
and traditional authorities, including marginalized
groups, may ease the situation and contribute
significantly to ensuring national ownership for
achieving peacebuilding goals through a common
vision of national development. The full and effective
participation of women can further strengthen the
process.

We agree with the concept paper (S/2011/16, annex) that building institutional capacity in a post-
conflict country is a difficult task. However, it is not
impossible. It requires coordinated efforts, constructive
willingness, appropriate needs assessment and defining
norms and standards. The volatile post-conflict
environment is largely defined by a lack of vital
resources, including physical infrastructure, human and
financial capital and appropriate social bonds. While
some of that stems from a lack of adequate confidence,
mostly it has to do with insufficient financial
resources, technical expertise and institutional skills.
No supply-driven approach will suffice. On the other
hand, a demand-pull approach coupled with national
training and exchange programmes may help. In
addition, the provision of adequate and timely
resources is indispensable. In that context, the
Movement believes that the following points must be
kept in mind while planning and conducting post-
conflict institution-building activities.

First, any activity relating to peacebuilding in a
post-conflict country must be based on the principle of
national ownership. In that regard, institution-building
activities should also encompass national priorities,
taking into account the reality and necessities of the
people who are the potential clients of the initiative.
Second, effective partnership must be forged
among all Member States so that the varying capacities
among them can complement each other and strengthen
post-conflict institution-building efforts.

Third, gender mainstreaming and the role of
women in post-conflict peacebuilding cannot be
overemphasized. The institution-building process and
its outcome should ensure gender perspectives as
appropriate. While crafting such norms and standards,
sufficient attention must be given to ensuring that the
concerns of women in the host country are adequately
taken into account so as to empower them to
effectively participate in the post-conflict country's
economic, political, social and security-related
activities.

Four, organizational coordination must be
addressed. Without prejudice to the functions and
powers of the other principal organs of the United
Nations, the General Assembly must play the key role
in the formulation and implementation of institution-
building activities. In this context, the Peacebuilding
Commission should play a central role in providing
policy guidance and strategies in conducting
institution-building activities.

Five, there has to be cooperation among the
different United Nations organs. Post-conflict
peacebuilding activities should be conducted through
intense and effective consultations among the main
organs of the United Nations, while duly emphasizing
their respective areas of competence.

Six, the role of peacekeepers and early
peacebuilding activities need to be properly
recognized. In that regard, the significant role of
peacekeepers will further strengthen early
peacebuilding activities. Furthermore, these activities
need to be identified by the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture in cooperation with the
national Government, including the views of troop-
contributing countries in relevant areas.
Seven, with regard to South-South cooperation,
countries of the South have similar socio-economic
experiences that need to be utilized in the process. In
addition, the diverse capacities and skills in the South
can be replicated suitably in the form of lessons
learned and the development achieved from previous
experience in nation-building.

Last but not least, efforts must also include a
mechanism for including North-South and triangular
cooperation. That would renew the strength of
partnerships and complement South-South cooperation.

In conclusion, the Movement believes that the
building of institutions in post-conflict countries must
be based on a fair appreciation of the circumstances of
justice and on the prevailing social situation for which
the norms and standards are being postulated. They
should reflect a collective thought process premised on
the needs and concerns of the people who will
ultimately uphold the institutions.

As a supporting partner, the international
community must advance its capacities through
institutional, technical, financial, human and other
assistance in which it has the capacity to do so. The
process must forge the effective participation of all
stakeholders, including women, civil society and
marginalized groups, so as to address the root causes of
conflicts.

