Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): First of all, Sir, let
me congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of May. We
look forward to close cooperation with you. I should
also like to thank Ambassador Heller of Mexico for his
presidency last month, under truly challenging
circumstances.

I wish to thank Ms. Karin Landgren,
Representative of the Secretary-General in Nepal, for
her comprehensive briefing and, especially, for the
update she gave us on ongoing developments.

Austria shares the serious concern expressed by
other speakers about the current political crisis in
Nepal. The dispute between Prime Minister and the

Nepal Army, which was followed by the Prime
Minister's decision to resign, has clearly aggravated
the rift between political parties and deepened the
existing atmosphere of mistrust. It is of great
importance for all parties in Nepal to exercise restraint
and to re-engage in a cooperative and inclusive
political dialogue with the aim of overcoming the
current impasse. In particular, we hope for the
expeditious formation of a stable Government that
enjoys the widest possible consensus. It is the
responsibility of all Nepalese stakeholders to ensure
that the peace process, which had finally seen
promising progress in recent months, does not lose its
momentum once again.

Let me add that Austria was indeed encouraged
by the positive developments in the peace process that
had taken place over the first three months of this year,
including progress made on the process of drafting a
constitution. We wish a peaceful and prosperous future
for the people of Nepal. Reaching agreement on the
form of governance and a federal structure for the
country is clearly a challenge that bears great
significance for Nepal's future. As I said on an earlier
occasion, as a country that has specific expertise in
these matters, Austria is prepared to offer support and
expertise.

Progress had also been made on disarmament and
demobilization, in particular with regard to the issue of
the integration and rehabilitation of Maoist army
personnel. It is very unfortunate that, in spite of the
declared determination and the efforts shown by the
political parties in Nepal to work together in a
constructive manner in the framework of the Special
Committee and the Technical Committee, this issue
now seems to be at the core of the current crisis. We
appeal to all the parties concerned to adhere to the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement and all related
agreements and encourage them to resume their work
as soon as possible.

In this context, we are also concerned about the
fact that the discharge from the Maoist army
cantonments of nearly 3,000 Maoist army personnel
disqualified as minors will now be further delayed. We
learned with great appreciation that talks on the
modalities of this discharge had started and that
preparations were under way prior to the current
impasse. There is a need for all stakeholders to ensure
that these steps have not been in vain and will lead to a
swift implementation of the assurances given to the

Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, in December 2008 that the discharge
and rehabilitation of minors would proceed without
further delay. We also believe that this task should be
carried out in a transparent manner, in conformity with
international standards and in close consultation and
cooperation with the United Nations. The proliferation
of militant youth wings affiliated with political groups
is another concern in this context.

I also wish to stress the importance of the fight
against impunity. During her official visit to Nepal in
March of this year, the High Commissioner for Human
Rights, Ms. Navanethem Pillay, warned that Nepal's
peace process could be at risk unless justice is ensured
for the victims of past and ongoing human rights
abuses. We were encouraged by steps taken by the
Nepalese Government to establish accountability for
past violations through the development of transitional
justice mechanisms. We wish to stress the need for any
such mechanism to pay particular attention to the
experiences of women and children during the conflict,
and we encourage the Nepalese Government to
continue its cooperation with the United Nations
Development Fund for Women in order to include
gender aspects in the transitional justice process, an
effort which receives Austrian support.

We concur with the Secretary-General's view that
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights Nepal can continue to play an
important positive role, not only in capacity-building
for national human rights institutions, but in
maintaining the confidence of all stakeholders in the
peace process. We therefore hope that the presence of
the office will be extended by the Nepalese authorities.

In View of the difficult current situation and the
remaining challenges of the peace process, we
encourage all involved in Nepal to take advantage of
the expertise of the United Nations Mission in Nepal in
supporting the peace process. Austria reaffirms its full
support for the Mission and would appreciate it if the
Secretary-General could include in his next report an
assessment of the impact of the current crisis on the
implementation of the peace process as well as the
consequences for the United Nations presence on the
ground, in particular in view of a possible prolongation
of the mandate.

