Mr. Kafando (Burkina F aso) (spoke in French): I
thank Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah for introducing the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/590) on piracy
in the context of our consideration of the situation in
Somalia. Having examined the report and paid close
attention to the additional information that has just
been presented to us, we should like to make some
observations.

Due to their frequency and modus operandi, the
activities of the maritime militias off the coast of
Somalia remain a source of extreme concern, making
the search for a comprehensive and Viable solution to
the tragedy in Somalia even more difficult. The
statistics given in the report are eloquent and only
confirm the gravity of the problem. Of the 300 attacks
that took place around the world between 1 January
and 30 September, 160 occurred in the region off the
coast of East Africa. This also shows the determination
of the pirates in the face of the reaction of the
international forces in the Indian Ocean.

Despite their limited capacities and the
consequences of the civil war that has raged in the
country for more than a decade, the Somali authorities,
especially those of Puntland, have launched a number
of initiatives to combat piracy and prosecute those
responsible. We welcome these efforts, which led to the
arrest and detention of more than 100 suspects in
Bossaso, and we urge the Somali authorities not to let
down their guard and to continue their fight against
this criminal enterprise.

We also warmly welcome the mobilization of the
international community in response to this scourge,
and we praise the efforts made by States and
international and regional organizations in this area.
The role of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development deserves particular notice. We also
welcome the establishment of a Contact Group and the
implementation of the Djibouti Code of Conduct
concerning the Repression of Piracy and Armed
Robbery against Ships in the Western Indian Ocean and
the Gulf ofAden.

While we may believe that the considerable
reduction in the number of successful attacks, as
stressed in the report, is the result of dynamic
international cooperation, it is important nevertheless
to bear in mind that the legal cooperation regime
currently in place is an exception and should not be
considered as replacing or modifying the provisions of
09-61200
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea,
which remains the sole legal instrument relevant to
counter-piracy activities.

However, we hope that the momentum of this
international solidarity can go beyond mobilizing
against piracy alone, and would like to see it manifest
in other areas of concern to the population of Somalia,
since it is clear that the proliferation of acts of piracy is
directly related to the overall situation facing Somalia
today. That is clear from the reports of the Secretary-
General and of the Monitoring Group on sanctions,
which establish, inter alia, a very clear causal link
between piracy and the violation of the arms embargo
in Somalia.

There is therefore no doubt that it was the
meltdown of the internal situation in Somalia that gave
birth to the maritime militias, which in turn have
become an aggravating factor due precisely to the
complicity between the pirates and the armed groups
active in Somalia.

In that context, cooperation between civil and
military actors in the fight against piracy must be
broadened so that direct bilateral and multilateral
assistance can be offered to the Transitional Federal
Government (TFG). Some countries are already taking
steps in that area and their example is worth following.

With that direct assistance, the Somali
Government will be able to consolidate its police force
and security services, exercise better control over its
land and sea territories and facilitate the delivery of
humanitarian assistance. Such assistance should work
in tandem with the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), the only international presence on the
ground and whose preponderant role has been
demonstrated, but which sorely lacks the financial and
logistical resources to carry out effectively its mandate
and guarantee the implementation of the Djibouti
Agreement.

We welcome efforts by the Secretariat to support
AMISOM. pursuant to resolutions 1863 (2009) and
1872 (2009), notably through its support for the
African force. We also support the Secretary-General's
appeal for a more substantive assistance to AMISOM
so that it can continue to provide support to the
Transitional Federal Government in the maintenance of
peace and security.
09-61200

The new dynamic created by several political
parties participating in the Transitional Federal
Government and establishing themselves now, in fact,
in Mogadishu, is certainly something to be welcomed,
but we have to act quickly to ensure that it does not
crumble, which would plunge the country once again
into chaos.

In conclusion, we would like to thank Mr. Ould
Abdallah, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Somalia, for his ongoing efforts on behalf
of and commitment to the people and the authorities of
Somalia.

