The President (interpretation from Spanish): In
accordance with the decision taken by the Council at its
3702nd meeting, I invite the Vice Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Angola to take a seat at the Council table; I
invite the representative of Mozambique to take a seat at
the Council table; I invite the representative of Zimbabwe
to take a seat at the Council table; I invite the
representatives of Algeria, Brazil, Burundi, Cape Verde,
Costa Rica, Cuba, India, Ireland, Lesotho, Malawi,
Malaysia, Mali, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Portugal, Tunisia and
Zambia to take the seats reserved for them at the side of
the Council Chamber.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Miranda
(Angola), Mr. Chidumo (Mozambique) and
Mr. Mazemo (Zimbabwe) took seats at the Council
table; Mr. Baali (Algeria), Mr. Amorim (Brazil),
Mr. Nsanze (Burundi), Mr. Leao Monteiro (Cape Verde), Mr. Berrocal Soto (Costa Rica),
Mr. Rodriguez Parrilla (Cuba), Mr. Shah (India),
Mr. Campbell (Ireland), Mr. Mangoaela (Lesotho),
Mr. Rubadiri (Malawi), Mr. Abdullah (Malaysia),
Mr. Ouane (Mali), Mr. Sevilla Siero (Nicaragua),

 

Mr. Gambari (Nigeria), Mr. Lamego (Portugal),
Mr. Abdellah (Tunisia) and Mr. Kasanda (Zambia)
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President (interpretation from Spanish): The
Security Council will now resume its consideration of the
item on its agenda.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/1996/844, which contains the text of a draft resolution
prepared in the course of the Council's prior
consultations.

It is my understanding that the Security Council is
ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution
(S/1996/844) before it. If I hear no objection, I shall put
the draft resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:

Botswana, Chile, China, Egypt, France, Germany,
Guinea-Bissau, Honduras, Indonesia, Italy, Poland,
Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America


The President (interpretation from Spanish): There
were 15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 1075 (1996).

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda. The

Security Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 3.55 pm.

