Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are pleased to welcome to the Security
Council Mr. Hoshyar Zebari, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Iraq. We listened attentively to his statement
on Iraq's efforts to bring about national reconciliation
and economic development in his country. We are also
grateful for the briefings given to the Council this
morning.

In December 2007 we supported the Security
Council's decision on a further extension of the mandate
of the Multinational Force until 31 December 2008,
because it is necessary to keep the presence of foreign
troops in Iraq within the purview of the Security
Council. We agree that, to a degree, the Multinational
Force is playing a stabilizing role by preventing a full-
fledged civil war. But this situation cannot continue
indefinitely. Genuine sovereignty for Iraq can be
established only when full responsibility for security has
been transferred to the Iraqi leadership and when
foreign troops have been withdrawn from the country.

In that context, it is important that the planned
United States-Iraq status of forces agreement not
enshrine the indefinite presence of foreign troops in
Iraq, lest we run the risk of seeing an ever-deepening
rift in Iraqi society, which would exacerbate the
domestic political situation and would have increased
negative repercussions for the security situation. A
timetable for the withdrawal of the Multinational Force
08-38029
from Iraq would not only reduce tension in that country
but would also provide important impetus for efforts
towards national reconciliation and agreement.

The Security Council has repeatedly expressed its
firm support for the sovereignty, political independence
and territorial integrity of Iraq. The Russian Federation
firmly supports those principles and is confident that
the Iraqis are in a position to decide independently on
their own future and to resolve the issues on their
national agenda. That is why it is important that the
presence of foreign troops in Iraq not undermine the
country's sovereignty in any way and that it be
consistent with the Security Council's position on these
matters.

Another problem is that of Iraqi detainees - in
particular, children - held in military prisons of the
Multinational Force. It is essential that the norms of
international humanitarian law be observed in that
context.

We note that there continue to be many
shortcomings with respect to the activities of the
Development Fund for Iraq. But no decisive measures
have been taken to correct them. In particular, there has
been no decrease in the quantity of smuggled oil, and
the Fund's accounting practices and its methodologies
and forms for concluding contracts with foreigners -
especially United States subcontractors - give rise to
grave misgivings. That is all because of a chronic lack
of transparency in the Fund's work.

