Mr. Delattre (France) (Spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking Germany, Belgium and
Kuwait, co-penholders on the humanitarian track of
the Security Council's work on the situation in Syria.
I also thank Rosemary DiCarlo and Mark Lowcock for
their very informative presentations, the conclusions of
which are indisputable, namely, that we are witnessing
another humanitarian catastrophe in the north-western
part of the country, adding further to the long list of
tragic events that Syria has experienced for more than
eight years. This dark chapter in Syria's history has yet
to conclude.

The number one priority today is to prevent Idlib
from becoming another Aleppo. We must spare no
effort to shield the lives of more than 3 million civilians,
including 1 million children. In order to help those who
are most vulnerable, in the coming days France will
release €5 million for the Syria Humanitarian Fund
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA), based in Gaziantep.

Humanitarian aid is crucial for the millions of
people in the north-west, but remains an inadequate
means for sustainably alleviating the suffering of the
people. We therefore must also focus our efforts on
three priorities: the protection of civilians and civilian
infrastructure, unconditional respect for international
humanitarian law in all circumstances, including in
the fight against terrorism, and the need for a lasting
political solution.

First, the protection of civilians and civilian
infrastructure must be an absolute priority for all.
Despite the positive words uttered by both sides, the
offensive against Idlib is leading to renewed civilian
casualties every day, in flagrant violation of every
underlying principle of international humanitarian law.
The protection of civilians, including humanitarian and
medical personnel, as well as civilian infrastructure, is
an obligation that all must uphold. It is not negotiable.
It is unacceptable that health-care infrastructure,
including that which has been deconflicted, and
schools continue to be the targeted. A letter signed
by 60 doctors and prepared by the non-governmental
organization Syria Campaign, which France recently
asked to be circulated as a Security Council document,
is an irrevocable appeal to that end. I recall once again
that attacks on hospitals and health-care workers,
which France condemns in the strongest possible terms,
constitute war crimes.

In that regard, we call on the signatories of the
ceasefire agreement to fulfil their commitments and
ensure an effective ceasefire in the north-western part
of the country with a view to freezing the fronts and
a nationwide ceasefire, in accordance with resolution
2254 (2015). Russia in particular must exert all the
necessary pressure on the regime. We urgently call on
that country to do so. Discussions between Turkey and
Russia must also be pursued in order to allow for an
immediate de-escalation ofthe situation. Iran must also
join that effort. Furthermore, I reiterate here and now
that France will stand extremely firm in the event of the
renewed use of chemical weapons and ready to respond.

Secondly, the fight against terrorism must be
carried out under international humanitarian law. The
influence that the terrorist group Hayat Tahrir al-Sham
has gained in most ofthe region covered by the ceasefire
agreement is of course a cause of great concern to all of
us, but we must be clear on three points.

First, the offensive under way is not part of the fight
against terrorism, as was demonstrated by the attacks
on densely populated areas and civilian infrastructure.
It is impossible to see such attacks as having any other

purpose than to terrorize populations and depopulate the
localities concerned in order to retake control of those
areas. Furthermore, such an offensive in no way serves
our goal of beating back terrorism. On the contrary, it
contributes only to increasing and spreading the threat,
while running the risk ofdispersing the terrorist fighters
present in the region. The offensive calls into question
Turkey's efforts to reduce the influence of terrorist
groups - efforts we fully support. Finally, combating
terrorism, which is a priority for us all, cannot be
invoked in every instance as ajustification for violating
international humanitarian law, as the Secretary-
General has recalled on more than one occasion.

Lastly, the current escalation risks undermining
all efforts under way to reach a political solution when
such efforts are more urgently needed than ever.

While a compromise on the constitutional
committee, which was accepted by most international
actors, seemed to be coming to fruition and would
have finally allowed for substantive discussions, the
Syrian regime chose to adopt a strategy of systematic
obstruction, thereby preventing the establishment of that
body so as to hold those discussions hostage. We have
every confidence that Special Envoy Geir Pedersen will
keep us up to date on the obstacles he encounters and
will hopefully inform us when a satisfactory balance
for all has been found. But we cannot stop there. Every
one of us understands that the political process would
be meaningless if it were limited to the issue of the
constitutional committee. It is therefore imperative that
the Council unequivocally support the Special Envoy
in order to move forward, as of now, with regard to all
aspects of resolution 2254 (2015).

In particular, I am alluding to the issue of elections.
The Syrians themselves must be able to freely choose
the future they want for their country, and we must
ensure that they have the means to do so. That is
the condition necessary for providing a satisfactory
and lasting response to the tragedy that Syria had
undergone. In accordance with resolution 2254 (2015),
we must therefore begin to consider the conditions
necessary for avoiding a scripted outcome, as was the
case in the past, so that the elections will be free and
fair, that all Syrians, including refugees, will have a
free voice in the process and that the United Nations
will be involved in overseeing the process. I also take
this opportunity to reiterate that, in the absence of
significant and irrevocable progress in the political
arena, the positions of France and the European Union
on sanctions, reconstruction and normalization will
remain unchanged.

It would be a serious error of judgement as well
as a grave political misstep to consider that the Syrian
tragedy is behind us. In view of the recent tragic events
in Idlib that are following a well-worn script, no one
will be able to say that they were taken by surprise. We
therefore call on every member of the Security Council
to assume its responsibilities to end this recent tragedy
and allow for the establishment of a credible political
process under the supervision of the United Nations
allow that country to move forward on the path towards
stability and peace

