Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
Senegalese delegation wishes to warmly thank the
Italian delegation for its timely choice of this topic.
Trafficking in persons in times of conflict goes hand
in hand with the many briefings that the Italuian
presidency has organized this month, including those
on Libya and security challenges in the Mediterranean.

We would also like to thank today's briefers:
Secretary-General Antonio Guterres; Mr. Yury Fedotov,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime; Ms. Maria Grazia Giammarinaro,
United Nations Special Rapporteur on trafficking in
persons, especially women and children; and of course
our brother Mr. Smai'l Chergui, Commissioner for
Peace and Security of the African Union, who joined us
from Addis Ababa,

This debate could not be more timely, given that
indignation mixed with anger continues to envelop the
world, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa, following
media reports on the auctioning off of individuals of
sub-Saharan African origin in Libya. Certain questions
continue to be posed. How long has this despicable
practice been taking place? Who are the main players?
What inhumane fate have those who were sold been
subjected to? How can we put an end to this scourge,
which surely constitutes a crime against humanity
and a form of modern-day slavery? How can we find
and bring to justice the backers, the perpetrators, the
people smugglers and others who are complicit in this
heinous trade?

In a press statement released last week, part of
which I read out here in the Chamber on 17 November
(see S/PV.8106), the Government of the Republic of
Senegal appealed to the international community,
specifically - but not limited to - the African Union
and the United Nations, as well as the Libyan authorities,
to swiftly launch an investigation in order to shed full
light on the situation and identify the perpetrators, as
well as to take all the necessary measures required to
stop this crime and hold all those responsible to account.

What can the Security Council do? What must
it do? The Secretary-General has provided us with
an update on the current state of play in terms of
States' implementation of the relevant provisions of
resolution 2331 (2016). Resolution 2388 (2017), which
we have just adopted this morning, equips us with
the ways and means to tackle this scourge. In March,
while reflecting on the same issue, we focused on
forced labour, slavery and other abhorrent practices
(see S/PV.7898). In September, the General Assembly
endorsed the political declaration on the implementation
of the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons, having assessed the actions
taken and remaining challenges in the fight against
human trafficking in general.

For its part, Africa is highly mobilized, given
that our continent is home to the greatest number of
conflicts. My delegation would like to warmly thank
Commissioner Mr. Chergui for his unequivocal briefing
on the causes of this scourge as well as the ways and
means to eliminate it. On the global level, however,
no continent has been spared this scourge. The United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime has shed further
light on the complex links that exist between human
trafficking and armed conflicts, revealing that 60 per
cent of those who fall into the webs of human traffickers
in situations of armed conflict are refugees and asylum
seekers in flight.

My delegation would like to take this opportunity
to underscore its grave concern regarding human
trafficking by non-State groups, especially terrorist
groups, in situations of armed conflict. Their goal is
to consolidate their power, strengthen their financial
sources and, most unfortunately, recruit foreign
terrorist fighters. Whether in Libya or anywhere
else engulfed in conflict, my delegation considers
it essential to be determined and coordinated in our
fight against all forms of human trafficking. This
crime not only constitutes a violation of human rights
and international humanitarian law but also leads to
further instability, allowing non-State armed groups,
transnational organized crime and terrorism to thrive.

In adopting resolution 2331 (2016), the Security
Council issued an urgent appeal to Member States to
take immediate and decisive steps to prevent and crack
down on human trafficking, particularly in situations
of armed conflict. It calls upon States to investigate
human trafficking networks active in armed conflict
situations in order to disrupt and dismantle them. It also
calls upon States to establish mechanisms to properly
identify victims and alleged victims, including on
the basis of information received from staff who are
in contact with the former. Moreover, States should
strengthen the bodies established to investigate illicit
financial flows and analyse the extent to which human
trafficking funds terrorism. States are also called upon
to accede to the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocol to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children.

Senegal has ratified almost all international and
regional conventions and protocols pertaining to human
trafficking, and we have incorporated the provisions
of those conventions and treaties in our national
legislation. We have also drawn up regulatory and
legislative texts at the national level that address the
human trafficking and migrant phenomena, particularly
through a specific law with a section in the criminal
code on human trafficking and analogous practices that
provides for the protection of Victims, adopted in 2005.

In terms of measures to discourage, suppress
and prevent human trafficking, particularly in armed
conflict situations, my delegation would like to
underscore the need to ensure accountability, while
stressing the need to investigate alleged acts when
reported and to identify and prosecute the alleged
perpetrators. When national legal systems and courts
are not in a position to conduct such investigations and
prosecutions, then the international justice system must
take on those cases in the fight against impunity.

It goes without saying that frank and exhaustive
international and regional cooperation - within the
context of a global and united approach - is essential
here, particularly when it comes to information flow
and the identification and protection of victims.
Such cooperation must also translate into enhanced
coordination between mechanisms and frameworks
intended to prevent human trafficking and to protect
people from human trafficking in conflict situations.

To conclude, my delegation would once again
like to emphasize the importance of prevention,
protection, rehabilitation and accountability as tools
that we must utilize in our fight against all scourges
that threaten humankind, including that of human
trafficking in situations of armed conflict. To that end,
it is important to combine prevention, response and
reparation, while addressing the deep-rooted causes
of conflict, strengthening the protection of civilians in
such situations and bringing those who are responsible
to justice.

