Mr. Fadaifard (Islamic Republic of Iran): I wish
to extend my congratulations to you, Mr. President, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of March. We have full
confidence that, under your wise guidance, the Council
will make progress in dealing with the issues on its
agenda. Let me also extend my felicitations to your
predecessor, Ambassador Said Ben Mustapha of
Tunisia, for his skilful stewardship of the Council's
activities last month. I should also like to thank you for
convening this important meeting of the Security
Council at this critical time for the Palestinian people.

Since last September, the occupying forces in the
Palestinian territories have been engaged in an
excessive and disproportionate act of violence and
collective punishment against the rightful protests of
the Palestinians against the protracted occupation of
their homeland. Over the course of recent months, the
whole of the Palestinian territories have been the scene
of the killing of hundreds and injuring of thousands of
defenceless civilians.

Moreover, there has been an increase in tension
and the level of violence in the Palestinian territories
since a more aggressive Israeli faction took up the reins
of power. Among other things, this has led to an
intensification of the policy of suffocating and
besieging cities and villages in the West Bank and the
Gaza Strip. The tightening of blockades against the
Palestinian territories by the occupiers is further
preventing Palestinians from having access to basic
necessities and medical treatment, travelling to work
and trading their goods throughout the area. Without a
doubt, this amounts to collective punishment and a
stranglehold on a whole people in the name of security
for the occupiers. The pursuit of this policy over
several months has devastated the Palestinian economy,
created financial a crisis in the Palestinian institutions
and plunged more families into poverty.

Indiscriminate killings and the besieging of the
Palestinians negate the Israeli pretence of peaceful
intentions or a desire for pacific co-existence with the
Muslims and Christians in the region. The crimes being
committed by the Israeli armed forces are consistent
with the aggressive and expansionist policies of the
occupying Power. Israel's repeated crimes and heavy-
handed approach run counter to all its high-sounding
and empty claims of seeking peace. This regime is the
main cause behind the tension and instability in the
region. While deceitfully negotiating peace with the
Palestinians, it embarked on violently assaulting the
oppressed and defenceless people of the occupied
territories.

The fundamental question the international
community - represented by the United Nations and
the Security Council - now faces is to what extent we
can normally justify the loss of Palestinian blood and
life, the homelessness and agony before the occupiers
and aggressors are tamed and the fundamental rights of
the Palestinians to self-determination in their own land
is realized. The international community in general and
the Islamic world in particular continue to be deeply
concerned about the ongoing atrocities being
committed by Israeli troops. The disdain of Israeli
leaders for the principles of international law and the
decisions of the United Nations is no secret to anyone
in this Chamber. That disdain is commonly
acknowledged, deplored and condemned. But very
little, if anything, is done about it.

In this context, we deplore some recent remarks
that amount to encouraging the occupying regime in
the pursuit of its bloody campaign against Palestinian
civilians. The recent reiteration of commitment by a
Member State of the United Nations to transfer its
embassy to occupied Al-Quds - which, among other
things, constitutes a violation of Security Council
resolutions - represents one-sided support for the
Israeli regime, is likely to further escalate tension in
the region and represents a clear bias towards
occupation and aggression.

In our view, the international community and the
United Nations - especially this Council - have a
responsibility to intervene to stop the brutal campaign
by the Israeli armed forces against civilians.
Undoubtedly, the unchecked acts by Israel will further
exacerbate the situation in the Middle East as a whole.
The defeat in the Council last December of a draft
resolution to authorize the establishment of a United
Nations observer force to protect Palestinian civilians
led to more violence and more bloodshed. Since then
more than 70 Palestinians have lost their lives, more
destruction has occurred, and the plight of Palestinian
civilians has been further exacerbated.

In the face of this worsening situation, the
Palestinian authorities and a vast majority of the
Member States of the United Nations - including the
Islamic, Arab and Non-Aligned States - have called
for an international force to be stationed in the
occupied territories with a view to protecting civilians
and putting an end to the bloody campaign by the
Israeli forces. We expect the Security Council to fulfil
its responsibility this time and take concrete and
appropriate measures to this end.

