Ms. Del Ponte: I am grateful to have this
opportunity to appear before the Council to provide an
update on the work of the Prosecutor's Office in the
two International Tribunals. It is my assessment that
both the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) are poised to enter the
most important phases of their existence, and are both
about to begin their major criminal trials.

Much crucial work is still before us in both the
ICTY and the ICTR, but we are also now in a position
to begin to see how the Tribunals may complete their
mandates. We are starting to consider what has been
called our "exit strategy". I know that the Council is
particularly keen to have an understanding of what my
future prosecution policy will be and how much work
the Tribunals will have to do before they can complete
their respective mandates.

Although there are substantial differences in the
nature and complexity of the conflicts in the two
continents - in the scale of the killings and the time
scale of the events - it goes almost without saying
that my focus in both situations is on the leaders. Any
lower-level cases that are going through the system
either can be explained in terms of the history of the
Tribunals' development or concern notorious
individuals whose conduct stands out despite the fact
that they had no formal position in any hierarchy.
Instead, today I would like to explain two aspects of
our policy. These aspects apply equally to Rwanda and
to the former Yugoslavia.

First, we have not investigated all crimes. We
have concentrated on the areas in which the worst
massacres occurred. So there have not been in-depth
investigations of every municipality, or opstina, in
Bosnia or every commune in Rwanda. But we have
established that both the genocide in Rwanda and the
ethnic cleansing in Bosnia were highly organized
criminal enterprises - centrally organized at the
highest level, and pursued with enthusiasm at the
regional and local levels.

Even at these command levels, we are not dealing
with a small handful of individuals, whatever
impression the general public may have about how
many architects there were. From the many thousands
of significant targets, we have selected under 200 in
each Tribunal, and we do not even expect to prosecute
all of them. Many, many important crimes have
therefore been left to be dealt with by national
jurisdictions. In order to appreciate the scale of the
undertaking, we have only to look at the internal
Rwandan justice system, where we see in the
traditional gachacha process that 11,000 local
jurisdictions, involving 260,000 local judges, will be
dealing over a three-year period with 120,000
perpetrators of the genocide, in which between 800,000
and 1 million people died in the space of four months.

Secondly, one should not fall into the trap of
separating the accused into big fish and small fish. A
number of the accused under investigation in the ICTY
and the ICTR played a very nasty role somewhere in
between these two extremes - as key organizers and
motivators at the district or local level. They had strong
links to the central power base and were fully aware of
the overall criminal enterprise, but they also fervently
put the plan into action in their areas and had blood on
their own hands. In the former Yugoslavia, some of
these individuals still occupy official functions, and
their activities are an obstacle to the peace process. In
Rwanda, the genocide exploded quickly in the areas
where such people fanned its flames, whereas in other
regions, without these willing perpetrators, the number
of killings was lower, and the massacres were less
extensive. For the local people, the victims and the
survivors, it was these people who brought their world
to an end, not the remote Governmental architects of
the overall policy of genocide. Unless these local
leaders are brought to justice in both Rwanda and the
former Yugoslavia, the ordinary population will not
come to terms with the past, and the process of
reconciliation and building a stable peace will suffer
accordingly. That is why these cases justify my
attention, and that is why the choice of cases to pursue
is not at all simple. The crimes were highly organized,
directed and implemented at a number of levels, each
of which depended on the other.

We have previously given figures for the
remaining investigations - 36 for ICTY, involving a
total of 150 accused, and 136 for ICTR, involving a
total number of 136 accused, since each investigation
there concerns a single target. The Council, however,
should not think that these figures present the picture
of a prosecutor out looking for business and ranging
broadly over all possible suspects, whatever their
involvement. On the contrary, the figures represent, as
I have said, only a fraction of the potential number of
crimes or suspects, all of which involve mass murders,
multiple killings, or other crimes at the very highest
end of the scale of national or international crimes. In
fact we turn most cases away.

If there is any public concern about the number of
investigations, it is a concern about resources, because
it cannot be a concern in terms ofjustice. There may be
people who are saying after the events of 11 September
that the world has moved on, and the issue of the day is
now terrorism, not past conflicts. We cannot take that
view of international justice. There is now all the more
reason for the international community to harden its
resolve to pursue those responsible for genocide and
crimes against humanity. It is neither credible nor
honourable to give support to the war against terrorism
while not doing everything possible to bring to justice
those responsible for genocide in Rwanda, in
Srebrenica and in other massacres. As with the fight
against terrorism, we delude ourselves if we think there
is a quick and low-cost solution that does the job
properly. The Tribunals must have sufficient means to
do their job, and all the projections we make about the
remaining workload are made on the assumption that
the two Tribunals will be given the resources that we
have sought in our budget submissions for the next two
years.

I know that earlier this month the Council held
informal consultations to discuss the question of ad
litem judges for the ICTR. Tribunal representatives
were present to listen to the Views being expressed, and
certain concerns were relayed to me about prosecution
policy. First, let me say that I strongly support the
appointment of ad litem judges for two reasons. We
must increase our capacity to hold the trials of accused
who have already been in custody for long periods.
And we must also be able to process new cases within
a reasonable time. These are separate compelling
justifications for increasing the number of available
trial chambers.

I understand that the Council is broadly
sympathetic to the request for ad litem judges, but I
also understand that you need more information from
me about my prosecution policy.

Let me therefore give you specific details of my
prosecution policy in the ICTR. Fifty-three accused are
in custody; some cases have been dealt with; 17
accused are currently on trial; 25 are in custody
awaiting trial. More than 20 are still at large, including
major figures who have found refuge in countries
outside Rwanda and who are beyond the reach of any
national jurisdiction.

Our investigations concentrate not on
geographical areas of Rwanda, but on prominent
figures in the command structures of the Government
and the military and in other walks of life such as the
media, the clergy, the intelligentsia and the business
world. The only prospect of bringing those people to
justice lies with the International Tribunal, and we have
demonstrated our ability to track them down. Our
specialist tracking teams often work in the most
difficult conditions to locate their targets, but it can be
done, and it is being done. This year, nine accused have
been arrested so far.

As things stand, bringing existing detainees to
trial in the courtrooms will take us well into 2005 or
even beyond. In addition, I indicated at the beginning
of this year that I intend to complete a further 136 new
investigations, to bring our investigative mandate to
completion by the end of 2004. That programme,
which involves a maximum of 30 new indictments per
year, appears to have caused some alarm, and I hope it
is not being misunderstood.

The figure of 136 represented the very outside
estimate of our future workload. The figure is the
number of investigations, not the number of trials.
Many factors will affect whether or not an
investigation results in an actual prosecution. In a
significant number of cases the accused are confirmed
to be dead. Not all investigations succeed in gathering
sufficient evidence. Not all accused can be traced or
arrested, and the number of trials will be lower than the
number of arrests because the accused can often be
tried jointly. In one current trial, six accused are being
tried together. Working down from the outside number,
our original estimate was that the 136 investigations
might result, at best, in 45 new trials, perhaps even
fewer.

What does that mean in additional years of work
for the ICTR? Assuming, after the major prosecutions
are over, that subsequent trials can be much more
streamlined in terms of their proof, we are probably
looking at another four years of trial work for the
Tribunal after the existing business has been processed.
That is what we can expect from our investigations
programme. Four years added to the end of 2004 would
bring us to the end of 2008.

This year, we are largely on course to meet our
investigative targets. Nineteen cases are reaching the
indictment stage now, and 21 other investigations are
ongoing. It is true that some of these are suspects who
were involved at the local level, but to cite just a single
example, one of these targets is believed to be
implicated in the killing of between 20,000 and 30,000
people. That demonstrates the scale of the crimes we
are continuing to address in Rwanda, even in our new
cases.

For those ongoing investigations, we will depend
upon the close cooperation of States, including Rwanda
itself. One new area that we are addressing concerns
allegations of crimes committed during 1994 by
members of the Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF) forces.
The success of those inquiries will be especially
affected by the degree of support we have from the
Rwandan Government. The extent of their
collaboration remains to be seen. We also intend to
move away from our policy of sealed indictments to a
policy of greater use of circulating arrest warrants
openly through the INTERPOL red notice procedure
and taking advantage of reward programmes for
information leading to arrests. We are particularly
interested in the situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, and have begun to explore with the
authorities in Kinshasa whether we can trace suspects
there. It is essential that we do so.

I believe that in these circumstances my
investigative strategy is fully justified by the facts. I
am satisfied that cases are being carefully and properly
selected for prosecution in the international forum. In
addition, individual cases are constantly reviewed as to
their viability and suspended or discontinued if need
be. No reason or principle can be found based on the
public interest in the pursuit of justice that would
justify a radical departure from the existing policy.
But I hope we shall not come to that point. Ad
litem judges are required to deal swiftly with existing
business, irrespective of the future court programme. If
the capacity of the Tribunal were to be increased for
this reason, there would certainly be a substantial
shortening of the Tribunal's life. I agree with the
estimate that existing trials could probably be
completed by the end of 2004, and that the remaining
trials could be dealt with by the end of 2008.

In the Office of the Prosecutor we are prepared to
aim at such a date, even if that means adjusting the
content and presentation of the later trials accordingly.
I am determined to address the quality and focus of our
prosecutions. I have already set about changing the
whole approach of my staff so that the emphasis at all
times is on making the best use of resources. We must
ensure that all activity, both in investigations and in
prosecutions, is especially directed towards meeting
the evidential and legal needs of the Chambers. I am
resolved to present cases with much greater precision
and focus than in the past and to explore all available
avenues to speed up the proceedings without losing the
essential fairness of the trial process. If we do that, in
my estimation, the close of 2008 might be a realistic
date for the end strategy for the trials in the ICTR.

If I might now turn to specific issues for the
ICTY, I can inform the Council that, in The Hague, we
are also planning strategically for the future. Our
programme of outstanding investigations, publicly
revealed in 1999, is under constant review. Four
investigations relating to Kosovo and Macedonia have
been added to the original list of 36, bringing the total
to 40. A review of the status of these investigations has
been carried out in recent weeks. Four have been
successfully completed; a further four have been
incorporated into other ongoing cases; six have been
discontinued; and a further 10 have been identified as
potentially suitable for prosecution at the national
level. These 10 have been suspended pending a review
in a year's time. The 16 remaining investigations are
active and are now being resourced according to their
priority. Together, the active and suspended cases
involve 108 potential accused and an estimated 34 new
indictments, approximately half of which might
appropriately be dealt with by national courts. The
deadline is still to complete the outstanding
investigations by 2004.

There is an interesting possibility for an ICTY
exit strategy - namely, as I have just suggested, that
some cases might be referred to courts in the former
Yugoslavia for prosecution. The Tribunal's rule 11 bis
already envisages the referral of cases, but it has not
yet been used and it is doubtful whether a suitable
judicial process exists at the national level. Adequate
measures have yet to be taken for the protection of
witnesses. As the majority of the cases are from Bosnia
and Herzegovina, I have therefore suggested in
Sarajevo the idea of designing a special court in Bosnia
and Herzegovina that would have an international
component or of developing an existing state court to
perform this special task. That court would deal with
cases referred to it by the ICTY either during or after
the completion of our mandate, and it might also deal
with other sensitive war crimes cases, which are
presently submitted to my office for review under the
"Rules of the Road" scheme following the Rome
Agreement of 18 February 1996.

The idea of a national forum involving the
participation of international prosecutors and judges to
deal with war crimes cases has so far been well
received by the Office of the High Representative, by
the Presidency in Bosnia and Herzegovina and by
certain States. Much work would have to be done to
establish the required prosecutorial and judicial
mechanism. My Office stands ready to assist the
development process in any way possible, since I am
aware of the international community's desire to see
both Tribunals finish their work in a timely fashion. If
we began to design a special court in Bosnia and
Herzegovina now, it might well be up and running by
2004 and able to begin taking accused in the kind of
cases we have identified for our own investigations as
being suitable candidates for national prosecution.

I would not, however, be ready to hand over
prosecution of my cases to national courts as they now
operate. War crimes cases are still politically sensitive
in the region and the international community must
promote equitable national jurisdictions and legal
institutions. The United Nations must have an
important role to play in this regard.

I must speak also about State cooperation with
the Tribunal, which remains problematic. It takes a
great deal of time and effort to achieve cooperation and
we do not yet enjoy full cooperation across the board in
the former Yugoslavia. Some time ago, the Council was
seized of the issue of non-cooperation by Yugoslavia
and then by Croatia. Last year, I was able to report that
the situation with Croatia had improved, but that full
cooperation was not yet forthcoming. At present, I can
reiterate that, in some areas, we have managed to make
advances with the Croatian Government, but there are
still areas where progress is very slow, especially in the
production of documents.

I am constantly in a constructive dialogue with
Zagreb. I expressed my disappointment about the non-
apprehension of General Gotovina and was assured that
the Government remained committed to arresting him
and transferring him to The Hague. However, it
appears that General Gotovina has been allowed to
escape arrest and I wish to bring that unsatisfactory
situation to the attention of the Council. I also call on
Croatia to overcome any remaining obstacles and to
stand firm on the path of full cooperation.

With the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, the
picture is very complex and often discouraging.
Working with Prime Minister Djindjic and the Serbian
authorities at the republican level, we have experienced
good results in terms of arrests and access to evidence.
The transfer of Slobodan Milosevic to the Tribunal was
a groundbreaking event and a courageous step by the
Serbian Government, but cooperation at the federal
level appears to be blocked for reasons of domestic
politics. Despite their declarations, the federal
institutions obstruct the work of my Office. State
cooperation does not begin and end with the surrender
of accused. We need access to documents, archives and
witnesses. At the federal level, access to these
important sources of evidence is being denied to us on
the pretext that no domestic legislation authorizes it.
And, while the Yugoslav federal authorities continue to
claim that an internal law must be enacted in order for
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to be able to
cooperate with the Tribunal, I see no effort on their part
to ensure adoption of such legislation. The contrary is
true.

Moreover, I regret to inform the Council that
Ratko Mladic is residing in the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia under the official protection of the
Yugoslav Army. As an officer of the Yugoslav Army,
General Mladic is said to enjoy military immunity and
is being shielded from both national and international
justice. To give another glaring example, the Council
will recall the efforts we have made for years now to
obtain the transfer of the three accused indicted for
crimes in Vukovar. In November 1998, the Council
adopted resolution 1207 (1998) stressing that no State
may invoke provisions of its domestic law as a
justification for its failure to cooperate and calling for
the arrest and transfer of the three Vukovar accused.

Nevertheless, the Army continues to harbour
them with the approval of the federal Government.
Instead of compliance with the specific demands of the
Security Council, these indictees are allowed to defy
the Tribunal publicly by making presentations of their
books. The list of wanted persons sheltered in the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia has grown longer and,
instead of giving clear, unambiguous support for the
Government of Serbia and of taking a clear stand on
cooperation with Tribunal, the federal authorities are
doing everything possible to stop even limited
cooperation by the republican authorities, who have
been most helpful.

I have not had occasion to address the Council
since the arrest and transfer of Slobodan Milosevic. I
would like to express my gratitude to members of the
Council and to all other States, without whose
insistence and support the transfer of Milosevic would
not have happened. Last week, a third indictment was
confirmed against Milosevic, covering crimes in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, including genocide. The
support of States is essential for the work of both
Tribunals and I would also like to record my gratitude
to those countries that assisted in the recent tracking
and arresting of several accused for the ICTR in
Arusha.

Turning to Bosnia and Herzegovina, the most
problematic issue is still cooperation with Republika
Srpska. A law on cooperation was recently passed, and
we are now very keen to see the concrete results of its
implementation. As for the authorities of the
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, they have once
again confirmed their full commitment to cooperation
by the swift transfer to The Hague of four indicted
senior Bosniac military staff.
The argument all too often put forward by
Belgrade and Banja Luka, and to a lesser extent by
Zagreb, that cooperation with the ICTY is threatening
the political stability of the country is one which
should not be taken at face value. Is it easy for the
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina to transfer a
former chief of staff of the army or generals who are
still widely regarded as war heroes? Although the
authorities in Sarajevo stress the political difficulties
that may arise from their cooperation with the ICTY,
they do not invoke them as excuses for not
cooperating.

Last week I visited Skopje in order to inform the
authorities of the Former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia about two new investigations opened by my
Office in regard to alleged war crimes by National
Liberation Army (NLA) and Government forces. The
Council will be well aware of the situation in that
country. Despite the fact that all parties involved in the
recent conflicts have agreed that the existence of the
Tribunal has already had a very positive deterrent
effect, I have to admit that I am deeply worried. Until
now I have experienced no problems with activities of
my Office in that country. I have had full cooperation
from the Government so far, and I was assured by the
President and the Prime Minister that I could count on
their full cooperation in regard to any of my
investigations. But the real test will come when
investigations are pursued and if indictments are
confirmed.

I therefore appeal to the Council for its
continuing support for the work of my Office, and
especially ask the Council to insist upon the arrest of
Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic, whose
continuing liberty is an affront to the authority of the
Council and mocks the entire process of international
criminal justice. If we are seriously resolved to enforce
the rule of law against those who commit acts of
genocide or crimes against humanity or terrorism, and
if we want long-term stability in the Balkans, we
simply cannot allow Radovan Karadzic or Ratko
Mladic to escape justice and we cannot talk in any
meaningful way about the completion of the mandate
of the International Criminal Tribunal unless they are
brought to trial with the others in The Hague.

Those are the key issues I wished to bring to the
attention of the Council. Finding long-term and
comprehensive solutions for criminal justice in the
former Yugoslavia and Rwanda does not lie within the
mandates or the powers of the International Tribunals
themselves. As Prosecutor, appointed by the Security
Council, I will fulfil whatever mandate is given to me
in the pursuit of international peace and security.

