Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): We join other Council
members in expressing appreciation to the delegations
of China and the United States as well as to all those
involved in the work that led to the adoption of resolution
2321 (2016) today. Malaysia welcomes the unanimous
adoption of this very important text, in the light of our
belief that the illicit development and procurement of
weapons of mass destruction and related technologies
and capabilities by any State are unacceptable and
cannot be tolerated by the international community.
Such activities undermine the work and commitment
of all Member States to peaceful relations with each
other and to the peaceful resolution of conflict. It is for
this reason that Malaysia voted in favour of resolution
2321 (2016).

Malaysia remains convinced that a comprehensive
solution, which would take into account the interests
of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, the
grave hardship its people are facing as well as their
humanitarian needs, is indispensable. We call upon
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to return
to the negotiating table and resume peaceful dialogue
and negotiations Within the framework of the Six-
Party Talks. The language in the text that safeguards
humanitarian exemptions is a crucial element. It is
designed to prevent the effects of possible unintended
consequences against legitimate interests, particularly
those related to the livelihoods and the humanitarian
situation of the people of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea. We fully support that aspect of
the resolution.

As we did upon the adoption of resolution 2270
(2016) in March, Malaysia wishes to re-emphasize that
interpretation of relevant provisions in the resolution
must not be a pretext for disrupting diplomatic access
or further impede the conduct of legitimate diplomatic
and humanitarian activities in the country, as
stipulated under the Vienna and Geneva Conventions,
respectively. At the twenty-third regional forum in
July, sponsored by the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations, Malaysia called on the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea to abide by all relevant Security
Council resolutions, dismantle its nuclear programme
in a complete, verifiable and irreversible manner, and
refrain from conducting any provocative acts, in order
to maintain peace and stability in the region.

Our aspiration is to see the denuclearization of the
Korean peninsula. We also wish to see the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea returning to the negotiating
table and embracing change that builds trust so that
shared security and prosperity might be pursued
through international cooperation.

