Mr. Kodama (Japan): At the outset, allow me to
express my deep gratitude to you, Mr. President, for
your initiative, which includes convening today's open
debate on the working methods of the Security
Council- an issue on which Japan places great
importance - and holding a separate and in-depth
discussion in the General Assembly earlier this month
on the annual report of the Security Council. We also
acknowledge the work of Ambassador Barbalic',
Permanent Representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
for his contribution in his capacity as Chairperson of
the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions.

The discussion on working methods is crucial to
ensuring prompt and effective action on the part of the
Council for the maintenance of international peace and
security and to securing the support of the wider
United Nations membership in the implementation of
Council decisions. Continuous attention and effort,
such as the better use and implementation of
presidential note 507 as revised last year (S/2010/507),
are Vital to achieving improvement in the working
methods.

The issue of working methods is also important in
the context of Security Council reform. The
intergovernmental negotiations on Security Council
reform have identified working methods as one of the
five key issues for reform. Achieving real progress in
this area will require continuing and sincere efforts on
the part of the Council as well as initiatives led by
Member States. In this connection, we highly
appreciate the dedication shown by the 8-5 group.

We recognize that the Security Council has been
engaged in an effort to increase transparency and has
made some significant progress in that regard, as
reflected in its more frequent interaction with
non-Council members. It has also shown some success
in improving efficiency. For example, the programme
of work is briefed by the presidency to non-Council
members at the beginning of each month and is readily
available on the Council website. In its interaction with
non-Council members, the Council has not only
engaged in dialogues with relevant parties such as
troop- and police-contributing countries and the
Peacebuilding Commission but has also made use of
informal interactive discussions. Such improvements
are duly reflected in the revised note 507.

Furthermore, under Japan's initiative, a
comprehensive Handbook on the Working Methods of
the Security Council, commonly referred to as the
"green book", was compiled to assist newly elected
members of the Council, as well as the wider
membership, in gaining an understanding of the
workings of the Security Council. I am delighted to
announce that the handbook is now available as a
publication of the United Nations. It can now be
purchased for $12 at the United Nations bookstore or
online at amazon.com. Incidentally, the colour is no
longer green, but white and blue.

We also listened with keen interest to your
presentation, Mr. President, at the General Assembly,
which described recent efforts in the Council to
improve its internal efficiency, and commend members
of the Council on such undertakings.

While it is important to acknowledge the progress
made to date, we must continue our efforts to improve
the working methods. More specifically, the
improvements that we hope to see include
improvement of the monthly assessments by the
President on the work of the Council through
summaries of major discussions. That will help the
creation of a more substantive annual report.

It is also critical to acknowledge that
effectiveness is not antithetical to openness. The
Security Council must recognize that interaction with
concerned parties is necessary in order for the Council

to take prompt and effective actions. In that context,
we note that progress in improvement of the Council's
working methods cannot be achieved without the
cooperation of the permanent members. Needless to
say, a periodic review of progress is necessary, and,
with help from existing and newly elected members,
we hope for continued engagement on that issue in the
coming years.

In conclusion, the participation of many
non-Council members in today's meeting testifies to
the fact that the working methods remain a critical
issue. We appreciate the work of countries that have
helped promote the issue from both inside and outside,
such as the S-5 and Portugal. Japan will also maintain
its engagement in this very important issue in order to
promote continuous improvement in the working
methods of the Security Council.

