Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): I extend the deep gratitude
of the Nigerian delegation to you, Mr. President, for
the invitation to participate in this meeting and for the
concise concept note provided to facilitate the
discussion. This initiative is greatly appreciated not
only for its value as a stock-taking endeavour, but also
because it strengthens the current momentum in
reviewing United Nations peacekeeping strategies. We
thank Mr. Alain Le Roy, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, and Ms. Susanna Malcorra,
Under-Secretary-General for Field Support, for their
insightful and informative statements today.

In our time, reform of United Nations
peacekeeping has become inevitable given the rapid
expansion, complexity and multidimensional scope of
peacekeeping and humanitarian relief missions. Several
missions are constrained by lack of basic equipment,
transport, food and medical supplies. This situation is
compounded by gaps between mandates, inadequate
planning of operations, fluid exit strategies and perhaps
imprecise relationships between troop-contributing
countries (TCCS), the Secretariat and the Security
Council.

The Nigerian delegation believes that as
formidable as these challenges are, they do not in any
way diminish the relevance of United Nations
peacekeeping as an essential instrument for conflict
resolution and peacemaking. We also believe that
Member States need to forge a consensus on the
strategies for addressing these challenges, particularly
the relationship between TCCS, the Secretariat and the
Security Council. Consensus is required especially on
issues of mandate, resources, entry into peace
operations, exit benchmarking and strategic long-term
planning.

Considering the relationship between TCCs and
the Security Council, we note that the broader and
more sustained dialogue envisaged by resolutions 1327
(2000) and 1353 (2001) has not been fully realized.
Undergirding this situation is the urgent need for
strengthening the triangular cooperation between the
Security Council, the TCCs and the Secretariat. It is
imperative that TCCS that implement peacekeeping
mandates in the field are involved from the conception
and resolution-drafting stages of a peacekeeping
operation through to its deployment and final exit.

Resource constraints remain the single most
important challenge to effective peacekeeping. This
dampens the morale and enthusiasm of peacekeepers
and the political will of TCCs. Therefore, resources
must be adequate and predictable in order to
accomplish the mandated tasks. Furthermore, adequate
predeployment training should be a prerequisite to the
successful implementation of any mandate.
There should be a larger consensus-building
process encompassing political negotiations at the
highest levels of Member States on the difficult issues
of doctrine, entry, exit, rapid deployment, resources
and Security Council working methods. Nigeria
supports intensified dialogue and consultations
between the Fifth Committee of the General Assembly,
the Peacebuilding Commission, the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations and the Security Council
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations in order
to overcome some of the clearly delineated challenges
facing United Nations peacekeeping operations.

