Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Madam President, for having organized
this briefing. It gives us an opportunity to interact with
Lieutenant General Maqsood Ahmed, Military Adviser
forPeacekeepingOperations,andtheForceCommanders
of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO), the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
and the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
(UNDOF). I thank Lieutenant General Dos Santos
Cruz, Major General Kazura and Lieutenant General
Singha for their briefings. They have vividly described
the challenges facing United Nations missions in
contexts where the threat is constantly evolving and
peacekeepers are required to be able to adapt a great
deal.

The protection of civilians, a topic raised by General
Dos Santos Cruz, is at the heart of the mandate of many
United Nations operations. The implementation of such
mandates requires the commitment of all components
of the mission. On the one hand, missions must have
civilian capacities specifically devoted to the protection
of civilians, in particular women and children. However,
on the other hand, it is equally critical that Force
Commanders have professional and well-trained staff,
with the necessary awareness, capacities and resources
to effectively protect civilians.

Before and during their deployment, peacekeepers
should have specific training that enables them to deal
with complex situations and to take decisions on the
ground. In that context, allow me to recall resolution
2143 (2014), on children and armed conflict, in which
the Security Council recommends that the United
Nations and troop- and police-contributing countries
undertake "targeted and operational trainings for the
preparation of United Nations mission personnel
on their contribution in preventing violations against
children" (resolution 2143 (2014), para. 20).

In terms of capacity, MONUSCO, with its Force
Intervention Brigade and unmanned aerial systems, or
monitoring drones, is a mission that is well equipped
to protect civilians. Its decisive action against the
Mouvement du 23 mars showed that. The proactive
implementation of the Mission's mandate, which
General Dos Santos Cruz mentioned, strengthened
the protection of civilians in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of Congo. In that specific case, it
also helped to address the gaps in the use of force that
were identified in the report issued last March by the
Office of Internal Oversight Services (A/68/787).

In that context, aware that there is no universally
applicable model for all crises, I would ask General
Dos Santos Cruz and his colleagues who are present
to what extent MONUSCO's experience in terms of a
robust mandate and its available protection of civilian
capacities could be useful for other United Nations
missions. I ask that question also conscious of the
fact that yesterday the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Mali proposed to the Security Council that the United
Nations mission deployed in that country, MINUSMA,
be strengthened with the addition of a rapid-reaction
force (see S/PV.7274). It would also be interesting to
hear General Kazura's view on that issue regarding
MINUSMA.

The events of recent months in Mali and in the
Golan have shown that the environment in which a
peacekeeping operation is deployed can deteriorate very
quickly. In Mali, increasingly violent and sophisticated
attacks target MINUSMA and cause major losses.
Those asymmetric attacks have killed 20 Blue Helmets
since early September. As has already been said, 31
peacekeepers have been killed since the Mission's
deployment on 1 July 2013. For its part, Luxembourg
is ready to support the measures being explored by the
Secretariat, together with MINUSMA, to enhance the
safety of troops deployed in northern Mali in particular.

In the Golan, the repeated abductions of UNDOF
members and the increased activities of the Syrian army
and several armed groups, including the Nusra Front,
jeopardize the implementation of the Force's mandate and
expose the peacekeeping troops to considerable danger.
The United Nations must continue consultations with
troop-contributing countries and the two signatories
to the Agreement on Disengagement between Israeli
and Syrian Forces of 1974 so as to establish a better
framework for the UNDOF arrangement. The risks to
United Nations staff must be minimized while allowing
them to carry out their important work and maintain
their rapid-response capability. In that context, I would
like to underscore that it is critical that the Syrian
authorities allow UNDOF to have all the necessary
equipment to combat improvised explosive devices as
soon as possible.

The timely definition of specific military strategies
and concepts, the use of force, leadership, effective
command and control, force generation, the necessary
resources, the training of peacekeepers, mission
support and the proactive approach highlighted by
General Dos Santos Cruz are, in our View, the most
important parameters to ensure the effective execution
of missions in the changing environment.

In conclusion, I would like to express Luxembourg's
deep appreciation to all the heads of the military
components of United Nations missions for the
outstanding work that they carry out with their
contingents in increasingly demanding conditions in
order to implement the mandates entrusted to them by
the Council in the interest of protecting civilians.

