Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
want to express my gratitude for the very interesting
presentations we have heard from Prosecutor Carla Del
Ponte, Judge Pillay, Judge Jorda, the Minister of
Justice of Rwanda and the Ambassadors of Yugoslavia
and of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

It is clear that we are reviewing the performance
of the two Tribunals at the best possible time with
regard to results. As is well known, things take place
slowly in the administration ofjustice. But there is also
an opportunity to reap the harvest. We share the
opinions of the judges and of the Prosecutor with
regard to the fact that this is the situation in which both
bodies now find themselves.

We can see quite clearly that the reforms have
been useful and that the effort to authorize changes to
the original statute have been quite worthwhile. We are
also convinced that the same should be done with
regard to the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR). The ICTR too must undergo a phase
of reform and of streamlining its processes. We also
hope that the time will come - preferably sooner
rather than later - to appoint new ad litem judges.

We share the Prosecutor's view that it is
necessary to maintain, and even accelerate further, the
investigation and trial phase. We cannot really accept
the View that terrorism is the subject of the day and that
therefore everything else becomes secondary. On the
contrary, it is clear that there is an imperative need to
move forward in carrying out those investigations and
bringing those aberrant cases to trial.

We know that reconciliation cannot occur if the
subject of impunity is not tackled. Therefore, it is
essential to heed the appeal made by the Prosecutor.

There are basically two questions that I would
like to ask following these general views I have put
forward. The first question relates to the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which, as we can see from the report, the
Tribunal supports. We would like to know what the
relationship of that Commission would be with the
work of the Tribunal. What might be the international
component of the Commission? What about financing
issues? Also, might it be possible to extend this mode
to other cases, such as that of Yugoslavia? I am
referring to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission.

My second question pertains to the relationship
with Belgrade, which has been mentioned on a number
of occasions. As the Ambassador said, there has been
progress, but there is also one case that has been
commented upon on a number of occasions - the case
of Mr. Milosevic, which in its current stage obliges us
to continue to reflect on how to improve the
relationship. The report mentions the re-opening of the
Office of the Prosecutor in Belgrade. It has also been
said that access has been allowed to witnesses and that
there are adequate conditions.

When it comes to the application of justice, we
need to make progress. As we have said many times in
this Council, that same kind of relationship is essential
at the political level. It has been said - and we will be
repeating it this afternoon - that it is necessary to
strengthen the relationship, for example, between the
Security Council on United Nations mission, in Kosovo
and the Federal Government. This is also something
that has been analyzed a great deal and that has yielded
good results.

I would like to ask whether coordination between
the Tribunal, including the Office of the Prosecutor,
with the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo - I am mentioning this because it
is something significant to this Council - could
improve the cooperation between the Tribunal,
especially the Office of the Prosecutor and the Federal
Government. There might be some capacity there to
work in the right direction of having greater
cooperation in the specific case of the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia, the Tribunal and the Office of the
Prosecutor.

