Mr. Sotirov (Bulgaria): At the outset, I would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Colombia, on Colombia's
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of August. On behalf of the Bulgarian
delegation, I wish you every success in fulfilling your
demanding and challenging tasks in presiding over this
important body.

Let me join previous speakers in congratulating
Ambassador Alfonso Valdivieso and his colleagues on
the excellent preparations for this open debate. We are
grateful for the opportunity to contribute to the
consideration of the issue of small arms an item
on the Security Council's agenda since September 1999
that is of particular concern to the international
community.

 

The importance of this meeting is emphasized by
the fact that it is being convened only a few days after
the successful completion of the United Nations
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, chaired in a
professional and devoted way by Ambassador Camilo
Reyes of Colombia.

Bulgaria has associated itself with the statement
made by the representative of Belgium, on behalf of
the European Union, and we fully share the view that
the United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects
should be assessed as a landmark in, and an impetus to,
the efforts of the United Nations to prevent, combat
and eradicate the illicit trade in strategic arms and light
weapons. We are pleased to see that the positive
outcome of the Conference is already galvanizing the
political will to fight the problem at national, regional
and global levels.

Bulgaria is pursuing a responsible policy of
stringent control over arms exports in compliance with
existing regional and international standards. I would
like to share some of our national experience.

Bulgaria has aligned itself with the criteria and
principles contained in the European Union Code of
Conduct on Arms Exports and the European Union
Joint Action on Small Arms and Light Weapons of
December 1998.

On 2 February 2001, the Bulgarian Government
adopted a special normative act for the implementation
of the principles, standards and criteria contained in the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
document on small arms and light weapons.

Our country abides by the provisions of the
moratorium on small arms transfers established by the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS). We welcome the recent decision in Lusaka
by the ECOWAS heads of State and Government to
renew the moratorium on the import, export and
manufacture of light weapons for a second three-year
period, with effect from 5 July 2001.

In the context of the foregoing, Bulgaria has
introduced and developed a robust system of export
controls for foreign trade activities in arms and dual-
use goods and technologies, corresponding to the
highest existing international standards.

The Bulgarian Government has established the
regular practice of adopting special normative acts or
decrees stemming from a given international
commitment.

During the last two years, the Council of
Ministers of the Republic of Bulgaria adopted a series
of internal regulations related to the implementation of
Security Council sanctions. These acts translate the
provisions of Security Council resolutions into
Bulgaria's domestic legislation and enforce them with
respect to Bulgarian nationals and legal entities.
Currently, a governmental decree for the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1343
(2001), on the imposition of sanctions against Liberia,
is in the process of preparation for adoption by the
Bulgarian Government.

In accordance with our international
commitments and the restructuring programme of the
Bulgarian armed forces, the Ministry of Defence has
already started projects for the destruction of surplus
small arms and light weapons. We are in close
cooperation with a number of partners, such as the
United States of America, Canada, the United
Kingdom, Norway, the Netherlands and others, on a
whole range of issues regarding stockpile management
and destruction of small arms and light weapons.
Under the terms of an agreement for cooperation
between the Ministries of Foreign Affairs and Defence
of the Republic of Bulgaria and the State Department
of the United States of America, signed on the last day
of the United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons, a surplus in small
arms, nearly 80,000 units, will be destroyed using
existing facilities in Bulgaria.

In addition to taking steps at the national level,
Bulgaria actively promotes regional cooperation in
South-Eastern Europe. I would like to refer to the
importance of the documents adopted at the Regional
Conference on Export Controls, held in Sofia in
December 1999. The measures agreed at that
Conference enhance national export control systems, in
line with the European standards, strengthen the
process of regional cooperation in preventing illicit
arms-trafficking and controlling exports of arms and
dual-use goods and technologies, and constitute a
sound contribution to regional stability in South-
Eastern Europe.

We commend the valuable practical work of the
Security Council's arms embargo monitoring
mechanisms. We are convinced that full and strict
implementation of Security Council sanctions can be
achieved only through goodwill and a synergy of
actions on the part of all relevant actors. Improved
international cooperation and the coordination of
national State policies are indispensable for the
attainment of this goal.

Bulgaria will continue its cooperation with the
Security Council and its subsidiary bodies on
monitoring the sanctions, including arms embargoes,
and will render all necessary assistance for the
implementation of Security Council measures
undertaken under Chapter VII of the Charter.

Before concluding, let me assure the Council that
Bulgaria is fully committed to further contributing to
the efforts of the international community to eradicate
the illicit trade in small arms, which has a destabilizing
effect and poses a threat to international peace and
security.

