Mr. Berger (Germany): Germany strongly
condemns the terrorist attack against United Nations
House in Abuja. We convey our heartfelt condolences
to the families of the victims, the Government of
Nigeria and the whole United Nations family.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his insightful briefing and you, Mr. President, for
organizing today's important debate. As we all know,
India is one of the countries that has most contributed
to peacekeeping over many decades. Germany aligns
itself with the statement to be made by the European
Union observer a little later. We commend the active
and useful role of the Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations in this field, and we would like to thank
Ambassador ngu for her able chairmanship.

Peacekeeping operations are at the heart of the
United Nations role to maintain international peace and
security. We need a comprehensive and coherent
approach. That includes the need to continually adapt
preventive diplomacy, peacemaking, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding to changing circumstances. In recent
years, much has been achieved in terms of reforming
United Nations peacekeeping, including doctrine and
capability review. Building on those efforts to adapt
and to strengthen effective peacekeeping, we consider
it vital to continuously review and develop its key

areas, in particular the design and management of
missions; delivery in the field, including enhanced
deployment; clarifying and delivering on critical roles;
and improving mission impact and building for the
future. Against that backdrop, I would like to highlight
some specific aspects that are of particular concern to
us in those key areas.

First, designing mandates and missions should
build on an inclusive planning process, involving at an
early stage a broad range of experts and potential
capability providers, notably including troop-
contributing countries (TCCs) and police-contributing
countries (PCCs), as well as the main financial
contributors. The role of corrections in peacekeeping
settings should also be taken into account. A decision-
making process that includes interaction with major
stakeholders at an early stage could contribute to
managing expectations and facilitate an effective force
generation process. Such procedures are mandatory in
other international organizations. To that end, the role
of the Military Staff Committee should be revitalized
and strengthened.

Furthermore, from the beginning, whenever
possible, peacekeeping mandates should have clear
benchmarks inserted and monitored in order to lay the
ground for transition towards exit, based on sustainable
political solutions. Partnership in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding is crucial. We fully support initiatives to
improve communication and to find a better system for
consistently pooling information from TCCs, military
experts, PCCs, the main financial contributors and
other key stakeholders in peace processes.

Secondly, with regard to delivery in the field,
including enhanced deployment, peacekeeping requires
adequate means and efficient structures. In that
context, we strongly support the implementation of the
global field support strategy.

In reference to the deployment of staff, let me
add two points on civilian staff and police. Civilian
staff have a critical role to play in the peacekeeping
context as they provide political, humanitarian, human
rights and leadership roles, as well as management and
related administrative functions. In that context, I
would like to reiterate our support for the swift
implementation of the civilian capacities review. We
should build on existing local capacities and the
capacities of Member States and regional
organizations. Internal United Nations rules and

11-4815]
regulations need to be adapted in order to improve
conditions for Member States that wish to support the
United Nations with their civilian capacities.

Police generation, however difficult, remains
crucial. While the global commitment of trained police
is high, the challenge to source sufficient numbers of
police to ensure that well-trained police officers are
sent to secure the sustainability of their effort remains.

Thirdly, with regard to delivering on critical
roles, the protection of civilians has increasingly
become a yardstick for measuring the success of
peacekeeping operations. That represents both an
opportunity and a challenge. It is an opportunity since
the protection of civilians is now widely accepted as a
part of peacekeeping mandates, while respecting the
primary responsibility of States to protect their
civilians. However, it also represents a challenge with
regard to the discrepancy between aspirations, also
contained in mandates of the Security Council, and the
reality on the ground, notably with respect to the
capabilities of missions to effectively implement
protection tasks. We therefore advocate strengthening
the evaluation of protection measures, fostering inter-
mission exchange and drawing on lessons learned more
intensively.

In the context of the protection of civilians,
children in armed conflict deserve our special
attention. They are the most vulnerable members of
societies, both as victims and as coerced participants in
conflicts. Special protection from violence, including
sexual violence, and for schools and hospitals is
necessary, as stated in the recently adopted resolution
1998 (2011), as are specific approaches in the field of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration.

Peacekeepers transform mandates into concrete
actions on the ground and keep hope for peace alive.
Clearly defined mandates, adequate resources and
reliable command and control structures are crucial for
successful peacekeeping. They are also crucial for a
successful transition from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding.

Germany remains committed to all initiatives
supporting more efficient and effective peacekeeping.
There are no alternatives to peacekeeping operations.
However, we should keep in mind that their
deployment should be a last resort. The prevention of
conflicts needs to be the priority.

11-4815]
To conclude, let me take this opportunity to thank
all United Nations military and civilian personnel
involved in past and current peacekeeping operations
for their duty and to express our deepest appreciation.

I thank the Indian delegation for preparing the
draft presidential statement, which we fully support.

