Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Zahir Tanin, for his
comprehensive briefing to the Security Council on the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
(S/2018/407). The State of Kuwait fully supports the
Special Representative in his activities and values the
vital role that the United Nations has played over the
past period in helping Kosovo to build its institutions in

accordance with relevant Security Council resolutions,
notably, resolution 1244 (1999). I would also like to
welcome Mr. Ivica Dacie, First Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Serbia, and Ambassador Vlora Citaku. I thank them for
their briefings.

I will focus my remarks on the political and security
developments in Kosovo.
First, I will address the political developments. The
State of Kuwait acknowledged the independence of the
Republic of Kosovo in 2013. We support all efforts
by the Republic of Kosovo to strengthen its security,
stability, rule of law and justice system, as well as
its ongoing efforts to build up its State institutions.
We support its efforts to integrate with the European
Union, and we call for stepping up the work to resume
dialogue led by the European Union and implement
all agreements between Kosovo and Serbia to reach
lasting solutions to issues between the two parties so
as to ensure good-neighbourly relations and strengthen
regional stability and security. We commend the steps
taken by Kosovo to accelerate the implementation of
the European Union reform agenda, especially with
regard to the ratification of the agreement signed in
2015 with Montenegro on the demarcation of the two
countries' shared border.

We welcome the resumption of the European
Union-facilitated dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina at the technical level. We urge the two parties
to commit fully to honouring all their obligations within
the framework of that dialogue, in particular with regard
to the establishment of the association of Serb-majority
municipalities as a first step towards strengthening
trust between the two parties. We welcome efforts to
create a comprehensive judiciary in Kosovo in line
with the agreements between Belgrade and Pristina.
The European Union-facilitated high-level dialogue
therefore remains the optimal framework within which
to settle pending issues between the two parties and the
only way to reach just and sustainable solutions.

Secondly, with regard to security developments,
we are concerned about signs of deteriorating relations
between Belgrade and Pristina, especially following
the arrest of the Director of the Office for Kosovo
and Metohija of the Government of Serbia, Mr. Marko
Durie, on 26 March. We call on both parties to avoid
all provocation and inflammatory rhetoric. We urge
the authorities in Belgrade and Pristina to continue to
address all matters of concern through dialogue and to
demonstrate the necessary political will so as to ensure
the full normalization of relations between both parties.
We express our concern about the slow progress being
made in investigating the assassination of the Kosovo
Serb politician Oliver Ivanovic', on 16 January. We
believe that trading accusations will undermine mutual
trust among communties throughout Kosovo.

The international community must step up its efforts
to encourage Pristina and Belgrade to overcome all their
differences and reach sustainable and just solutions that
are acceptable to the two parties to ensure peace and
stability throughout the region. We encourage UNMIK
to continue its active cooperation with Pristina and
Belgrade, and all communities in Kosovo to strengthen
stability, security and human rights.

