The President (spoke in Russian): I will now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Russian Federation.

As all other Council members have stated, we are
grateful to Assistant Secretary-General Hedi Annabi,
for his thorough briefing on developments in Kosovo
and in Serbia and Montenegro. As noted, today is the
fourth anniversary of the adoption in this Chamber of
resolution 1244 (1999), which set the principles and
parameters for a settlement in Kosovo. There is no
doubt that, since then, huge efforts have gone into
reaching a settlement, and considerable progress has
been made. Mr. Annabi and Council members spoke
about that today.

However, they also emphasized that the problem
is far from resolved. Problems outnumber solutions.
The main conclusion today is that, four years after the
deployment of special missions to the area, local
citizens continue to lack equal conditions of security
and freedom of movement. There is ongoing ethnically
motivated violence, oppression and discrimination
against minorities, particularly the Serb minority. The
most flagrant example, though by no means the only
one, was the brutal murder on 4 June of a Serbian
family - an 80-year-old couple and their son - in
Obilic. The Security Council has vigorously
condemned that crime and has supported the effort of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and the Kosovo Force (KFOR) to
arrest the culprits and bring them to justice.

Moreover, it is clear that we need to do more than
ensure that all such crimes are punished. We must
double and treble the efforts of the international
presences to fundamentally alter the entire atmosphere
in the region, where there are still extremist forces
creating a breeding ground for continued violence.
International legal defence organizations -
particularly Amnesty International in its 2003 report -
have noted serious violations of minority rights in the
region.

The idea of building a multi-ethnic society in
Kosovo is bogged down and the level of trust between
the Kosovan communities is in fact back to square one.
The leaders of the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government frequently shirk their obligations under
resolution 1244 (1999) and the Constitutional
Framework. Moreover, they are attempting to promote
decisions that incite ethnic hatred. Among these is the
Regional Assembly resolution on the "war values" of
the Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA) and the draft
legislation on the census, which, if adopted, could be
used for the arbitrary redrawing of the ethnic map of
Kosovo. Such actions are being undertaken in spite of
the clearly articulated negative position taken by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and as
a challenge to the United Nations and the Security
Council.

Without radical improvement of the situation in
that regard, we cannot expect the full participation of
minority representatives in the work of the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government and in disbanding
parallel structures. Our common challenge is to
promote normal conditions for the constructive
participation of all Kosovan communities in the work
of regional and municipal bodies.

We are concerned by the maintenance of the
Kosovo Protection Corps (KPC) as a paramilitary
successor of the KLA. Ignoring decisions of the
Security Council, the KPC leadership is blatantly
trying to turn the Corps into an army for an
independent Kosovo. I am not even referring to the
commission of terrorist acts by Corps members, such
as the sabotage of a bridge in Svecan, which was also
referred to today.

Unfortunately, the reaction of the UNMIK
leadership was confined to placing a one-month travel
ban on Corps workers abroad, which has already
ended. We are convinced that, in its current guise, the
KPC is a potential source of destabilization in the
region, capable of inciting a new wave of violence on
multi-ethnic soil. We call on UNMIK to take a more
active and consistent position in countering the growth
of radical movements in the region and the assertion of
their legitimacy.

Due to the lack of progress in those areas, there is
also a serious impediment to establishing a dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina. We support the concept
of "standards before status". The process of
transferring some competencies to the Provisional
Institutions must be constructed strictly in accordance
with resolution 1244 (1999) and must move forward at
a pace that is, above all, determined by the
effectiveness of the work of those bodies in areas in
which they have received all necessary competencies.
The international presences must strengthen their
oversight of this process, and must not allow abuses or
attempts to use the Provisional Institutions for political
purposes and turn Kosovo into a quasi-State structure.
The process of the transfer of competencies can in no
way be a substitute for a fundamental decision in
principle on the status of the region, which must be
taken at a later stage and exclusively on the basis of
resolution 1244 (1999).

We deeply regret the serious interruptions in
dialogue between UNMIK and the Belgrade
authorities. We believe it is necessary to take urgent
steps to restore constructive cooperation between them,
which will enable us to avert collisions, such as the one
that came about on the head of UNMIK's regulation on
land-use rights. We have a serious concern about that
regulation. It could have consequences that are too far-
reaching. This is too serious a matter for us to take a
decision that will last 99 years.

I share the view expressed by the representative
of Mexico: we would expect that the assessments given
by Council members today will be borne in mind by
the UNMIK leadership in Kosovo in their continuing
efforts for the full and comprehensive implementation
of resolution 1244 (1999).
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Serbia and Montenegro. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.

