Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): I wish to take this
opportunity to express our appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for holding this public debate on an
exceptionally important issue. The discussion
concerning Iraq has been on the waiting list at the
United Nations for quite a while. We are convinced that
at this moment it is necessary to hear out the views of
Member States, before the Council adopts any new
resolution on Iraq that may directly affect the future
role of the United Nations in the maintenance of
international peace and security.

Ukraine welcomes the agreement reached in
Vienna on I October 2002 between the Government of
Iraq, the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC) and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) on
practical arrangements for the resumption of
international inspections in Iraq. We view as promising
the assurances given by the Government of Iraq that
unrestricted access to all sites would be granted to
United Nations inspectors. We consider this as the next
step towards full compliance by Iraq with the relevant
Security Council resolutions.

Ukraine believes that the international community
should utilize to the full extent all the opportunities this
decision provides to check Iraq's compliance with the
Security Council resolutions, specifically with regard
to the development of weapons of mass destruction.
That is why we call for the inspectors to return to Iraq
as a matter of urgency, as well as for Iraq to provide all
necessary conditions for the work of UNMOVIC and
IAEA, and to cooperate closely with the international
inspectors. In this connection Ukraine is ready to
provide all necessary assistance and support, including
sending Ukrainian experts to UNMOVIC in its work in
Iraq.

We are fully confident that the United Nations
inspectors would discharge their duties to the highest
professional standards consistent with their mandate.
The results ofthe inspections should play the definitive
role in elaborating further steps of the United Nations
concerning Iraq.

As a non-permanent member in the Security
Council in 2000 and 2001, Ukraine stood for and
continues to call on the Iraqi Government to strictly
adhere to its commitments under all Security Council
resolutions, especially with regard to the disarmament
obligations that remain the main prerequisite for lifting
Council sanctions.

The need for a peaceful solution of the issue of
Iraq in a way that preserves the authority and
credibility of the United Nations and international law,
and preserves the unity and territorial integrity of Iraq,
as well as peace and stability in the region, should be at
the core of the Council's decision on Iraq.

In conclusion, I would like to stress that Ukraine
favours continuing efforts in exploring all peaceful
means to resolve the situation and to avoid a war that
would cause further sufferings, first of all to the people
of Iraq.

