The President (spoke in Arabic): I will now make
a statement in my capacity as Minister for Foreign
and Expatriate Affairs of the Hashemite Kingdom of
Jordan.

I am honoured to preside over today's meeting
of the Security Council on the item "The situation in
Middle East, including the Palestinian question".

First, I would like to take the opportunity to express
the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan's appreciation
for the States Members of the United Nations for the
confidence they have shown my country by electing
it, almost unanimously, as a non-permanent member
of the Security Council for the 2014-2015 term. We
assure the Council that, God willing, we will prove that
we are worthy of that confidence, by working with a
spirit of cooperation and harmony with other members
of the Security Council, entrusted with the primary
responsibility of maintaining international peace and
security on behalf of the international community.

The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, under the
leadership of His Majesty King Abdullah II Bin Al
Hussein, has a singular record of accomplishment,
for which the entire international community has
expressed appreciation. It is a record of relentless and
fruitful efforts to promote the purposes and principles
of the United Nations: achieving global harmony,
peace, justice, security and stability. Jordan has also
made remarkable contributions, distinguished by both
quality and quantity, to United Nations peacekeeping
operations in many regions of the world. I can assure
the Council today that we will continue to honour that
outstanding track record and will work diligently, with
a positive spirit, to build on those achievements.

Unfortunately, the Middle East region continues
to be gripped by chronic tensions with repercussions
and ramifications that threaten international peace and
security. That painful continuing reality has imposed on
the Council agenda the tradition of regularly convening
a special meeting on the Middle East, because the
situation in the region is a constant source of concern
owing to its direct impact on world peace.

We have no doubt that the continued absence of
a just, lasting and comprehensive peace between the
Arabs and Israel is the source of most tensions in the
Middle East. Hence the achievement of a just and
comprehensive peace would give rise to dynamics that
would lead to the elimination of other tensions in the
region. The key to a comprehensive Arab-Israeli peace
lies in the implementation of the two-State solution,
with an independent and fully sovereign Palestinian
State established within the 1967 lines, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, living in peace and security
and within secure borders with all countries in the
region, including Israel. Such a solution should be in
line with the relevant terms of reference adopted in this
regard, including the numerous resolutions adopted by
the Council, such as resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973),
1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003), in addition to the Arab
Peace Initiative, whose importance has been repeatedly
acknowledged by the Council.

Based on that conviction, we support the ongoing,
much-appreciated efforts led by the United States
and undertaken personally by its Secretary of State,
Mr. John Kerry, aimed at reaching a Palestinian-Israeli
agreement that adopts the two-State solution and
addresses all core issues, namely, refugees, Jerusalem,
security, borders, water and settlements, in accordance
with the aforementioned international terms of
reference and resolutions of international legitimacy.
We also deeply appreciate the efforts being made by
Secretary Kerry to ensure that an agreement is reached
by the bodies directly concerned and not by proxy. We
have consistently stressed this issue.

In that context, I deem it imperative to stress that
we in Jordan believe that the implementation of the two-
State solution and the establishment of an independent
and fully sovereign Palestinian State within the June
1967 lines, with East Jerusalem as its capital, constitute
a higher interest for Jordan. In fact, all ofthe core issues
directly affect higher, factual Jordanian interests. We
are the world's largest host of Palestinian refugees,
and most of the refugees on our territory are Jordanian
citizens in addition to their status as refugees. The
protection and restoration of their legitimate rights,
as recognized by the international terms of reference
pertaining to the peace process, lies at the heart of our
responsibilities.

As a host country, we, in turn, have rights owing
to the burdens we have shouldered. Regarding East
Jerusalem, His Majesty King Abdullah II is ensuring
the maintenance and protection of Christian and Islamic
holy sites there, as part of the historical Hashemite
custodianship of East Jerusalem. We will continue to
play that role and to address all Israeli violations, which
continue in defiance of several resolutions issued by the
Security Council that stipulate that all Israeli actions in
occupied East Jerusalem are null and void and should
be halted immediately, and that the Israeli occupation
of East Jerusalem must end. Moreover, the world
rejects Israel's settlement activity, which is illegal and
continues even as we speak. In addition, the issues of
security, borders and water directly affect the security
of Jordan and its interests.

Accordingly - and although we are not a party
to the negotiating process yet are a main party in the
context of the process as a whole - let me stress that
all agreements on the core issues should take into full
account and, indeed, meet Jordan's vital and higher
interests. Our unyielding commitment to achieving
peace is based on our firm conviction that ending
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict would lead to an end
to the broader Arab-Israeli conflict, which would, in
turn, result in the elimination of many other sources of
tension in the region. I cannot fail to point to the tragic
humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories, particularly in the Gaza Strip, and urge the
international community to shoulder its responsibilities
in that regard.

The tragic, bloody crisis in Syria continues to rage.
This bloodshed must stop immediately. Syria must work
to end the crisis there, especially since it has spilled
over beyond Syrian borders and now threatens regional
and international stability. That threat is associated not
only with displacement and an influx of refugees into
neighbouring countries, but also with the unrestrained
flow of people and weapons into Syria's neighbours.
That has become an alarming phenomenon that poses
a real security threat to some of those countries, the
entire region and even beyond, as international peace
and security are at stake. We in Jordan are convinced
that a political solution is the only way to end this
tragedy.

The upcoming international conference to be
held in Montreux, Switzerland, is an opportunity that
should not be wasted to put this political solution on the
right track through the cessation of hostilities. Such a
political solution must meet the aspirations ofthe Syrian
people, for which so much blood has already been shed.
The envisioned political transition should immediately
lead, through a consensus among all parties, to the
establishment of an inclusive executive transitional
body representing the entire Syrian spectrum. It should
have full authority and act immediately to restore
social cohesion in Syria, with complete jurisdiction
over the entire territory of the country, in a manner
that ensures Syria's territorial integrity and political
independence. Such a body should also have full
control and sovereignty over Syria's weapons arsenals,
pave the way for a pluralistic and democratic political
system, and work to restore security and stability in
order to encourage the return of internally displaced
persons and refugees in neighbouring countries, with
Jordan at the forefront. As the Council is aware, we
are currently hosting about 1.3 million Syrian citizens,
including nearly 600,000 who have been refugees
in Jordan since the outbreak of the crisis three years
ago. We are sharing with those brothers and sisters our
already limited resources, with the cost of their hosting
estimated at $1.7 billion for 2013. We anticipate the cost
to reach $2.8 billion in 2014.

We call upon the international community to
help us meet the challenge to which we have risen on
behalf of humankind. We have previously extended an
invitation to the Council to visit the camps so as to get
a close look at the situation on the ground. Moreover, I
wish to express our gratitude to the State of Kuwait and
to the Secretary-General for hosting the International
Humanitarian Pledging Conference for Syria. It could
be useful for the Security Council to adopt the results of
the aforementioned international conference when they
are achieved. It would also be useful if it were to adopt
a resolution that makes it mandatory for all parties to
implement those results. Let me take this opportunity
to express our appreciation for all who have made such
great efforts to facilitate the holding of this important
conference, particularly several States members of the
Security Council, namely the initiating countries, the
Russian Federation and the United States of America,
and others that have played an important role in that
regard.

There is no doubt that the unending conflict in the
Middle East and the unusual circumstances in some
countries of the region are all interlinked because they
have been unfolding in a time ofwar. Such circumstances
have produced internal tensions in some countries in our
region that in turn have led to practices that have fuelled
sectarian, ethnic and religious polarization, opened the
door wide to interference by external powers, incited
parties against each other and interfered in the internal
affairs of some countries in the region, driven by their
desire for hegemony and expansion. The result has been
a deepened state of polarization that is spilling over
into other countries. It poses a real threat to regional
and international peace and stability. It is therefore
the duty of all to firmly confront violence, extremism
and all forms of terrorism, as well as religious, ethnic
and sectarian polarization, and to tirelessly work to
eliminate the root causes of phenomena that threaten
internal and international stability.

Nevertheless, addressing the wave of extremism,
sectarian and religious tension and incitement in the
region is a challenge to regional security and stability,
as its effects can be seen to be spilling over into our
neighbouring countries, not just in Syria. It requires
us to make concerted efforts to counter such ideas.
Building on the Amman Message and the "A Common
Word" initiative, and under the guidance oins Majesty
King Abdullah 11 Bin Al Hussein, we in Jordan have
embarked on an effort to address those phenomena.

In the context of that effort, an Islamic conference
was convened in Amman last summer, at which
participants voiced their complete rejection of the use
of and incitement to sectarian conflict. It was stressed
at the conference that the freedom of opinion and belief
and the sanctity of human blood were sacred. The
conference rejected the apostatizing approach and the
use ofsuch practices in political conflict. The conference
was followed by another, entitled "Challenges facing
Christian Arabs", at which His Majesty stressed that

"[w]e believe that the protection of the rights of
Christians is a duty rather than a favour. Arab
Christians have played a key role in building
Arab societies and defending the just causes of
our Nation [and that] "[w]e support every effort to
preserve the historical Arab Christian identity and
safeguard the right to worship freely, based on the
principle in both the Christian and Islamic faiths
that emphasizes the love of God and of neighbour,
as embodied in the 'A Common Word' initiative".

Finally, I thank the Council again and reiterate that
Jordan, as the world has always known it to do, will
continue to work hard and earnestly for the development
of cooperation and cordial relations between the
countries of the world and its peoples. It will pursue its
approach and mission to enhance international security
and peace and counter isolationism, despair and hatred.
Jordan will tirelessly work to promote harmony and
respect among all nations and peoples, cultures and
civilizations. That will bring us together under the
umbrella of humanity, which is an ideal that will yield
the greatest benefits to all.

I now resume my functions as the President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the members of the Council.

