Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I
would like to thank Mr. Edmond Mulet, Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, for
presenting the report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (S/2012/72). We welcome the participation in
today's meeting of His Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremie,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and thank him
and Mr. Enver Hoxhaj for their statements.

Azerbaijan respects the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Serbia and does not recognize Kosovo's
unilateral declaration of independence. Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999) is the binding
international legal basis for resolving the Kosovo issue
and providing security in the area. The resolution
outlines explicit guidelines and steps to be taken for a
comprehensive settlement in a political process and
through negotiations.

Neither the divergences on the interpretation of
resolution 1244 (1999) nor the lack of progress in
political negotiations can be presented as justifying
unilateral action. It should be taken into account that in
its advisory opinion of 22 July 2010, the International
Court of Justice did not address the question of the
legal consequences of Kosovo's unilateral declaration
of independence. Accordingly, the Court did not clarify
whether Kosovo had the right to unilaterally secede
from Serbia or, generally speaking, whether such
secession conformed with international law, nor
whether or not Kosovo's declaration of independence
had led to the creation of a state. The Court also left
unanswered the question of the status of acts of
recognition of Kosovo made by other States.

Attempts to impose unilateral solutions on crisis
situations and their far-reaching repercussions,
including, in particular, when such actions are
controlled from outside or are coupled with external
aid or even foreign military intervention, continue to
pose a serious threat to international and regional
peace, security and stability.

As the Secretary-General pointed out in his report,
optimistic assumptions that durable solutions to the
Kosovo issue might simply evolve from the status quo,
without a strong vision for the way forward and a united
engagement of the international community, are belied
by dynamics on the ground (see S/2012/72, para. 52).
Indeed, dangerous escalation of the situation and
instability and insecurity in the area demonstrate how
illusive were the hopes of those who preferred unilateral
actions to the perspective of achieving a solution based
on mutual understanding and consensus.

Azerbaijan is deeply concerned about the tension
and violent clashes observed in northern Kosovo
during the reporting period. We note the efforts aimed
at de-escalating tension and call upon all stakeholders
on the ground to engage in dialogue and work together
to restore stability.

Under challenging circumstances, it is important
that the sides continue to be constructively engaged in
the European Union-facilitated dialogue. Some positive
results achieved so far in the framework of that
dialogue and visible progress in the implementation of
previously reached agreements are commendable and
should be consolidated. We also hope that discussion
on the European perspective, particularly on Serbia's
European Union candidature status, will not be further
delayed.

We are pleased to observe some positive
characteristics in Kosovo's economic development,
including gross domestic product growth of 5 per cent
in 2011 and a satisfactory fiscal performance. At the
same time, as the Secretary-General notes in his report,
some legislative measures on privatization-related
matters constitute a departure from the relevant
framework established by UNMIK.

The situation regarding the return of internally
displaced persons, in particular the decline in the rate
of such returns, remains a matter of concern and
requires redoubled efforts. Continued cooperation on
the issue of persons reported missing and on the
protection of religious and cultural heritage is also
essential for reconciliation between communities.

Azerbaijan is concerned about reports related to
human organ trafficking and believes that inquiries to
investigate such a serious offence will definitely serve
the principles of justice and the rule of law. We look
forward to an objective investigation of the facts by the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo. At
the same time, in order to ensure fairness and
transparency, we support the View that the process
must be empowered by and accountable to the Security
Council.

In conclusion, I would like to commend UNMIK,
under the leadership of Special Representative Zarif,
for its efforts and important role in maintaining peace
and stability in Kosovo and the entire region.

