Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the convening of this meeting and your
presence this morning, Madam Minister, presiding
over the work of the Council. We would like to thank
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov and Mr. Pierre Krahenbuhl for
their detailed briefings.

Peru notes with deep concern the deterioration in
the political and humanitarian conditions underpinning
the question of Palestine. Putting an end to that serious

situation is a major undertaking, which requires a sense
of urgency. The risk of escalation in the Middle East
must be viewed by the Council as a serious threat to the
maintenance of international peace and security.

It is from that perspective that we encourage the
authorities of both parties to refrain from hate speech,
anti-Semitism and discrimination in all its forms. In
any society, ethnic, cultural and religious diversity
must be seen as an asset and never as a threat.

In that regard, we recall the obligation to implement
the resolutions of the Security Council. In particular,
we believe that it is urgent to put an end to the increased
settlement activities, house demolitions and evictions
in the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967. We
recall that such practices represent an open challenge
to international law and to specific Council resolutions,
such as resolution 2334 (2016), and that they undermine
the possibilities of achieving a two-State solution.

Peru strongly condemns the firing of rockets
and incendiary devices, which endanger the lives of
innocent people and cause material damage, as well as
all terrorist acts by Hamas and Islamic Jihad. At the
same time, we emphasize Israel's obligation to observe
in its responses to such threats the basic principles of
international humanitarian law, such as proportionality
in the use of force and precaution in relation to its effects.

We also emphasize the urgent necessity to address
the basic needs of Gaza's population, as poverty
and marginalization are fertile ground for those
who promote violence and terrorism. We therefore
believe that it is essential to continue mobilizing the
international community's support to deal with the
still complex financial situation of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East so that its crucial assistance work will not
be interrupted given the new arguments of those who
promote radicalization.

We also believe that it is indispensable to redouble
efforts to advance the intra-Palestinian reconciliation
process because of the relief that its realization would
bring to the humanitarian situation and the impetus
that it would provide for a resumption of dialogue
with Israel.

We would like to conclude by expressing our full
support for Mr. Mladenov in his intense efforts to prevent
further escalation and foster a climate of understanding
between the parties, with a view to reaching the only
viable solution, that of two States living side by side
with secure and mutually recognized borders.

