The President: The Security Council will now
continue its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council remains deeply
concerned about the ongoing conflict in Angola.
It holds Mr. Jonas Savimbi and the armed faction
of the Uniao Nacional para a Independencia Total
de Angola (UNITA) primarily responsible for the
failure to implement the Lusaka Protocol. It
expresses its deep concern at the resulting human
rights and international humanitarian law
violations, and the humanitarian crisis.

"The Security Council reaffirms that the
Lusaka Protocol remains the only viable basis for
a political settlement of the conflict in Angola.
The failure by UNITA to implement the Lusaka
Protocol and the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council are the basis for the
continuation of the Security Council sanctions
against UNITA.

"The Security Council once again reaffirms
its intention to keep sanctions under close and
ongoing monitoring with a view to improving
their effectiveness until it is convinced that the
conditions in the relevant resolutions are met. It
welcomes, in this regard, the ongoing review by
the sanctions Committee of the recommendations
of the Monitoring Mechanism on Sanctions
against UNITA.

"The Security Council reiterates its call on
Member States to comply fully with the
implementation of the sanctions regime against
UNITA. The Council notes the positive
contribution of the Security Council sanctions
Committee established pursuant to resolution 864
(1993) and, in this regard, calls upon the Member
States to cooperate fully with the Security
Council Committee and the Monitoring
Mechanism on Sanctions against UNITA.

"The Security Council supports the
Government of Angola in its efforts to implement
the

the Lusaka Protocol including through the Fund
for Peace and National Reconciliation. The
Security Council supports the Government's
intention to hold free and fair elections when
appropriate conditions are in place. It encourages
the Angolan authorities to continue, in
consultation with all the political parties and with
the full participation of the civil society, their
efforts for peace, stability and national
reconciliation. The Council further encourages
the Government of Angola to work for economic
reform and to ensure transparent and accountable
governance to provide a positive climate for
peace.

"The Security Council expresses its concern
that the continuing conflict in Angola is leading
to large numbers of internally displaced persons
and a dire humanitarian situation. It welcomes the
efforts of the Government of Angola to improve
the humanitarian situation and the resettlement of
the displaced population and calls upon it to
increase its efforts to this end. It also calls upon
the international community to continue to
provide necessary humanitarian assistance. It
stresses that humanitarian assistance should be
provided to the population in need, throughout
Angola.

"The Security Council supports the efforts
of the civil society and the churches to alleviate
the humanitarian situation and to facilitate
national reconciliation.

"The Security Council welcomes the
upcoming visit of the Secretary-General's Special
Adviser on Africa to Angola for consultations
with the Government, political parties and civil
society representatives on how the United
Nations could help in the advancement of the
peace process. It also reiterates its support for the
work of the United Nations Office in Angola in
finding a solution to the Angolan conflict."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2001/36.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 8pm.
