Mr. Pedersen (Norway): I am delivering this
statement on behalf of the Nordic countries: Denmark,
Finland, Iceland, Sweden and my own country, Norway.
I will not read out the full statement.

As highlighted in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2017/4l4), recent armed conflicts have seen State
and non-State armed groups defying international law
by directly targeting civilians and civilian objects.
That has led to indescribable acts of violence and
brutality and caused human suffering and carnage on
an unprecedented scale.
The backdrop for our current debate is the one-year
anniversary of the Security Council's adoption of
resolution 2286 (2016) on health care in armed conflict.
The resolution sent a resounding message. The wounded
and sick, medical and humanitarian personnel, as well as
hospitals and other medical facilities, must be respected
and protected. States are responsible for implementing
resolution 2286 (2016). That requires putting in place
the requisite legal and operational measures. The Nordic
countries are committed to the Secretary-General's
recommendations on implementing resolution 2286
(2016). We call on all Member States to do the same.

Attacks against medical personal must be
understood as part of a broader trend where civilians
increasingly are subjected to attacks in armed conflict
and that becomes a tactic of war. Our common resolve
to confront such acts must be unequivocal. There are
no simple solutions. Our response must be carefully
calibrated and effective. Let me emphasize seven points
of particular importance.

First, we must ensure full respect for international
law, especially humanitarian law, human rights law and
refugee law. International law protects the delivery of
humanitarian aid; providing medical care, it mandates
the protection of refugees, displaced persons and
migrants and protects civilians from harm. Compliance
with international law is therefore paramount. We
remain committed to the joint initiative on the part of
Switzerland and the International Committee of the Red
Cross on strengthening compliance with international
humanitarian law.

We must enhance respect for international law by
the parties to armed conflict. This requires that we
understand the changing nature of conflict. Armed
conflicts are increasingly being fought in urban areas
with devastating consequences for civilians. We share
the concern of the Secretary-General and call on State
and non-State parties to armed conflicts to prevent
civilian harm resulting from the use of wide-area
explosive weapons in populated areas.

Second, we must ensure that those who violate
international law are held accountable. If States are
unwilling or unable to prosecute such crimes, they must
be referred to the International Criminal Court.

Third, parties to a conflict must allow and facilitate
the rapid and unimpeded passage ofhumanitarian relief.
The international community must unequivocally
condemn and take effective measures against attacks on
health care personnel and facilities. The International
Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement Health Care in
Danger initiative should be universally supported.

Fourth, we must meet the humanitarian challenges
posed by the historically high number of irregular
migrants, refugees and internally displaced persons.
Our humanitarian response must be effective, efficient
and fully able to meet urgent humanitarian needs and
promote sustainable solutions.

Fifth, States must fulfil their responsibility to
protect children from armed conflict and take action to
address violations and abuses. That includes protecting
the right to education and schools from attacks. Our
children deserve the right to pursue a better future
through education, even when their grown-ups cannot
make peace. We urge all States to join the Safe Schools
Declaration, now endorsed by 65 Member States.

Sixth, we must recognize that gender equality and
women's participation are critical to peaceful societies.
We must actively involve women in political and
economic decision-making. Women and men must be
heard and respected equally.

Seventh and finally, we must address the root
causes of conflict, violent extremism and terrorism.
That entails ensuring respect for human rights,
upholding the rule of law and striving for sustainable
development and socioeconomic opportunities without
discrimination of any groups.

