Mr. Fonseca (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): We are
grateful to you, Mr. President, for the initiative of having
convened this meeting. It is an initiative that shows the
continuing concern of the Netherlands for the fashioning of
an international order of peace and prosperity. We are
grateful also to the Secretary-General for his broad-ranging
and objective report on the subject before us.

We would like also to thank Mr. Salim A. Salim,
Secretary General of the Organization of African Unity
(OAU), for his statement, as well as the Permanent
Representative of Algeria, who spoke on behalf of the
Chairman of the OAU. Those contributions are highly
valuable to the work of the Council.

Brazil has strong ties with Africa. To a great extent,
it is to the Africans that we owe the shaping of our own
nationality. We speak of Africans as brothers and always in
a spirit of solidarity. We have many forms of effective
cooperation with the African countries. At the bilateral
level, for example, over the past four years we have
welcomed over 1,800 students from African countries.
Multilaterally, I might mention Brazil's participation in
peacekeeping operations in Angola.

Throughout our history we have learned from
Africans. We have no advice to give them or lessons to
offer. Nonetheless, it is obvious that we view certain
African issues with concern, in particular the persistence of
armed conflicts and obstacles that continue to impede the
process of laying the foundations of sustainable
development throughout the continent.

It is therefore natural that Africa should be the subject
of a specific series of actions by the United Nations. The
African priority is reflected in many initiatives, recent
examples of which are the New Agenda for the
Development of Africa in the 1990s, the Special Initiative
for the implementation of that Agenda, and the important
report of the Secretary-General on the causes of conflict
and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa.

The considerable success achieved towards building
peace and democracy in Africa is a source of satisfaction
for us all. Likewise, mounting frustrations emphasize the
collective responsibility to support Africa's efforts to
overcome conflicts and poverty. This highlights the need
for the international community to demonstrate, with
determination and through concrete deeds, its will to do
more and to be more active and more effective in its
efforts at cooperation with the Organization of African
Unity, the countries of Africa and their subregional
organizations.

The Security Council has been dealing with conflicts
in Africa as they arise, but the actions that it has taken
remain very timid. As was recently indicated by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Brazil, day by day the
perception grows among us that there is a permanent gap
between words and deeds. It seems that the international
community feels compelled to act jointly to mobilize the
necessary political will and the needed instruments only
after problems have worsened to the extent that they are
extremely difficult to resolve.

What is taking place in Angola is a clear example of
a conflict that, in spite of the disastrous consequences
known to all, has not been given the priority that it needs
from the international community. Along those same
lines, President Chiluba, in his recent statement before the
Council, made an eloquent appeal for more effective
action by the Council in support of conflict settlement in
Africa. We strongly support President Chiluba's message.
It is most important that the actions and decisions of
Africans themselves should determine what happens in
Africa. In this context, there are many achievements and
positive trends that are the exclusive responsibility of
Africans. First, there is the effort to democratize. The
example of the extraordinary transition in Nigeria can be
added to other processes whose impact and significance
extend far beyond national borders.

The process of democratization in Africa, steadfastly
supported by the resolutions of the OAU, is decisive not
only in the establishment of a culture of participation and
respect for human rights, but also in the promotion of
basic conditions of stability for development. That is
because the regulatory framework that results from
democratic processes is innately stable and immune to
arbitrary acts. It is therefore guarantee for the
establishment and maintenance of conditions necessary for
the security of economic investment.

 

The second positive trend, which began with the
overthrow of apartheid in South Africa, is the African
capacity to devise a culture of tolerance even in the most
adverse conditions. The great world leader, Nelson
Mandela, set an example that extends far beyond national
borders and should serve as an inspiration for liberating
African countries from the evils of fratricidal struggle.

The process of independence and democracy-building
in Namibia and the national reconciliation in Mozambique
are also eloquent examples of the African capacity to
construct peace through dialogue and participation. We
hope that similar processes will take place in countries such
as Sierra Leone and the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
as well as in other conflict situations.

In turn, democracy, when strengthened, is a factor for
understanding and for harmonizing differences, whether
intra-national or international. Democracy is also a vehicle
for the promotion of peace and reconciliation between
neighbours.

The third positive trend is the range of international
actions to support the clear path of legitimacy, as in the
strengthening of sanctions against UNITA, which took
place under the leadership of Ambassador Fowler; the
action to stem the illicit traffic in arms; and the efforts of
the United Nations system to establish effective
mechanisms to support reconstruction, rehabilitation and the
promotion of sustainable development in countries emerging
from conflicts. The strengthening of humanitarian assistance
and of peacekeeping operations is also playing a role in that
same process, which is why they, too, should be strongly
supported.

As I said earlier, we are referring to trends, and it is
absolutely necessary that the international community
respond in a clear and positive way to those trends in order
to strengthen them and to contribute to the efforts that the
African countries themselves are continuously making. But
I emphasize that the roots of the solutions to African
problems lie in Africa, as Mr. Salim said in his eloquent
statement.

Without the African struggle of the 1960s, the
principle of self-determination would not be as strong as it
is today in international society. Democracy in an Africa at
peace will create conditions for a better and more stable
world. We all need a strong, united Africa, confident in its
destiny of peace and prosperity. That is the aspiration of us
all. It must be the destiny of Africa.

