I would like to express our thanks to you, Mr. President, for bringing this cross-cutting issue to the attention of the Security Council. The recognition of the role of young people in both peace and conflict settings is a significant step towards building sustainable peace, combating extremism and achieving the Sustainable Development Goals. The role of young people in the maintenance of peace and security has long been neglected. Today young people between the ages of 10 and 24 years constitute almost one third of the world's population. One in four of these young people are affected by, or living in, regions fraught with conflict and violence. Young people around the world strive for peace and justice, as well as economic and social development. Their voices should be heard and their needs and demands should be addressed. Their capacities must be further improved. Investing in young people is an investment in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and in our global pledge to leave no one behind. As we mark the fifth anniversary of the milestone resolution 2250 (2015) this year, we need to step up our efforts to accelerate its implementation and to amplify the voices of young people at all levels by taking into account the crucial nexus between long-lasting peace and sustainable development. In line with that understanding, Turkey's youth policy encompasses a wide range of areas, including education, vocational training, employment, entrepreneurship and civic participation. Article 58 of the Turkish Constitution is devoted explicitly to youth and the rights of young people. The Ministry of Youth and Sports plays a central role in planning, implementing and monitoring youth- related policies and strategies. It develops mechanisms for the participation of young people in all spheres of social life. The coronavirus disease crisis has revealed, among other things, the importance of the role of young people and the value of intergenerational solidarity. Young people in Turkey are actively contributing to the success of the fight against the ongoing pandemic as active agents of their communities. Young people shoulder an immense burden in humanitarian crises. The World Humanitarian Summit, held in Istanbul in May 2016, played a catalytic role in putting in place mechanisms to guarantee that young people are prioritized in the humanitarian system. It noted the urgency of upholding the rights of young people in humanitarian settings, including the right to access secondary education as well as health services and information. The Global Compact for Young People in Humanitarian Action, launched at the Summit, has been key in guiding the long- term commitment for youth in emergency situations. As the largest refugee-hosting country in the world, Turkey has taken significant actions to prioritize young people and children in its refugee policy. To cite a few examples, we have been working closely with the relevant United Nations agencies to address the social and health-service needs of young asylum-seekers. So far, we have granted more than 20,000 scholarships to those who are under temporary protection in Turkey. Together with United Nations agencies, we have established more than 40 safe spaces for women and girls across the country. Such cooperation has been expanded 114/123 to a number of social service centres with a view to reaching over | million people in order to provide psychological support, legal advice and language lessons. As stressed in the Secretary-General's first report on youth, peace and security (S/2020/167), the engagement of refugee young people in global discussions, such as the global compact on refugees, has enabled the recognition of the significance of youth participation in humanitarian settings and helped to galvanize the commitment of Member States to improving their support for young refugees. We look forward to further steps being taken in that direction by the international community. Resolution 2419 (2018) rightly focuses on the need to increase the role of young people in decision-making processes concerning security, conflict resolution and peace, including peace agreements. It is encouraging to see that some Governments, United Nations entities and non-governmental organizations have stepped up efforts to accelerate the implementation of the resolution. Yet more efforts and investments should be made at the level of the United Nations in order to meaningfully incorporate young people in decision-making processes and address the underlying social, economic and political factors that may lead to radicalization and violent extremism. In many regions around the world, we have come to see that the full and active participation of women and young people in peace processes is imperative. We need to improve the role of women and young people in the prevention and resolution of conflicts, peacebuilding, post-conflict reconstruction and reconciliation. We also need to establish policies to ensure the incorporation of views and interests of young people into the design and implementation of development strategies and to make better use of the analysis of age-disaggregated data so as to improve the possibilities for young people to contribute to socioeconomic life. With that understanding, Turkey spearheaded efforts and worked with all stakeholders to address youth unemployment during its presidency of the Group of 20 (G-20) in 2015. We built a consensus among the G-20 members to commit to a reduction in the youth unemployment rate by 15 per cent by 2025. Turkey's efforts were successful in securing a specific target for youth unemployment for the first time in the history of the G-20, with an accountability mechanism to be monitored by the International Labour Organization and the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. The launch of the Secretary-General's Youth 2030: The United Nations Strategy on Youth is also the result of a growing acknowledgement of the need to advance our youth policies and focus our attention on the concrete needs of young people. At the same time, more remains to be done to deliver a coordinated United Nations response to realize their rights and build their capacities as agents of change. Turkey remains ready to contribute to the efforts of the Secretary-General to advance the youth agenda of the United Nations. As we celebrate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations, it is time to realize our promise to young people by establishing a United Nations youth centre, through which we can all contribute to the implementation of resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018) and where young people can amplify their voices at the global level.
