Mr. Suarez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. O'Brien
for his briefing and commend him on his work at the
helm of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs. We also commend his team.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela appreciates
the progress made with regard to the humanitarian
situation in Syria during the first half of this year, which
was acknowledged by the Secretary-General in his
latest report (S/2016/631). Accordingly, so far this year,
approximately 1 million people have received some
form of help from humanitarian agencies. While the
situation is not ideal, with constant clashes occurring
in numerous parts of Syria, it is a fact that convoys
carrying humanitarian aid have reached various areas
of the country where their assistance is required - a
fact that we see in a positive light.

In that regard, we welcome the recent delivery
of humanitarian assistance to the people of Qalaat
al-Madiq, which received 40 convoys of aid intended
for 32,000 people. In general, we note that there has
been real progress in the humanitarian area. However,
it has been limited in scope by the delicate situation
that the country is undergoing owing to the actions
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS), the
Al-Nusra Front and other armed non- State actors, which
have increased activities in some areas of the country.
The situation in Aleppo is particularly worrying
since groups that some international actors call the
"moderate opposition" are simultaneously fighting the
Al-Nusra Front terrorists. This military collaboration
affects the political settlement of the armed conflict. As
has been reiterated in various resolutions, terrorist and
associated groups are excluded from the negotiations
and should be fought.

The cessation of hostilities has established areas of
peace that have helped civilians attend to their urgent
needs. That is why we must build on the ceasefire and
advance the strengthening of local ceasefire agreements
with a View to achieving a political agreement to put
an end to the conflict. We should therefore like to
take this opportunity to express our support for what

by Mr. O'Brien proposal concerning weekly, 48-hour
humanitarian pauses. That would help to alleviate the
difficult conditions in which civilians find themselves.
We recognize that in some cases the situations on the
ground make it difficult for humanitarian agencies to
carry out their work; it is therefore necessary to lift
the sieges in all affected areas and comply with the
provisions of resolution 2268 (2016). We condemn the
practices that violate international humanitarian law.

We recognize the current cooperation between the
Syrian authorities and the World Food Programme,
an institution which has reached more than 4 million
people and undertaken 70 airdrops for the inhabitants
of Deir ez-Zor. Al-Raqqa is one of the areas where
humanitarian needs have become more acute because
of the control being exercised by ISIS, which is referred
to in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2016/631).

We also pay tribute to the humanitarian
agencies deployed in the field. They are undertaking
commendable work in adverse and highly risky
conditions. We repeat that these agencies must not be
military targets, much less actors in the armed conflict.
Their only task is to provide assistance to those who
need it most, in accordance with the provisions of
international humanitarian law. However, their work
should be coordinated with the State concerned, in
accordance with international law.

We reiterate our condemnation of ISIS for
systematically denying access to humanitarian
assistance to the civilian population, as well as for
enforced disappearances, criminal actions against
ethnic minorities, women and the recruitment of
children in the areas it controls and the use of civilians
as human shields, which we have been informed is
taking place in Manbij. ISIS, the Al-Nusra Front and
their associates have become the greatest threat to
peace and stability in the region. Their influence must
be fought with all the necessary means, in accordance
with international law.

Similarly, we join others in rejecting today the
recent beheading of a 12-year-old Palestinian boy. That
happened in Aleppo and was executed by an armed
group called the "moderate rebels", which enjoys
international support. So far we have not heard any
condemnation of that brutal murder by those who are
financing these groups. These terrorist practices are
no different from those executed by the Al-Nusra Front
and ISIS. Moreover, their actions are in violation of
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
They represent a war crime and those responsible must
be brought to justice.

We take this opportunity to condemn the
recruitment of minors. That practice undermines the
provisions of the Council with regard to children in
armed conflict.
Finally, we reiterate that overcoming the
humanitarian crisis depends on putting an the end to
the armed conflict. That is why we reaffirm our support
for the efforts of the Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura
to establish peace and to find a political and peaceful
solution to the Syrian armed conflict. However tragic
the situation may be on the ground, it must not be an
obstacle to bringing the parties to the conflict to the
table. We therefore call on the parties and those with
influence on them to resume the political negotiations
as soon as possible. Like all members of the Security
Council have said, the situation requires a political
solution and we must endeavour to make that a reality.
The prolongation of the conflict will mean only more
suffering and destruction for the Syrian people.

