Mr. Griffiths: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council.

Since I last talked to the Council a few weeks
ago (see S/PV.844l), we have made some significant
progress in the implementation of the agreements
reached in Stockholm towards the latter part of last
year. The parties have now confirmed to Lieutenant
General Michael Lollesgaard and to me their agreement
to the first phase of the Al-Hudaydah redeployment
plan. Naturally, I welcome the agreement they have
reached - and I hope the Council does - and the
commitment it shows by the parties to implement the
Stockholm Agreement and the promises made in that
meeting in early December.

Under the leadership of Lieutenant General
Lollesgaard, the parties agreed to redeploy from the
ports of Saleef and Ras Isa in a first step, followed
by a redeployment from Al-Hudaydah port itself and
critical parts of Al-Hudaydah city associated with
humanitarian facilities in the second step. That will
facilitate humanitarian access to the Red Sea Mills,
where, as we know, significant tonnage of grain has
been waiting to be distributed to the people of Yemen. I
am grateful to both parties, who have made concessions
to allow that to happen. Of course, I call upon them
to immediately start the implementation of the
agreement and agree on the details of the second phase
of redeployments in Al-Hudaydah, which we hope will
lead to the demilitarization of that city.

This agreement would not have been possible
without the strong leadership of Lieutenant General
Lollesgaard. He has led those negotiations with patience
and persistence. I personally am very grateful to him for
those qualities. It would not have been possible either
without the strong commitments demonstrated by the
parties. Despite deadlines being missed, the parties
have constantly shown their commitment to implement
the agreement and have consistently assured me of that
commitment. I am under no illusion about the challenges
that we face. But perhaps, for one day at least, we can
be heartened rather than dismayed by challenges. I am
heartened by both parties' current reminders to me and
my colleagues that this is a unique opportunity.

Since I last briefed the Security Council I have
had the privilege of meeting three times with His
Excellency President Hadi on a wide variety of issues
of concern to him and, of course, to us. I am grateful
for the flexibility that he has shown and, perhaps more
important, the guidance that he provided me and my
colleagues with regard to negotiations on Al-Hudaydah.
The progress that we announced today benefitted from
those exchanges. I rely on him to continue to give me
the benefit of his advice going forward. I should also
add that the numerous, almost daily, meetings that we
have held with the coalition continue to be invaluable
to illuminate issues on the table and allow us to achieve
progress towards their resolution.

There is momentum on Yemen. The Stockholm
Agreement, reached by the parties in December
2018, was described - reasonably, I believe - as a
breakthrough. It was a major shift and showed to the
people of Yemen that something was indeed happening.
As I have reported before, there have been signs of
increased civilian activity in Al-Hudaydah, and the
people of the city are already, at this very early stage,
seeing some tangible benefits from the significant and
consistent decrease in hostilities in that area as a result
of the Stockholm Agreement. The Agreement reached
on phase 1 is a sign that the parties are committed
keeping up the momentum of which I speak. It
demonstrates, to me at least, that the parties are able
to deliver on their commitments to turn words into
tangible progress on the ground. It reinforces trust,
which is an essential commodity, between the parties.
Finally, most important, it shows political will.
With the beginning - possibly today or
tomorrow - of the implementation of that part of the
Al-Hudaydah agreement, we now have the opportunity
to move from the promise made in Sweden to hope
for Yemen. As I am sure Mark Lowcock will describe
shortly, an agreement on redeployments is also
important for the broader humanitarian effort in the
country. In the past few days, both Mark and I have
already underlined the parties' responsibility to give
the World Food Programme access to the Red Sea
Mills, grain tonnage which represents enough food to
feed 3.7 million people for a month.

In recent weeks, in order to make progress on
agreements made in Sweden, I have made many visits
to Sana'a and Al-Hudaydah, meeting each time with
Abdulmalik Al-Houthi and his colleagues in the Ansar
Allah movement. I am glad to report to the Council
that he has always engaged positively with me on all
discussions that we had on Al-Hudaydah, the vital
logistical issues necessary for the introduction of a
United Nations mission in Al-Hudaydah, the release
of specific individuals and the general release of
prisoners. I am grateful for his commitment to support
all our efforts. I was back from Sana'a just yesterday,
and it is clear to me that the commitment found there
with regard to the implementation of the Al-Hudaydah
agreement is genuine and, therefore, most welcome.

We have also been very busy these past weeks
in seeking agreement for the release and exchange of
prisoners. The Council will recall that a mechanism
concerning the matter was in fact the first agreement
between the parties, and was made before we went to
Sweden in November 2018. We have held two substantial
and substantive meetings between the parties here
in Amman in recent weeks. I am very grateful to the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, and personally to the
Foreign Minister, for allowing those meetings to take
place. With the International Committee of the Red
Cross-theco-Chairofthesupervisorycommittee-we
were able in those bilateral meetings and discussions
with the parties to make progress towards what we hope
will be the release of the first batch of prisoners. But I
should stress here that, as was always the intention of
that prisoner exchange agreement, to which I referred,
the parties and their leaders - as they have expressed
directly to me on more than one occasion - seek the
release of all prisoners on both sides of this conflict.

As many of them remind us, "All for all" is
the watchword for this process. That remains our
commitment and responsibility as it is theirs. I would
like to think that we are not far off from agreeing and
realizing the release of a first batch, and I am very
grateful to both parties for their prompt support for
that move. We still have some work to do before it
can be finalized, not least to ensure that it is clearly
part of a larger process to provide for the release of
those who remain in prison. I hope beyond hope that
the parties can push those particular efforts forward
to reunite thousands of families and relieve the
humanitarian burden on those who have been detained
in the conflict. I should like to express my gratitude
to Peter Maurer, my good friend and President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, who took
time out from his extraordinarily busy schedule to open
the most recent of those two meetings in Amman. The
involvement of his organization, as you read out earlier
in your statement, Mr. President, guarantees the probity
and professionalism of the process.

Both parties have once again reaffirmed to me
their commitment to the statement of understanding on
Taiz, agreed in Stockholm. Members will recall that I
mentioned in my previous meeting how significant, and
almost iconic, Taiz is in this conflict, and how essential
it is that we improve freedom of access and movement
of peoples in that area. I will focus all our efforts on
meaningful steps to make a difference there, as well.
We need to agree on small steps now, not big things
later. No one is suggesting that the process will be
straightforward. Taiz is a place that has witnessed some
of the worst parts of the conflict, but we like to think
that we have a good chance of seeing some tangible
progress in the coming weeks.

I have said to the Council - on more than one
occasion, I am afraid - that Al-Hudaydah is the centre
of gravity of the war, and perhaps it is. In truth, our
primary interest - and in that sense, the real centre
of gravity of this conflict for us - has to be moving
towards a political solution. The agreement concerning
phase 1 of redeployment in Al-Hudaydah, as confirmed
today, gives us permission, I like to think, to look ahead
beyond the agreements made in Stockholm. While we
need tangible progress very clearly before we may move
forward, we can now imagine how we would begin to
address those serious substantive difficulties. I believe
that we have an obligation to focus our minds on finding
that political solution. We need to start talking about
the future. The beginning of a discussion on political
and security arrangements would constitute, in our
view, a major step forward and an important statement
of intent from the parties that they are determined,
together with us and the support of the Council, to
bring the conflict to an end.
The members of the Council will recall that the
Stockholm Agreement was only ever intended to be
a preliminary step - a humanitarian step - of great
moment, but not the end of the story. Indeed, the
parties, civil society, women's representatives and the
international community have repeatedly reminded me,
as the Council did when we last met on this subject,
that a comprehensive solution is the only way to put
an end to the conflict. I note in particular the growing
support of southern groups to our efforts and their clear
desire for a peaceful settlement to the conflict and their
broader concerns regarding the future of the country.

We therefore have an overriding responsibility to
build on the momentum created in Stockholm towards
resolving the conflict. I say that without, I hope,
being naive about the difficulties that we will face,
and continue to face, in implementing promises and
agreements. There will be setbacks, but we need to look
beyond those to the horizon that is before us.

Next week - as I am sure Mark Lowcock will tell
us - we will be reminded in Geneva of the financial
needs of the humanitarian programmes in Yemen and
their extraordinary dimensions, as well as the courage
of those colleagues who fulfil their responsibilities and
obligations daily. That reminder in Geneva reminds us
here, I would like to suggest, that the cost of the war, if
our collective efforts fail, will continue to rise steeply,
at the tragic expense of the people in Yemen.

