Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): As the Special
Representative said, Mr. President, you are no newcomer to
this Chamber. But as the first Council member to speak in
this debate, I should nevertheless like to welcome you here.
I much enjoyed working with you during your country's
transition to independence, when I was here in a more
junior capacity in the 1980s. It is a special pleasure to see
you here today in your current capacity.

Modern conflicts hit children the hardest. An estimated
two million have been killed in wars in the last decade.
Tens of millions of others have been orphaned, maimed,
traumatized, sexually abused, tortured or starved. We all
have an obligation to do everything in our power to stop
this.

Conflict prevention is clearly the best way to protect
children. And conflict prevention is best done by promoting
democracy and development, by ensuring respect for human
rights, fundamental freedoms and good governance. These
principles must be taken seriously. As the Special
Representative has said, Governments must respect their
international obligations, including under the Convention on
the Rights of the Child, which has now been ratified by
nearly all Members of the United Nations. We must all
speak out more clearly when they do not. This is one
instance where naming and shaming helps.

The proliferation of small arms and light weapons has
a particularly damaging impact on children. The existence
of so much weaponry in difficult and sensitive areas of the
world is in itself destabilizing. The United Kingdom has
been working to tackle the problem of proliferation of light
weapons, for example through the European Union (EU)
Joint Action on small arms, which provides a basis for
funding small-arms projects in third countries, and through
support for the Economic Community of West African
States moratorium on the import, export and manufacture
of light weapons. In addition, we have established with
European Union partners an EU Code of Conduct on arms
exports. This Code of Conduct, which is underpinned by a
consultative mechanism, aims to prevent the transfer of
weapons which might be used for external aggression or
internal repression, including use by, or against, children.
We call on all other arms-exporting countries to subscribe
to the same principles.

When wars happen, the protagonists must make sure
that children are properly protected. The Geneva
Conventions and their Protocols, the Convention on the
Rights of the Child and the African Charter of Rights and
Welfare of the Child set out the standards. There must be
no impunity for those who ignore them. Those who target
children must be brought to justice. The establishment of
the International Criminal Court will be an important step
towards this. We urge all States to sign and ratify the
Rome Statute of the Court.

We must raise the internationally agreed minimum
age of recruitment for soldiers. The current age of 15 is
too low. The United Kingdom is playing an active and
constructive role in negotiations on the draft optional
protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child. We
have made clear that we will not block any consensus
reached. But we must not let that debate distract us from
the concrete problem on the ground of the continuing
recruitment of thousands of very young children. We are
all familiar with pictures of children as young as 10
carrying Kalashnikovs in Africa. Our priority must be the
ending of such recruitment and the demobilization and
reintegration into society of existing child soldiers.

It is a pleasure to see the Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict here today. My good friend
Olara Otunnu has done much to raise the profile of issues
surrounding children and armed conflict and to deal with
individual country situations. We welcome and support
the catalyzing work he as done so far. It is important that
during the remaining period of his mandate the United
Nations system and other players should work together to
consider new ideas and strategies for children and armed
conflict which will shape their policies in future years.
We particularly welcome the Special Representative's
work in this area, and have made available up to
£400,000, or a little more than $600,000, to support his
project for country-specific follow-up. This project should
bring together all the actors in particular country
situations so that they can work among themselves to
identify priorities for action and develop greater
coherence of approach. We hope this will produce new
best practices which will be a lasting legacy from the
Special Representative's mandate.

But we should not, in this debate, ignore the role of
other parts of the United Nations system which have been
engaged in operational work on children for many years.
Their work has helped alleviate untold suffering and has
made an incalculable difference to many lives. Many
parts of the United Nations system are involved, as are
national Governments, regional organizations and civil
society. The United Nations Children's Fund, as the main
promoter within the United Nations of children's rights,
does particularly valuable work. The United Kingdom is

 

providing £9 million of funding to its work on children and
armed conflict.

Children neither start wars nor perpetuate them. They
should not pay the price for adults' wars. They have a right
to be protected, and all of us have a duty to ensure that
they are. We hope the draft resolution being negotiated in
the context of this debate will make a real difference.

