Mr. Drame (Mali) (spoke in French): I would first
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on Kuwait's
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of June, and to express the delegation
of Mali's great appreciation for the outstanding work
of the Indonesian presidency last month. I also want
to reiterate the deep gratitude of the people and the
Government of Mali to the Security Council, the
Secretary-General, the countries that contribute troops
to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and to all of
Mali's bilateral and multilateral partner countries and
organizations for their invaluable and tireless efforts to
bring about peace and stability in Mali and the Sahel.

The Government of Mali takes note of the report
of the Secretary-General under review (S/2019/454),
and I thank Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Mali and
Head of MINUSMA, for his accurate briefing and his
update on the latest developments in Mali.

I have taken note of the remarks and high
expectations of the members of the Council with respect
to the situation in Mali. I would now like to share with the
Council the comments of the Government of Mali on the
report. As the Council is aware, the significant events in
the period under review, politically and institutionally,
included the appointment of a new Prime Minister and
the formation of an inclusive Government, established
on 5 May, and the signing of a political agreement on
governance on 2 May between the Prime Minister and
numerous majority and opposition political parties,
in the presence of the representatives of the signatory
groups to the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation
in Mali, which was a demonstration of their support for
the emerging political consensus. The goal is to create
the conditions for a national gathering to promote the
search for consensus solutions to the multidimensional
crisis in our country.

I would like to take this opportunity to testify to the
role that the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Mali has played in easing the political
climate and in the process that led to the political
agreement on governance. The agreement includes a
road map that will give fresh impetus to the country's
stabilization process. On 8 May, at the first meeting of
the Council of Ministers, the President of Mali therefore
laid out the main priorities for Government action in
accordance with the political agreement. The first is
organizing an inclusive political dialogue with all of
Mali's political and social forces as soon as possible.
The second is ensuring further implementation of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali
that resulted from the Algiers process, within the
framework of national ownership of the peace process.
The third is carrying out the consensus-based political,
institutional, economic and social reforms that are
essential to our country's stabilization and economic
progress. The fourth is stabilizing the country's central
region and combating terrorism, and the fifth is holding
referendum consultations and legislative, local and
regional elections within the time frames agreed on
during the inclusive political dialogue.

In accordance with those guidelines, the Head of
State appointed the following national figures to lead
the process of inclusive political dialogue following
broad consultations with all segments of society:
Mr. Baba Akhib Haidara, Mediator of the Republic,
Mr. Ousmane Issoufi Ma'iga, former Prime Minister,
and Mrs. Aminata Dramane Traore, former Minister.
To facilitate these eminent figures' work, a consensus-
based organizational committee will be established to
ensure the preparation of the material and information
needed for the inclusive political dialogue that the
Malian people have waited for so long, to guarantee
mass support for the planned political and institutional
reforms. The committee will be presided over by a
former colleague of Council members, Ambassador
Cheick Sidi Diarra, who was the Permanent
Representative of Mali to the United Nations and High
Representative for the Least Developed Countries,
Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island
Developing States, as well as United Nations Special
Adviser on Africa for Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon.

Together with that measure, the Council ofMinisters
recently adopted a draft law extending deputies' term
of office. This second extension of the mandate is
intended to enable the National Assembly to enact the
political and institutional reforms that will be decided
on during the national dialogue, and thereby providing
a legal framework for reforms that are crucial for our
country's future. I want to take this opportunity to
affirm the resolute determination of the Government of
Mali to carry out political and institutional reforms by
consensus in order to strengthen national reconciliation
and democracy.

With regard to the redeployment of the reconstituted
national army, whose role is to support the gradual
restoration of State authority throughout the country,
we should once again note the determining role played
by Mr. Annadif, which has been instrumental, to
use an Anglicism. We have achieved the definitive
reintegration into the military of 529 former defence
force troops who had deserted during the conflict. To
that, in the framework of the accelerated disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process, we can add
the registration of 1,840 ex-combatant members of the
Operational Coordination Mechanism, of whom more
than 1,300 have been declared fit for service and as of
yesterday had already begun training in training centres.
Large numbers of them are trying to leave the north to
return to Bamako in order to go to training centres and
join the reconstituted national army. The Government
and the signatories to the Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali are continuing consultations
to finalize a draft decree defining the assignment of
ranks and responsibilities to commanding officers
and ex-combatants integrating into the reconstituted
army. This is a process involving consensus with the
peace agreement signatory movements on setting up a
framework to determine how to assign ranks.

With regard to the question of development in the
north, I am pleased to be able to inform the Security
Council that at its meeting on 29 May the Government
adopted and transmitted to the National Assembly draft
laws establishing the fundamental principles for the
establishment, organization and control of development
zones in the Republic of Mali. Those laws establish
a development zone in northern Mali, as provided
for in the agreement. They include laws on the basic
principles for the development zones' establishment
and their creation and organization, as well as on
the organization and operating procedures of the
interregional consultative framework for the northern
development zone. We have therefore made significant
progress on the process of establishing development
zones in northern Mali, which we know has been a
concern of the Security Council for some months.

The Government has also created the Sustainable
Development Fund, the financial instrument for
implementing the development strategy for the northern
regions. We have already set aside $20 million for urgent
priority expenditures in Kidal, Menaka, Timbuktu
and Gao regions and have provided $72 million to
the Sustainable Development Fund, showing that
the implementation of the Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali remains a top priority for the
Government. That is also reflected in our multi-year
budgetary and economic document, which outlines
budget expenditures for the period from 2019 to 2023.
The Government has already allocated 30 per cent of
the national budget to implementing the agreement and
is working to further decentralize the budget with a
View to reaching the agreed amount of revenue to be
transferred to the territorial collectivities. I am pleased
that the Secretary-General has noted in his report the
efforts made by the State of Mali to that end.

I should not conclude the part of my statement on
the implementation of the agreement without stressing
that the Government is working diligently with all the
signatory parties to adopt a new updated road map with
a realistic timeline. At the beginning of next week, on
17 June, we are hosting the Foreign Minister of Algeria,
who will preside over the Agreement Monitoring
Committee, during which the signatories will come to
an agreement on the new revised road map.

The situation in the central regions of Mali is
a matter of deep concern for all the Malian people,
who have once again been plunged into mourning
following the tragic events that occurred on the night
of 9 to 10 June in the village of Sobame-Da, near
Sangha, in the heart of the Dogon plateau, which before
the crisis was a centre of tourism. The Government
strongly condemns those criminal acts and reiterates
its condolences to the families of the victims, who
number 35, not 95 as was previously announced in
the media. In its recent history our country has never
seen so many victims and material damage as a result
of intercommunal violence, fuelled by the pressure of
terrorist groups and combined with forces competing
for access to natural resources and control over them,
often against a backdrop of resurgent former conflicts.

The Government has adopted a series of strong
measures in response to those barbaric acts in the wake
of the Prime Minister's visit to the martyred village
of Sobame-Da yesterday, accompanied by a number
of ministers, including the Ministers of Defence and
the Interior. It was decided to open a preliminary
investigation by the Prosecutor of the Specialized
Judicial Unit to Combat Terrorism and Transnational
Organized Crime, investigate and arrest six persons
in connection with these tragic events, two of whom
were apprehended by MINUSMA troops, and deploy
ground patrols in various villages to deter attacks and
reprisals, detain suspects, search for stolen livestock
and encourage people to return to their villages under
the protection of the Malian security forces. Malian
army helicopters are providing aerial support to the
patrols on the ground. Food assistance and medical care
are being provided for the injured in the village.

The Government is determined not to tolerate such
egregious acts and our defence forces are continuing
to carry out these measures, while our Minister of
Defence is in the Mopti region to coordinate the action
of our forces on the ground and the helicopters that are
supporting the ground patrols.

The arrests and questioning of suspects continue to
this day. New people were arrested this very morning
in several villages in the region. Aerial reconnaissance
patrols are being conducted in the main towns of the
Dogon plateau to deter militias and groups of hunters
from retaliating against Fulani villages.
Furthermore, with regard to the fight against
impunity, I am able to inform the Security Council that
the number of persons detained at the Mopti detention
centre in connection with the intercommunity conflicts
in the Koro and Bankass districts is over 70. These
people are now in detention and are being questioned
by the prosecutor in Mopti.

Similarly, the judicial unit specializing in the fight
against terrorism has opened an investigation into the
Ogossagou matter, the results of which are as follows: a
judicial investigation was commenced and, as of 10 June
2019, 10 persons have been arrested in connection with
the events that took place in Ogossagou in March. They
are charged with terrorist acts, murder, assault, arson,
robbery, and damage to the movable property of others.
Several objects were seized and placed under seal.

In addition, aware of the limits of the overall
security situation and taking full account of the
complexity of the situation, the Government resulting
from the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation has
created a political framework for crisis management in
the central region, bringing together some 10 Ministers
and the main leaders of the armed forces and security
services, with the objective of combining the political
and military/security approaches, in order to calm
the situation in the centre and resolve the crisis on a
sustainable basis.

Dialogue within and between communities in crisis
will be a key focus. The same will apply to the action
resulting from knowledge of the field, the intelligence
available on violent groups and the raising of awareness
of the main actors with a view to their return to the
peace camp. It is a multifaceted action that is being
taken because this political framework for crisis
management has already begun its work, having already
held meetings. It meets on a weekly basis - every
week - around the Prime Minister. The main Ministers
concerned and the heads of the main services will meet
to discuss the situation in the north. The Council of
Ministers, which endedjust as the Security Council was
beginning its work, decided to dismiss the Governor of
Mopti and to take other measures to show that impunity
will no longer be the rule there. The Governor of Mopti
is a general officer - a Major General - and the
Government just dismissed him. The message came to
me while the Council was already in session.

It is worth recalling that the crisis in central Mali
is an extension of the northern crisis and a direct
consequence of the occupation of part of this region
in 2012-2013 by terrorist groups. The first adherents
to violent-extremist ideology were recruited by the
Mouvement pour l'unicite et le jihad en Afrique
de l'Ouest (MUJAO), which is a non-Malian-led
international terrorist organization. The main leaders
of this terrorist group are now the Heads of the Islamic
State in the Greater Sahara. The Governor of Gao
during the occupation has now withdrawn south of the
Niger River into the Malian Gourma and officiates on
behalf of the Islamic State in the Greater Sahara. They
are causing bloodshed in the Malian Gourma and the
north-east of our country. The spokesman of MUJAO
during the occupation, who is now Head of the Islamic
State in the Greater Sahara, is staining the north-east of
Mali on the border with the Niger with blood. The main
figure ofjihadism in central Mali is affiliated with the
Group for the Support of Islam and Muslims.

The logistics used against our forces come from
the north. During major attacks on our garrisons in the
centre, the columns and commanders come from the
north, as they did a few weeks ago in Dioura, Guire and
last year in Soumpi and the year before in Nampala.
This shows the close link between the northern crisis
and the crisis in the centre and that it is therefore
difficult to separate them or to build a Chinese wall
between these two geographical regions and between
these two crises.

This is an opportunity to reiterate the commitment
of the Government of the Republic of Mali to
accountability and justice and to recall our total
rejection of impunity, as demonstrated by the measures
that have been taken in recent weeks on the ground,
including most recently - today - the Government's
dismissal of the Governor of Mopti, the main city in
central Mali, and the arrests that took place on the
Dogon plateau today following patrols by the national
gendarmerie with military support from the army.

The Government is committed to conducting
military operations in strict compliance with all
international instruments that Mali has sovereignly
signed and incorporated into its domestic legislation,
in particular with regard to respect for fundamental
human rights. In accordance with this commitment,
I would like to inform the Council that eight cases
involving military personnel are under investigation
at the Mopti military court. The interrogations begin
tomorrow, 13 June 2019.

I can assure Council members that the objective of
the military institution is zero cases of human rights
violations, and the Minister of Defence has visited the
military several times since his appointment in order
to send a message about respecting right to life and the
physical integrity of persons, even suspects who have
been arrested. To achieve this objective of zero cases
of human rights violations, Mali needs to strengthen
fruitful partnerships in the areas of adequate training
in expertise on finding and preserving evidence and in
conducting investigations.

The cases of human rights violations perpetrated
by MINUSMA officers identified in the report before
us testify, if there was any need, to the complexity of
the security environment. Moreover, the Government
reaffirms its willingness to do justice to peacekeepers
who are regularly attacked by hostile armed groups,
through the prosecution and trial of the perpetrators
and accomplices of such attacks, which may constitute
war crimes under international law.

I know that in a few days' time the Security
Council will renew the mandate of MINUSMA. This
Mission, whose strategic priority remains to support
the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali emanating from the Algiers
process, is striving to properly fulfil its mandate in a
particularly difficult and complex environment in more
than one respect.

The members of the Security Council and the
representatives of the troop- and police-contributing
countries can be proud of the brave men and women
who make up MINUSMA and who work daily to
implement the Mission's mandate on the ground, often
at the risk of their lives. MINUSMA's support both
for the implementation of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation and for the overall stabilization of
Mali is invaluable. Today, in addition to ensuring a
security network in the northern regions pending the
redeployment of the reformed and reconstituted Malian
defence and security forces, the presence ofMINUSMA
reassures our populations, promotes humanitarian
access and strengthens confidence among the Malian
parties to the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation.

I do not forget the support in the area of quick-impact
projects and the provision of basic social services to the
most vulnerable populations. Nor do I forget the support
we are looking forward to receiving in the upcoming
elections; the organization of the referendum; the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process
through the Mission's programmatic activities; the
strengthening ofpolitical dialogue and assistance in the
protection of human rights; and, as I mentioned earlier,
the important role played by the representative of the
Secretary General in the defusing of political tensions,
leading to the political agreement on governance.
Likewise, MINUSMA contributes to the stabilization
of the Sahel region through its important role in
supporting the forces directly involved in the fight
against terrorism, including the Joint Force of the
Group of Five for the Sahel and the Barkhane force.

It is for all these reasons and in order to consolidate
the gains already made that the Government of the
Republic of Mali asks the Council, following the
recommendations of the Secretary-General in his
report, to extend the mandate of MINUSMA for an
additional year. It is also for all these reasons that the
Government of Mali requests the Security Council to
provide MINUSMA with adequate human, financial,
technological and equipment resources, enabling it to
properly carry out its mandate of protecting civilians
and to better protect its staff and facilities.

It is also for all these reasons that the Government
of Mali is asking for an increased presence of
MINUSMA in the regions of central Mali, alongside
the Malian defence and security forces, in order to
help protect civilian populations and their property, to
end the cycle of violence and to allow the restoration
of administrative and basic social services. Such an
increased presence is the key condition for the success
of the political process and the political approach we
intend to launch in the coming days. I emphasize that
this strengthening of MINUSMA's presence in central
Mali should not be undertaken to the detriment of the
northern regions of Mali, because we do not want to
create a security vacuum in that part of our country,
which could be reoccupied by forces hostile to the
peace process.

In conclusion, I wish above all to assure the
Council of our Government's resolve to relentlessly
pursue the diligent and inclusive implementation of
the Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
emanating from the Algiers process. In that regard,
we attach particular importance to the renewal of the
mandate of the MINUSMA and its equipment in a form
adapted to the situation.

I would like to conclude as I began, by reiterating
the gratitude of our people to the United Nations and
to all our bilateral and multilateral partners for their
multiform and unwavering support since the beginning
of the crisis in 2012. I thank them yet again for all
their support over the years to Mali in exercising its
sovereignty over its entire territory; for their respect for
Mali's territorial integrity and national unity and the
republican and secular nature of the State; and, finally,
for all the support provided throughout the Algiers
process and the implementation of the Agreement for
Peace and Reconciliation.

I reiterate the tribute of the entire Malian people
to the memory of all the victims of the Malian crisis,
civil and military, foreign as well as Malian, fallen on
the field of honour in Mali since the beginning of the
crisis. I extend our ardent wishes to the wounded for a
speedy recovery .

Finally, I would like to address special words of
thanks, as others have done before me, to Ambassador
Francois Delattre, Permanent Representative of France
to the United Nations, for his leadership on the Mali
issue. At the moment when he is preparing to take up new
duties in his country, the Government of the Republic
of Mali, through me, expresses its infinite gratitude.

The meeting rose at 5.25 pm.
