Mr. De la Sabliere (France) (spoke in French): I
wish at the outset warmly to thank the Colombian
presidency, through you, Madam, for having taken the
initiative of convening today's public debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. I should like
also to thank the Secretary-General for his very
detailed report, which provides us with real substance
for our discussions.

The presence of the Director General of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, to whom I
bid welcome, is also important in this respect and
attests eloquently to the attention that the United
Nations devotes to the protection of civilians in armed
conflict.

Clearly, one of the ugliest aspects of
contemporary conflicts concerns the fate of civilian
populations. The point can never be overstated that
nowadays it is civilians, principally women and
children - not combatants - who are the primary
victims of conflicts.

The international community at first appeared
powerless to deal with these developments, because
humanitarian law had primarily been designed to deal
with conventional wars, which drew a very clear
distinction between civilians and combatants. But times
have changed, and today we can take stock of the
efforts made by the United Nations over the past three
years, with the adoption by the Security Council of the
first resolution relating specifically to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.

The report of the Secretary-General, his third on
this issue, clearly illustrates the progress that has been
made. Among the accomplishments, we refer to the
inclusion in the mandate of certain peacekeeping
operations of elements relating to the protection of
civilians, such as in Sierra Leone or the Democratic
Republic of the Congo; to the concern, when new
sanctions are decided upon, not to exacerbate the
humanitarian situation; and to the campaign against the
recruitment of child soldiers. This question, as
members know, was the subject of particular effort on
France's part and will, in the near future, be the topic
of a specific debate.

It would be difficult to provide an exhaustive list
of all the elements of the reports that are of particular
importance. Allow me nevertheless to refer to a
particular point that I believe has not been addressed
from this perspective until now: the need to make all
parties to conflicts - not only States, but armed
groups as well - aware of the violations they commit
against civilians, particularly with respect to
restrictions on access to humanitarian assistance. It is
indeed essential that humanitarian organizations have
access to all populations, which may require direct
contact with non-State armed groups. The overriding
concern here must be the effective protection of the
most vulnerable civilians, especially women and
children.

I also wish to welcome the attention focused on
the question of the illegal exploitation of natural
resources in the areas of lawlessness created by armed
conflicts, which has assumed alarming dimensions in
recent years. These abuses, including the massive use
of forced labour - children in particular - must be
halted.

We are now at a crossroads. Following a period in
which the international community has become aware
of the issue and mobilized itself - a mobilization that
clearly must continue - we need to move forward and
implement our objectives in a practical way. The
roadmap proposed by the Secretary-General for the
protection of civilians in armed conflict is a decisive
contribution in that respect. If it is to be truly
operational, we must specify the actors or institutions
involved in each measure, establish priorities and draw
up an indicative timetable. This work will have to be
undertaken, of course, with the broadest possible
cooperation within the United Nations system and,
undoubtedly, beyond.

I wish to conclude my statement with a question.
At the end of the report, a recent trend is cited that
singularly complicates the efforts of the international
community to ensure better protection of civilians in
armed conflict. I refer to the participation of terrorist
organizations in armed conflicts. Does the Secretary-
General's roadmap take this development into account?
What types of measures could be envisaged in the
context of the specific issue of the protection of
civilians?
