Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): I would first like to thank Special Envoy Geir
Pedersen for his briefing and also for his work on and
commitment to reaching a political solution in Syria.
1 would also like to thank Ms. Sabah Al Hallak for
her testimony.

First, with regard to the Constitutional Committee,

we share the Special Envoy's positive assessment
of its first meeting. Its work can and must be a first
step in the political process and towards realizing the
legitimate aspirations of all Syrians, both at home and
in the diaspora. In order to do that, the representatives
of the Committee must be able to carry out their work in
a propitious environment. We call on all the parties to
honour their commitments by allowing representatives
to do their job and seize the historic opportunity that
the Constitutional Committee represents. Belgium
continues to support an inclusive political solution in
accordance with resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva
communique (S/2012/522, annex).

Secondly, with regard to the situation on the
ground, the unfortunate reality is that the Violence
continues in north-eastern and north-western Syria.
We are particularly concerned about the latest
reports of attacks, including on a camp for internally
displaced persons in Qah on 20 November, as others
have mentioned. Such violence is unacceptable and
must cease immediately. We call on all the parties
to establish a nationwide ceasefire, as called for in
resolution 2254 (2015). The Syrian Government has a
particular obligation to ensure a safe, stable and calm
environment throughout the country as a backdrop to
the peace talks in Geneva. That also includes protecting
rights and preventing reprisals, repression and forced
recruitment into the armed forces.

Thirdly, the Special Envoy reminds us every
month about the importance of implementing
confidence-building measures. Thousands of Syrians
continue to be arbitrarily arrested and detained. We
call on Syria to take on board the crucial importance of
combating that issue as a sign of good faith towards its
own population.

Finally, I would like to remind members that
the Council will soon be considering the renewal of
resolution 2165 (2014), on cross-border humanitarian
aid. The importance of that resolution is indisputable,
and its renewal highlights the collective responsibility
of the Council in meeting the most basic needs of
4 million people.

