Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): It is a great honour
for me to present to the Security Council the report of the
Council mission on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999), which visited Kosovo from 27 to
29 April this year. The report is in four sections,
comprising the terms of reference of the mission, its
composition, its activities and summary of meetings and,
finally, the findings of the mission. It has 36 paragraphs,
contained in these sections.

From the moment of the mission's arrival in Kosovo,
its programme was very full and intense. It undertook a
series of meetings with key actors, on-site visits to a
number of places and encounters with representatives of
various ethnic communities. The mission criss-crossed
Kosovo, from north to south and east to west, from
Mitrovica to Prizren and from anilane to Djakovica, with
Pristina as its hub.

We had an opportunity to have a series of in-depth
discussions and interactions with various key people from
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and the Kosovo Force (KFOR), in
addition to those with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Bernard Kouchner, and the Commander
of the Kosovo Force, General Juan Ortufio. We believe
that the intensity of the visit and the tightness of the
programme, accompanied by the richness of inputs,
yielded very good results in terms of the objectives of the
mission. Future missions of the Security Council could
surely benefit from this experience.

The situation in Kosovo is extremely complex.
Equally complex is the process of implementation of
resolution 1244 (1999). Council members were able to
realize, possibly for the first time, the magnitude of the
task of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) as we stepped through the
programme, with each element bringing out a new
dimension of UNMIK's work. As I said at concluding
press conference in Pristina and elsewhere, the Security
Council could not have envisaged such wide-ranging
involvement of the United Nations in Kosovo when it
adopted resolution 1244 (1999). Every day brings a new
challenge, or the resurfacing of one tackled earlier. The
leadership of UNMIK and of KFOR is engaged seriously
in addressing these challenges with the determination and
promptness that the occasion demands. The spirit of the
staff of the international civil and security presences in
Kosovo is very high, and the mission was extremely
impressed by their teamwork and collaboration.

In the section on the activities of the mission, the
report provides details, and I would recommend that
Council members pay close attention to them.

A return to normalcy is gradually taking place in
Kosovo. Economic activities are slowly picking up.
However, the security situation poses a major and
continuing challenge to UNMIK and KFOR. During the
visit of the mission, a few violent incidents took place,
making us comprehend better the reality of the situation.

In its interaction with the ethnic communities, the
mission could sense the clear desire of people to live
together in peace and engage in economic reconstruction
and the restitution of law and order. The mission made
use of every possible opportunity to send a strong
message to the ethnic communities to reject all violence,
to promote stability, safety and security and to cooperate
fully with UNMIK in the implementation of resolution
1244 (1999). We are pleased to say that the mission's
message was taken seriously, with the full understanding
that a multi-ethnic society presents the best hope for the
people of Kosovo.

 

The upcoming municipal election and the civilian and
voter registration process, which commenced during the
visit of the Mission, will be a major challenge for the
United Nations in Kosovo in the coming months. The issue
of missing persons and detainees has emerged as one of the
major impediments to reconciliation and peaceful
coexistence. This issue was highlighted, in particular, in the
mission's meetings with families and communities that had
been going through agony for months. Given the urgency
of the situation, the mission felt that it was important to
bring the matter regarding the appointment of a special
envoy for missing persons and detainees to the attention of
the Security Council. The return of internally displaced
persons and refugees presents another impediment to this
process, and needs to be addressed with caution and
understanding.

The shortage in meeting the staffing requirements for
both the civil administration and the civilian police was
recognized by the mission as a serious constraint for
UNMIK operations. The mission would therefore ask that
necessary steps be taken in this regard by the Secretariat
and contributing countries with absolute seriousness and
urgency.

I will read out verbatim the section on the findings of
the mission in order for the Council to comprehend fully
the areas, both general and specific, which will require its
subsequent attention.

Before I do so, let me take this opportunity to convey
our sincere thanks to the Government of Italy for making
excellent arrangements for our transportation to Kosovo and
our return from Rome. On behalf of the mission, I would
like to convey our special thanks, and would request the
Permanent Representative of Italy, Ambassador Vento, to
convey this to his Government. I also thank, on behalf of
the mission, the Secretariat staff who accompanied the
mission for their wonderful support for our work.

I shall now read out section IV of the report
(5/2000/363), entitled "Findings of the Mission".

"Since its deployment on 13 June 1999, UNMIK
has made significant progress in implementing
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999). The full and
effective implementation of the Security Council's
mandate requires sustained effort by UNMIK and
KFOR and the full participation of local communities,
which in turn demand active engagement of and
support by the international community. All ethnic
communities expressed a desire to live in peace

together, but due to the recent violent conflict they
are still deeply divided and the healing will require
a long time. Despite a steady improvement in the
overall level of violence and criminality, attacks
against minorities continue and special measures of
protection must constantly be maintained. KFOR's
continued assistance in protecting minorities and
joint security operations with UNMIK police thus
remain vital.

"Inadequate physical, social and economic
security remains a major concern. Lack of freedom
of movement, access to education, health care, social
services and employment hampers the return of
internally displaced persons, primarily Serbs and the
Roma, and significantly impedes the integration of
ethnic minorities into public life. Regarding
possibilities for reconciliation, there have been some
positive signs, such as the general apology issued by
the Serb community of Orahovac and the subsequent
declaration from the Kosovo Albanian community at
Orahovac inviting Serbs to stay and to cooperate in
the future development of the community.

"Progress towards peaceful coexistence remains
fragile. The painful issues of all missing persons and
detainees, continuing violence, and the return of
internally displaced persons and refugees continue to
be major impediments to reconciliation and
undermine the efforts to create a climate of tolerance
and security. The Mission noted the strong support
of the different ethnic communities for the
appointment of a special envoy for detainees and
missing persons. Given its urgency, the Mission
undertook to report that support to the Council.

"The lack of an effective and unbiased rule of
law in Kosovo was a recurring theme at many of the
Mission's meetings. The Mission notes that
UNMIK's intention to recruit international judges
and prosecutors and their staff to work alongside
their local counterparts will be critical to redress the
perceived culture of impunity which currently
undermines the judicial system. If UNMIK is to
increase the effectiveness of the Kosovo judiciary,
substantial voluntary assistance, both in personnel
and material resources, is required. As regards the
lack of sufficient policing resources, it is imperative
for UNMIK to continue accelerating its training
programmes for the Kosovo Police Service. The
multi-ethnic and gender-sensitive Kosovo Police
Service development programme and the OSCE-led

 

Kosovo Police School should serve as models for
future institutions in Kosovo. The Mission was
appreciative of the fact that human rights education
and acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS)
awareness are part of UNMIK's police curriculum.

"While noting the serious staffing constraints
faced by UNMIK in civil administration and police,
the Mission recognizes the significant imbalance in
wages between its locally recruited civil service staff
and the rest of the Kosovo population (a similar situation exists in United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor operations). It feels that
both issues should be pursued through the appropriate
General Assembly process.

"To ensure an organized, expeditious and
sustainable return, significant resources will be
required in order to create appropriate conditions for
the returnees by increasing Kosovo's absorbing
capacity.

"The recent participation of the Serbs as
observers in the Joint Interim Administrative
Structures, including the Kosovo Transitional Council
and the Interim Administrative Council, is encouraging
and hopefully will lead to their full participation and
a larger representation of non-Albanians in the
Structures. Bosniac and Roma representatives,
however, have yet to join the Transitional Council. At
the same time, the Mission noted that a major effort
by the international presences and long-term nurturing
will be necessary to achieve progress in reconciliation.
Nonetheless, the Mission noted several examples of
more positive relations between communities at the
local level. Discussions at this level are less politically
charged and focus on practical modes of cooperation.
Efforts to promote cooperation and interface between
ethnic communities at the local level, including the
establishment of multi-ethnic municipal councils,
administrative boards and rapid-impact employment
projects, could foster peaceful coexistence.

"The civil and voter registration processes in
Kosovo, in view of the forthcoming municipal
elections, have just begun. It is unfortunate, however,
that all factions of the Kosovo Serb community have
chosen not to participate in this process, due to the
current lack of physical security and freedom of
movement. Substantial efforts by UNMIK and KFOR,
backed up by the strong support of the international
community, are essential to encourage and create the

conditions for Serb participation, including those
who are displaced outside Kosovo.

"The Mission welcomes the renewal of contacts
between leaders of both communities in Mitrovica,
and believes that joint community-based
programmes, which it had an opportunity to observe
while there, have a potential for confidence-building
and reconciliation.

"The Mission notes UNMIK's intention to
continue working to establish a Joint Committee,
which is aimed at enhancing productive dialogue
with the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia authorities.
KFOR is continuing to maintain regular contact with
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia authorities on
military issues within the framework of the Joint
Implementation Committee.

"The Mission is cognizant of the imperative for
UNMIK to foster economic recovery as a means of
underpinning confidence-building and reconciliation
efforts at the local level. The Mission welcomes the
deployment of economic reconstruction
representatives of the European Union at the
municipal level. It further supports UNMIK's view
that economic investment priorities must be guided
by UNMIK to ensure maximum effectiveness of
donated funds. Property issues, however, remain
unresolved, and could potentially undermine
international efforts aimed at the economic recovery
of Kosovo and even peace initiatives by UNMIK.

"The Mission feels that detailed information on
KFOR's activities in the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1160 (1998) should be provided
to the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1160 (1998).

"It was emphasized to the Mission that UNMIK
has only been deployed for some 10 months, and
that as a result there should be realistic expectations
of what it could achieve in that limited period.
Healing the wounds inflicted by the conflict will
take time. Reconciliation is a long and protracted
process, and the international community must be
patient and persistent. UNMIK and KFOR have
made significant progress in implementing their
mandates and must be commended for their efforts,
often made under difficult and challenging
circumstances. The Mission notes the enormity of
the task faced by UNMIK, and commends in

 

particular its efforts in the capacity and institution-
building areas. Further efforts to ensure full
implementation of its resolution 1244 (1999) remain
a high priority of the Security Council.

"The Mission wishes to pay a well-deserved
tribute to Mr. Kouchner for his outstanding leadership
of UNMIK and his commitment to the success of the
Security Council objectives in Kosovo. The Mission
also expresses appreciation to General Ortufio,
Commander of KFOR, for his determined efforts and
commitment. The hard work and dedication of their
collaborators and the entire staff of UNMIK and
KFOR, have earned the praise of the Mission. The
Mission is deeply appreciative of all the support
provided by UNMIK and KFOR which was crucial to
its success." (S/2000/363)

Let me conclude by saying, as has been mentioned
repeatedly in our report, that the healing of wounds and the
process of reconciliation may take a long time, but the
international community cannot afford to relent. It has
invested in Kosovo in a big and positive way and it cannot
afford to fail.

