Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): First of all, I would
like to thank Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi very much
indeed for his excellent leadership of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). As his
briefing showed, this has been a busy year for that
important body. I would also like to commend the 1540
Group of Experts and the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs for their tireless work in support
of the Committee.

Resolution 1540 (2004) is a vital part of the global
non-proliferation architecture. The threat of non-State

actors, particularly terrorists, acquiring materials for
weapons of mass destruction - whether chemical,
biological or nuclear - is a nightmare scenario for
all of us. By monitoring States' implementation of the
binding obligations under Chapter VII of the Charter of
the United Nations that address that risk, the Committee
fulfils a crucial non-proliferation function. In doing
so, it acts as an important safeguard for international
peace and security. It is therefore right that we take the
time to review, with a critical eye, the state of global
implementation, as well as the work and structures of
the Committee itself.

The United Kingdom supports the comprehensive
review, which is already under way, and looks forward
to the presentation of the final report on the subject to
the Council by the end of 2016. The year ahead will be
a busy one for the Committee. I would like to briefly
highlight three issues.

First, we have not yet achieved universality of
reporting, although there is a high rate of reporting
compliance. Providing a first report to the Committee
is the best way for a country to begin a dialogue
with the Committee on implementation. It allows the
Committee and its experts to highlight potential gaps
and risks and to help provide potential assistance
providers. The provision of follow-up reports and
national implementation action plans is a important
means of sharing information and further supporting
implementation. I would echo Ambassador Oyarzun
Marchesi's call on those remaining States to submit a
first report on implementation. If they have not already
done so, 2016 is the year to start such engagement.

Secondly, the Committee's decision to focus on
implementation on a regional basis is already bearing
fruit. The recent resolution 1540 (2004) training course
held in China for Asia-Pacific countries was a huge
success, and we look forward to more in other regions.
The United Kingdom had the privilege of supporting
a regional workshop in East Africa for States in the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development in
September to support the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). The new staff resources committed by the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and the Organization of American States are another
important step-up in engagement. Neighbouring
countries in a region often share geographic
and political similarities when it comes to the
implementation ofresolution 1540 (2004), so expanding
regional approaches to assistance and training under
that resolution can improve our overall security from
proliferation risks.

Finally, the Committee must continue its proactive
outreach. Resolution 1540 (2004) is atechnical resolution
that covers a range of specialist fields. The Committee
should continue to meet with expert communities
in the relevant scientific disciplines, including
academia, lawmaking and industry. As always in the
Security Council, getting new and fresh perspectives
on old problems is a welcome way of improving our
work. Direct engagement with States is also vital. We
invite all United Nations States Members to consider
how the Committee's work can be strengthened
through the comprehensive review, including through
implementation monitoring, assistance matchmaking
and outreach. We look forward to the public meetings
that Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi is planning so as to
facilitate that dialogue.

In conclusion, the United Kingdom is committed
to the preventative agenda on resolution 1540 (2004).
Measures taken by States today on materials for
weapons of mass destruction, as well as on financing
and export controls, will directly reduce the risk posed
by the proliferation of such materials to non-State
actors. As the threat of those non-State actors evolves,
we must continue to work together to strengthen our
collective security through committees such as these.

Finally, if we are getting all valedictory, I would
like to offer a very brief thanks to Chad, Chile, Jordan,
Lithuania and Nigeria for being five outstanding
non-permanent representatives. Personally, I will
always think of them as permanent, since they were
here when I first joined the Council. I hope that we
will vote tomorrow, but I equally hope that we will not
have to do any explanations of vote, as we will all be
so happy with the text that no one will need to do any
explaining.

