Mr. Ileka (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): Now that your presidency of the
Security Council for this month is drawing to an end,
Sir, allow me to express my delegation's satisfaction
with the outstanding manner in which you have carried
out your noble mission and to pay tribute to your skills
and competence.

My delegation fully endorses the statement made
by the representative of the sisterly Republic of the
Congo, who, with his customary clarity and eloquence,
gave, on behalf of the countries of the Economic
Community of Central African States, an outline of
developments in our community in the area of peace
and security. My delegation will therefore limit its
statement to the situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

While we sincerely thank the Security Council for
keeping the situation in our country among its
priorities, we take this opportunity also to express our
gratitude for this morning's unanimous response to the
request of the Secretary-General to deploy as soon as
possible a multinational force in Bunia with a view to
helping a return to normalcy in Ituri, a district of
Orientale province of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo that has been stricken, for the second time in
just a few months, by the misdeeds of the forces of
evil. Orchestrated by two neighbouring countries, the
events in Bunia are strikingly similar to those we have
seen in Kisangani, where the regular armies of those
same two countries clashed on several occasions with
heavy weapons, claiming thousands of victims. The
sheer numbers of callous warlords in Ituri, like those
further south in the provinces of Nord-Kivu, Sud-Kivu
and Maniema, are of such great concern that some are
now even talking about the "Somalization" of that part
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Worse still,
the atrocities enable us to draw a certain parallel to
other events, such as those carried out about 10 years
ago in Rwanda, where a terrible genocide occurred.
Broadcasts by Thomas Lubanga's Radio Candip remind
us quite starkly of those aired by Radio Mille Collines
of such sad memory.

Ituri is but one symptom of the general situation
in the country. Recent massacres there compound a
long and macabre list of massive violations of human
rights and of international humanitarian law since the
outbreak of the war of aggression on 2 August 1998.
Ituri is just a new catastrophe in the Congolese tragedy.
There are hundreds of verified deaths, thousands of
internally displaced persons and thousands of people
living in subhuman conditions in and around MONUC
areas, where they are seeking refuge under the
protection of Uruguayan troops, who have done
excellent work. My delegation cannot fail to recall that
members of the international community have paid a
heavy price. Two representatives of the Red Cross and
two MONUC officers, far from their families, fully
committed to the cause of returning peace and dignity
to our country, were savagely murdered. Their bodies
were found mutilated beyond what one can imagine.

In the light of all those atrocities, it is important
that the international community's message not be
hampered by ambiguity. The message must be made
clear, and the Security Council must send a strong
signal to those who commit such atrocities. For
example, those responsible for the murders committed
on 14 and 15 May 2002 in Kisangani - whose names
are in official United Nations reports - are still
moving about freely and continue to attend to their
business. In such cases, how can a potential violator of
human rights and of international humanitarian law not
feel safe to commit another crime if he knows
beforehand that, after committing it, not only will he
go unpunished, but perhaps he might even benefit from
a minor perquisite or a bonus, granted on the altar of
peace.

That is the case with Thomas Lubanga, a former
inmate of the central prison of Makala, in Kinshasa,
and a well-known criminal and terrorist. Are we to
consider him for what he really is - I repeat, a
criminal - or are we to lay out the red carpet for him?
At a time when the Security Council is resolutely
committed to the stabilization of Ituri and, therefore, of
the entire Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
whole Great Lakes region, Ituri will undoubtedly be an
important test of the will of the nation and of the
international community.

In the context of the partnership that has
fortunately been forged among the Security Council,
the African Union and the parties involved or
interested in the conflict in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the Council has taken the initiative of
dispatching a mission to the region on a regular basis.
We note with satisfaction that every Council mission
visit has given rise to notable progress in the peace
process. We are convinced that the same will apply to
the mission to Central Africa, which we will have the
signal honour to host in a few days' time in Kinshasa.
The challenges are immense, certainly, but they are not
insurmountable.

In the immediate future, particular emphasis
should be placed on the implementation of the
transition and on the completion of the ongoing peace
process. The cessation of hostilities throughout the
national territory - more particularly in the east - is
crucial in order to enable the Transitional Government
to establish its authority, in conformity with the
relevant Security Council resolutions with the Lusaka
Agreement and with other subsequent partial
agreements.

The reforms envisaged by the Transitional
Constitution deserve to be supported. Reform of the
army - a crucial attribute of the sovereignty and
defence of national territory - must be supported and
accelerated, particularly in the context of the swift
formation of an inclusive and republican army. Reform
of the judicial system, for its part, should be a priority
so that we can deal with the thorny question of the
administration of justice and impunity. The millions of
Congolese men and women who have suffered
grievously from armed aggression and from atrocities
committed by warlords are demanding justice. They
cannot be denied it.

The Ituri Pacification Commission's resolutions
also deserve to be supported unreservedly. They must
be fully implemented. However, it should be pointed
out that the tasks of pacification, reconciliation and
respect for law and order are functions that belong to a
governmental entity. Therefore, the capacities of the
Transitional Government deserve to be strengthened to
that effect.

In the short and medium term, the concepts of
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation (DDRR) and disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation or resettlement (DDRRR)
should be rethought if we wish them to be truly
effective. Naturally, they should pertain to the groups
mentioned in the annexes to the Lusaka Agreement, but
they should also extend to those that were created
recently, some of which are fighting in Ituri. It is also
essential to create a viable mechanism to halt the
circulation of small arms and light weapons, which
creates situations of instability, veritable breeding
grounds for all kinds of criminal, organized crime and
terrorist networks. In that connection, we followed
with much interest the views expressed this afternoon
by the delegations of Germany, Bulgaria and Guinea.

We must also put an end to the illegal
exploitation of natural resources. Such resources are
ultimately a curse for the countries that by chance
possess them. Those countries, including ours, are
extremely poor and represent nearly all of the world's
conflicts. In parallel, it would be useful to combine the
region's various peace processes in a comprehensive
approach. The Arusha process, for Burundi, is well
under way and seems to be on the right path. The
Lusaka process, for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, is irreversible. We hope that both processes
succeed and that a free and democratic space is created.
That will be good for the Great Lakes region. Then it
will be important that the region's two other countries
take into account the efforts undoubtedly being
undertaken with a view to genuine democracy,
reconciliation and national harmony.

Over the long term, the organization and
convening of an international conference on peace and
security in the Great Lakes region is becoming an
absolute necessity. Such a conference, from our point
of view, would be the most viable forum for laying the
foundations for new relations marked by respect and
trust among the region's countries. Once peace is
restored, Congolese men and women will not fail to
share with the world their vision of what they intend to
accomplish for the happiness of present and future
generations. We hope to share and to realize our dream
with the assistance of you, the members of the
international community.

Before I conclude, my delegation would like to
ask the Security Council to be so kind as to express to
the Secretary-General our gratitude for his tireless
efforts to restore peace in our country. We are grateful
to him for his recent initiative and take this opportunity
to sincerely thank, again through you, Mr. President,
all the countries that decided to respond favourably to
it in one form or another. These thanks for the
Council's tireless and unfailing commitment to the
Congolese people will be reiterated in several days'
time by the Republic's most authorized spokesman.

