Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I would like to join others
in thanking you, Sir, and your delegation for organizing
this important debate. I would also like to express my
appreciation to Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson
for his briefing, which reaffirms his unwavering
commitment to the protection of civilians agenda,
especially in promoting a culture of prevention.
Additionally, I would like to acknowledge Ms. Christine
Beerli, Vice-President of the International Committee
of the Red Cross and Ms. Eveline Rooijmans, Oxfam
Senior Humanitarian Policy Advisor, for being here
with us today and for their work, despite the challenges
and the risks involved.

Our history has informed our resolve to advocate
for and contribute, where possible, to the protection of
civilians entangled in today's armed conflicts. One life
lost is one too many. We can all agree on that point. We
believe that you, Sir, also hold this conviction, Uruguay
being one ofthe first signatories ofthe Kigali Principles
on the Protection of Civilians.

May I start by sharing how I view the protection
of civilians mandate is understood among the
international community. Some troop- and
police-contributing countries believe they are deployed
to protect by their presence - an idea that suggests
a more static approach to protection of civilians.
Other troop- and police-contributors adhere to a more
proactive approach to the protection of civilians, by
implementing a robust approach in the implementation
of their mandate. However, those differing views on
the protection-of-civilians mandate are not new. Since
the establishment of the United Nations, some 70 years
ago, the Security Council has adopted a number of
resolutions and strategies to protect civilians in armed
conflict, including landmark resolution 1265 (1999).
However, in 1994 more than 1 million were killed
during the genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda. That
was one of the darkest moments in the modern history
of humankind and of peacekeeping.

Today, more than 20 years since the genocide
against the Tutsi, we keep asking ourselves - why?
Why did the United Nations do little to nothing to protect
Rwandans? Why did the international community not
step in and prevent the fastest-moving genocide of the
twentieth century? To this day, we still have no clear
answer. In my own region, the Great Lakes region, we
have a peacekeeping mission that is supposed to provide
protection to civilians entangled in armed conflict,
but we have seen time and again that it has struggled
to deliver on that crucial promise to protect. Despite
the presence of the largest peacekeeping force - the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the United
Nations Force Intervention Brigade - which are
equipped with all types of equipment and enablers,
we are still facing roaming predators against civilians,
mainly the so-called Forces democratiques de liberation
du Rwanda, the former genocidal forces in Rwanda.

While we understand that the responsibility to
protect civilians lies primarily with the host country,
our main source of frustration today is the continued
inability of the international community, in a timely
manner, to rapidly respond to conflicts that may
turn violent, which could serve to effectively protect
civilians.

I would like to now take the time to touch upon
some challenges that we believe significantly impact the
implementation of the protection-of-civilians mandates
in today's peacekeeping missions.

First, we are still divided over what the use of force
entails. That is worrisome, considering the thousands
of peacekeepers entrusted with saving the lives of
civilians throughout the world. We need to clearly and
thoroughly confirm what is entailed, particularly when
the threat to civilians may arise from groups that claim
to be affiliated with the host Government. We seek a
common mindset.

Secondly, we must achieve sound and effective
rapid deployment. Even if we are to obtain the
necessary number of troops, the required contingent-
owned equipment and more, none of it matters if we
cannot rapidly deploy. As the report of the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations noted,

"Truly rapid and effective deployment
capacities will always come at a cost, but a more
reliable system for responding quickly to save lives
and arrest emerging conflicts can potentially avoid
a larger, more costly response later." (S/2015/446, para. 197).

Thirdly, we must avoid template approaches that
constrain protection-of-civilians mandates and the
respective peacekeeping mission. Now is the time
for us, the international community, to act boldly,
strategically and flexibly. Applying tailored approaches
means assessing the situation on the ground and the
capabilities needed to properly protect civilians, and,
as highlighted by the High-level Panel, to "build upon
existing sources of resilience and local protection"
(ibid, para. 94). Template mandates and missions must
be left in the past.

Fourthly, while a lot has been done by troop- and
police-contributing countries and the United Nations
to improve the protection of civilians, the increasing
violence against civilians has tested the fundamental
principles and capabilities of our operations and
demonstrated that much remains to be done. Our
experience on the ground has proved that peacekeeping
operations that are ill-prepared, with no adequate
means to address large-scale violence directed against
civilians, will falter and may even collapse.

Fifthly, we must understand the root causes of the
conflicts we face so that we can thoroughly protect
civilians. Such an understanding will, in turn, allow
us to understand the "hows" and "whys" of attacks
on civilians, which, as the High-level Panel noted,
that allows for identifying proper responses to threats
against civilians.

Lastly, there often exists a gap between the
expectations surrounding civilian protection and the
actual capabilities possessed by peacekeepers. Both
must be considered in the design of mandates. We
believe that threats to civilians and solutions to them
should inform mission mandates, strategies, structures
and resources allocation, as set out in the benchmarks
outlined in the Kigali Principles on the Protection of
Civilians. As the Council will recall, the Principles
were the outcome of the high-level international
conference that we hosted in May 2015. As the concept
note (S/2016/22, annex) rightly puts it, the benchmarks
set out in the Kigali Principles offer proactive, practical
ways that could lead to addressing current challenges in
implementing protection-of-civilians mandates.

We thank the Member States that endorsed the
Principles at an early stage, including your country,
Sir, Uruguay. We encourage others to join us in that
endeavour. In collaboration with the United Nations,
regional and subregional organizations and other
Member States, we hope to streamline the Principles
into the core of the protection-of-civilians agenda. That
will help us overcome the challenges we face in the
protection of civilians and the implementation of that
mandate.

In the coming months - in April, I think - we
will co-host an international conference with the United
States Africa Command and the Netherlands, which
will serve as a follow-up to the protection-of-civilians
conference held in Kigali last year. We look forward to
Council members' participation.

Allow me to also emphasize the role of regional
and subregional organizations, which we believe could
enhance the implementation of protection-of-civilians
mandates due to their cultural and regional proximity
and local knowledge of conflict dynamics, as well
as their ability to deploy quickly. It is my hope that
this organ will continue to maximize the use of their
comparative advantages, involving them throughout
the process of missions deployment, including
consultations on mandate design.

In conclusion, I wish to share the following words
of President Paul Kagame:

"We cannot turn the clock back, nor can we undo the
harm caused, but we have the power to determine
the future and to ensure that what happened never
happens again."

