Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): Seventy
years ago, the adoption of the Geneva Conventions was
a milestone in the evolution of our universal conscience
following the horrors of the Second World War. I
therefore welcome your commitment to this topic,
Mr. President, and thank Poland for having taken the
initiative of convening this commemorative meeting
some months after the 1 April meeting (see S/PV.8499),
on international humanitarian law during the joint
French and German presidency of the Security Council,
led by Mr. Heiko Maas, German Federal Minister for
Foreign Affairs, whose presence I welcome today, and
Mr. Jean-Yves Le Drian, Minister ofEurope and Foreign
Affairs. For us, respect for international humanitarian
law is a high diplomatic priority.

I would also like to thank the three briefers and
pay special tribute to the International Committee
of the Red Cross, which, as guarantor of the Geneva
Conventions, plays an essential role in the fight for
the dissemination and implementation of international
humanitarian law.

Today, the Conventions and their Protocols
Additional, for which we call for universal ratification,
are too often violated, whether in Syria, Libya, Yemen,
Palestine, Afghanistan, the Central African Republic,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo or South Sudan.
Certain parties to conflict even go so far as to knowingly
incorporate violations of those rules into their military
strategy in order to deprive people of all assistance
and obtain their surrender. Others violate international
humanitarian law in the name of fighting terrorism.
That is unacceptable and it is up to the Council to
reaffirm that very clearly and regularly.

Today, our efforts must focus on three priorities.

The first is to ensure access of humanitarian aid
to civilian populations. If humanitarian and medical
personnel are to have access to civilians, they must
be protected from all violence and threats and must
not be targeted. No one should target an ambulance.
The Security Council marked a critical point in
addressing this challenge when it adopted resolution
2286 (2016). In 2017, in order to move from words to
action, France initiated a political statement to promote
the implementation of that resolution, which is now
endorsed by 44 States.

The second priority is to prevent the violation of
international humanitarian law. That is what we do when
we place the protection of civilians, particularly women
and children, at the heart of peacekeeping mandates,
as is the case for the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali and the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic. As Miguel
de Serpa Soares reminded us, those operations, like
non-United Nations forces supported by the Council,
should carry out their operations in strict compliance
with international humanitarian law. That is what the
human rights compliance framework does for the Joint
Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel.

The prevention of violations of international
humanitarian law depends above all on the behaviour
of each State, and the members of the Security Council
must be exemplary in that regard. In France's military
action, international humanitarian law is integrated
from the planning stage and is an integral part of our
security and defence cooperation, particularly in the
training provided to our partners and the strategy
for modernizing our armed forces. As Ms. Florence
Parly, Minister of the Armed Forces, pointed out on
5 April, in her speech on intelligence and defence, the
rise of artificial intelligence must not move any of the
red lines drawn by international humanitarian law in
terms of either discrimination between combatants
and non-combatants, respect for the principle of
proportionality or the minimization of damage. On
the contrary, artificial intelligence should enable us to
continue to improve our compliance with these rules in
future conflicts.

The third priority is the fight against impunity, the
importance of which you have just noted, Mr. President.
We must strengthen national capacities to conduct

impartial and independent investigations and, where
national mechanisms are insufficient or inappropriate,
support the use of international mechanisms. In that
regard, France reiterates its call for the universalization
of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court.

There is also a need to improve data collection.
The establishment of the World Health Organization
database, which lists attacks on health personnel and
infrastructure, is a significant step forward in that
regard. We also welcome the establishment by the
Secretary-General of an office of investigation into
attacks on schools and hospitals in north-west Syria,
using the United Nations de-confliction mechanism.

Finally, sanctions are a deterrence tool that the
Council must use more frequently, particularly against
those responsible for sexual violence and attacks on
humanitarian personnel and facilities.

The task ahead is significant and we must collectively
mobilize more than ever around those priorities. That
is why, as Minister Heiko Maas has just noted, France
and Germany have launched a humanitarian appeal for
action, which we will introduce in September during
high-level week at the General Assembly. The appeal
will identify concrete actions that States can take to
strengthen respect for international humanitarian law.
We call on all of our partners to endorse it.

