Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I too would like to thank
Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco his comprehensive
briefing, as well as the Permanent Representative of
Israel and the Permanent Observer of Palestine for
their remarks.

Once again, the Middle East peace process is at a
very delicate juncture. The end of the construction
freeze on Israeli settlements in the West Bank,
continued construction of Israeli homes in East
Jerusalem, the attacks on and by Israeli settlers and the
increased exchange of fire between Gaza and Israel are
all ominous developments that pose a real challenge to
the direct negotiations.

Those disturbing developments must be reversed
so that the negotiation process launched on 2 September
can continue. That will require political courage and
statesmanship. It means halting all settlement activity,
as it becomes untenable for the Palestinian leadership to
gather support for the talks while the very prospects of a
viable Palestinian State continue to be undermined by
construction. Freezing construction is not only a legal
obligation, but is actually the single most critical
contribution to peace in the region at this juncture.

We all understand that domestic political
constraints are a factor in any significant diplomatic
endeavour and, in cases of war and peace, even a
determining one.

At the same time, leaders and parties must look
beyond their immediate political objectives and take
the measures that are necessary to preserve the peace
process and to reach their long-term goals. The
commitment of all parties to peace will be judged not
by words, but by deeds. One is not asking Israel to
make concessions. Israel is being asked to fulfil its
legal obligation not to build in the occupied territories
and, in so doing, to allow for the negotiations to have a
reasonable chance to succeed.

Saving the incipient direct negotiations will also
require the active engagement of the international
community. We commend the efforts of the United
States Administration in that regard. We also applaud
the decision taken by the Follow-up Committee of the
League of Arab States in Sirte to support the
Palestinian Authority in giving some time for
conditions to be created for the resumption of
negotiations.

Despite the many challenges they face today and
will certainly face in the future, negotiations are the
only way to achieve sustainable peace, provided they
are fair, meaningful and achieve concrete results in the
timeframe announced in September. Negotiations for
the sake of negotiations do not serve the purpose of
peace; rather, they endanger it.

Stopping and preventing violence is also key to
sustaining the fragile peace process. Recent incidents
of provocation and intolerance are a matter for serious
concern. We condemn the attacks against Israeli
settlers and the rocket-firing into southern Israel from
Gaza. We equally condemn provocation and violence
from Israeli settlers and the unacceptable attacks on
mosques and on Palestinian civilians and property.
Perpetrators of such acts must be swiftly brought to
justice. Moving the peace process forward is the most
unambiguous response to those who resort to
incitement and violence to impose their will,
discourage dialogue and undermine the two-State
solution.

The ultimate success of the peace process will
also depend on intra-Palestinian reconciliation. We
welcome the recent developments in the Palestinian
talks in Damascus and the constructive role played by
Egypt. Positive signs in the right direction are most
needed as the effort of institutional capacity-building
in Palestine, following Prime Minister Fayyad's plan,
reaches a new phase. We reiterate the need for Israel to
contribute to that effort by further eliminating
restrictive measures.

The rightful focus on direct negotiations must not
divert attention from the gravity of the humanitarian
situation in Gaza. On the contrary, apart from inflicting
unlawful hardship upon 1.5 million people, the
blockade of Gaza is also detrimental to the peace talks
and inconsistent with a true desire to create an
environment conducive to substantive dialogue. We
welcome the easing of the Israeli blockade, but what is
required is a complete lifting of the blockade, without
prejudice to Israel's legitimate security concerns.

At this critical point in time, there are
fundamental choices to be made by the parties, in
particular by the strongest one. As the Secretary-
General recently and eloquently stated, if the door to
peace closes, it will be very hard to reopen. We hope
and expect that his important message will be
understood and heeded.

Before I conclude, let me add a few words on
Lebanon. We encourage all Lebanese to work together
towards political stability and prosperity. We urge all
parties to address their differences peacefully. The
international community should also continue to extend
its full support to the country, especially through
efforts to assist Lebanon in promoting justice while
consolidating peace and reconciliation.

