Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Allow me to begin by
thanking Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and Under-
Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for their briefings,
which provide valuable updates on the implementation
of the Stockholm Agreement and on the humanitarian
situation in Yemen. We affirm our full support for
their efforts.

Like others, we are also deeply concerned about the
slow progress of the implementation of the Stockholm
Agreement given the inference that the required
humanitarian assistance has not been fully delivered to
the Yemeni people. However, we believe that the good
faith is still there. We recognize that the Agreement is
delicate and requires complicated technicalities to be
agreed upon prior to its implementation. Nevertheless,
the commitment has been made, and the parties should
make all the efforts necessary to ensure that the
Agreement is fulfilled. For both the Security Council
and the parties, that is a matter of great urgency, as we
are under the scrutiny of the international community.
Having said that and in response to the briefings,
Indonesia would like to emphasize three main points.

First, securing the corridor for humanitarian
assistance should be the top priority of all the parties.
They must make every effort to provide access by,
among other things, demining the road and clearing the
way to allow for the safe passage of the humanitarian
convoy. It is essential for all parties to permit access for
humanitarian personnel to the Red Sea Mills compound
and to ensure their safety and security during the
delivery of aid. The world cannot afford to once again
lose those important commodities, which can feed
3.5 million needy people. That is non-negotiable. Even
as we speak in the Chamber, there are many people,
in particular women and children, who are dying
from hunger and malnutrition. We listened to Under-
Secretary-General Mark Lowcock's briefing, which
described the dire situation, the increasing risk of a
pandemic, the presence of cholera and malnutrition, the
ongoing operational and logistical challenges and, of
course, the need for international funding. It is clear that
the international community must assist in that effort.

That leads me to my second point, which is
that the full implementation of the Al-Hudaydah
agreement would provide a more stable, safer and
more secure humanitarian corridor in the longer term.
The implementation of the Al-Hudaydah agreement
is also the gateway to a political process that could
be replicated in other parts of Yemen. It is a building
block for greater reconciliation in Yemen with the aim
of ending the conflict. We are pleased to hear that
the parties have reached agreement on phase 1 of the
mutual redeployment of forces and have also agreed in
principle on phase 2. Indonesia commends the parties
that have shown their good faith in reaching agreement,
in particular the Government of Yemen, which crossed
the front line to attend the meeting. Special thanks
should also be extended to General Cammaert, who set
up the initial work, and Lieutenant General Lollesgaard
for facilitating the agreement. That is a critical part of
the implementation of the Al-Hudaydah agreement, and
we are hopeful that the redeployment of troops and the
demilitarization of the city of Al-Hudaydah and the
ports can soon be completed. That means the United
Nations can now fully deploy the United Nations
Mission to Support the Hudaydah Agreement, with
only five months left to put in place its initial work
in Al-Hudaydah. Indonesia is ready to contribute its
personnel on the ground, if needed, in the quest for
peace. We recognize that the steps that I have outlined
above are not easy and require the trust that does not
currently fully exist between the parties. We encourage
Martin Griffiths to continue to build trust.

That links to my third point, namely, that all parties
should exercise restraint and de-escalate tensions beyond
Al-Hudaydah. Any military escalation or hostilities
elsewhere may diminish trust and undermine not only
the prospect of peace but also the implementation ofthe
commitments already agreed. However, in our view,
exercising restraint and de-escalating tensions beyond
Al-Hudaydah will significantly strengthen trust and
gradually build the essential confidence among all the
parties. That is the key to the full implementation of
the Stockholm Agreement. We would like others to also
strongly support the push for a second dialogue.

To sum up, Mr. Griffiths referred to the increasing
political will and that there was a genuine commitment
by the parties to the conflict. In our view, that must
be tested. While we are pleased to hear about the
progress that the Special Envoy mentioned, it needs
to be tested through concrete action, among other
measures, by all parties first, by the provision of access
for all humanitarian efforts; secondly, the withdrawal
of troops; and thirdly, the release of all prisoners - as
Mr. Griffiths said, "all for all". It is time for them to
reunite with their families. Those are only a few points
that would clearly demonstrate that there are tangible
intentions and good faith. In short, that is needed to
ensure the further opening up of the dialogue. Lastly,
also to quote Mr. Griffiths, Al-Hudaydah is the centre
of gravity in the conflict. Let us focus on Al-Hudaydah,
while also not forgetting other areas that are part
of Yemen.

In conclusion, I was also glad to hear the Special
Envoy say that something was happening and people,
in particular in Al-Hudaydah, had noted it. I hope that
other Yemenis in different parts of the country can say
the same: something is happening, and there is hope for
our children.
