Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank you, Mr. President for
convening today's important debate and presiding over
it. Japan is honoured to speak at the Security Council

on this very important topic. I would also like to thank
the briefers for their valuable inputs.

We have a national holiday in Japan, held in July,
called Marine Day, to give thanks for the ocean's
blessing. As a country that conducts 99.6 per cent of its
international trade volume on maritime transportation,
Japan takes the issue of maritime security very
seriously. We believe that peaceful seas governed
by the rule of law bring prosperity for all. Today,
however, many waters of the world face the destructive
consequences of transnational organized crime. Japan
believes that a free and open maritime order constitutes
a cornerstone of international stability and prosperity.
Our anti-maritime crime efforts are part of our free and
open Indo-Pacific initiative to ensure open sea lanes
and enhance connectivity between Asia and Africa.

Japan led the way in founding the Regional
Cooperation Agreement on Combating Piracy and
Armed Robbery against Ships in Asia, which has
successfully reduced piracy in Asia over the past decade.
We have also sent Japan Self-Defense Forces and the
Japan Coast Guard to join the multinational effort to
combat piracy off the coast of Somalia and the Gulf
of Aden. In addition, we have contributed to capacity-
building to tackle maritime crime through the Global
Maritime Crime Programme of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime. Those undertakings have
helped secure some of the world's most Vital shipping
lanes, and they prove that international cooperation
against maritime crime can work.

Despite those successes, however, the issue of
transnational organized crime at sea remains a concern.
That is especially the case in the Gulf of Guinea, which
has seen rising piracy and armed robbery in recent
years. Mounting an effective response to that threat
will require both a strategic and a comprehensive
approach. It must be strategic, using multi-layered
cooperation at the national, regional and international
levels. Countries need to strengthen their national
institutional capacity, while collaborating with their
neighbours, regional organizations and the United
Nations to build an effective maritime governance
system through harmonized legal frameworks and
improved information exchange. Japan will continue to
play a constructive role. It must also be comprehensive
by empowering individuals and communities in
addition to ensuring maritime governance.

Ultimately, however, we must tackle the
overarching cause of maritime insecurity, namely,
poverty. Poverty provides a fertile environment for
organized crime, and poverty drives desperate people
to take desperate measures. What pushes a young
person to take extraordinary risks every day to produce
illegal kerosene to sell on the black market, or to hijack
a tanker and take hostages for ransom? Poverty and a
lack of opportunity do.

Therefore, to uproot criminal networks, the
perspective of the individual in their local context
needs to be considered. United Nations sustaining
peace initiatives, including those by the Peacebuilding
Commission, can be leveraged to that end. Such a
holistic approach will also help promote a blue economy.
In that regard, we are encouraged by recent efforts by
some African countries to reduce marine plastic waste,
which can help protect fisheries and livelihoods and
ensure the sustainable use of marine resources.

Let me conclude by underscoring the importance
of prevention in maritime security. Transnational
organized crime can exacerbate existing problems and
set off a vicious cycle, but successful prevention can
help start a virtuous one. A strategic and comprehensive
approach will allow us to ensure both secured sea lanes
and environmentally sustainable economies, while
providing prosperity, security and opportunity for
generations to come.

