Mr. Garcia Moritan (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all I wish to thank the Ambassador of Chile,
Heraldo Mufioz, for the oral briefing he has given us
and for the work he and his delegation have been doing
in the Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al Qaeda and the Taliban. As has been
regrettably demonstrated by the recent appalling
terrorist attacks in Indonesia and Russia, including the
tragedy of Beslan, in which more than 300 people, half
of them children, lost their lives, terrorism continues to
be one of the gravest threats faced by the international
community at the present time.

The possibility that those responsible for the
attacks may have links with the Al Qaeda organization,
as indicated by the media, indicates the scale of the
task facing the 1267 Committee and the magnitude of
the challenges the Committee must confront. We
should also underscore the high quality of the work of
the Al Qaeda and Taliban Monitoring Team established
by resolution 1526 (2004). The first report presented
by the Team, which is now before the Committee for
consideration, is a serious and rather comprehensive
analysis of the questions and problems encountered by
the Committee in its work.

In this statement I shall address the work of the
Al Qaeda and Taliban Monitoring Team and the
initiatives to enhance contacts between the Committee
and Member States. The Monitoring Team's report
contains a number of suggestions to enhance the
effectiveness of the work of the Committee, which
deserve careful consideration. Many of the suggestions
should be adopted once the Committee is in agreement.

The recommendations relating to the
Consolidated List of individuals and entities subject to
sanctions are particularly relevant. The List, as has
already been stated, is the Committee's main working
tool; accordingly, it should be given the requisite
priority. It should always be kept up to date and seen
always by Member States as an efficient contribution
to the endeavour to combat terrorism sponsored by the
Al Qaeda network. In particular, it is important to
clearly establish procedures for making adjustments to
the Consolidated List, should new relevant information
be submitted. As the Chairman of the Committee
clearly stated in his briefing, the Team has hinted at a
number of measures that might be taken to improve the
functionality and credibility of the consolidated list.
The Committee should derive full benefit from this
contribution.

In some cases, the report of the Monitoring
Group indicates an intention to present
recommendations, or identifies aspects of the
Committee's work where they suggest adjustments
should be made. In both instances, my delegation
would request the Monitoring Team to present specific
suggestions for the Committee's consideration.

As has been indicated, the Committee is
discussing ways and means of adapting its guidelines
for action to the changes introduced in the work of the
Committee by the adoption of resolution 1526 (2004)
and it would be important, in that regard, to have
specific input from the Monitoring Team. In particular,
it would be appropriate to consider expanding and
clarifying the procedures relating to the delisting of
individuals or entities. Such an initiative might serve as
an incentive for States that may have doubts about
presenting requests for inclusion of individuals or
entities, because they are not clear as to the possible
difficulties they would face should the need arise to
remove the individual or entity from the sanctions List.

The last issue mentioned in the report, for which
we need further clarification, is that of due legal
process. That matter has been under consideration by
the Committee for some time, without any progress
having been made on the topic. Specific proposals
from the Monitoring Team for the consideration of the
Committee could be an important contribution in that
respect.

With regard to enhancing cooperation between
Member States and the work of the Committee, my
delegation takes the view that adoption of measures to
refine the List and clarify the procedures used in
handling it are the main way in which the Committee
can encourage the provision of contributions to the
Consolidated List from Member States.

The travels of the Chairman and the Monitoring
Team are at the same time an important instrument in
garnering impressions and learning from the
experience of those authorities directly responsible for
counter-terrorism activities. However, as the Chairman
of the Committee noted in his briefing, it is important
to be able to translate the concerns and experiences of
the States visited by him and the members of the
Monitoring Team into adjustments in the sanctions
regime, in order to make its implementation more
effective.

We also support the offer made again today by
the Chairman of the Committee to the effect that
Member States wishing to do so, may hold meetings
with the Committee to discuss pertinent topics as
provided for in resolution 1526 (2004).

Lastly, as has been clear from the statements
made throughout the meeting, there is a wide range of
significant challenges facing the Committee to increase
efficiency in its struggle against the Taliban and Al
Qaeda. However, as has already been stated, terrorism
is a global threat which can be combated only through
the concentrated endeavours of the international
community. Above and beyond the action that may be
taken within the Committee or the Security Council
itself, the genuine triumphs in the struggle against a
scourge that does not acknowledge or respect borders
will depend on the ability of the entire international
community to work in concert to find solutions to the
problems that lie at the origin of the inexcusable
terrorist acts which unfortunately continue to be
perpetrated.

