Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this meeting and for your efforts throughout
your presidency to reinforce the principles on which
the United Nations was founded. I also wish to express
my thanks and appreciation to Mr. Staffan de Mistura,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, for
his comprehensive briefing. In that regard, I would like
to pay tribute to the relentless efforts he has made and
continues to make to achieve a political solution to the
crisis in Syria.

All previous approaches to dealing with the Syrian
crisis have failed. That is why we need to redouble
our honest efforts and put the interests of Syria and
its people above all other considerations. Today, this
requires the Security Council to step up its work to
reach a political solution to this crisis. That solution
must be able to preserve the unity and integrity of Syria
and be accepted by all Syrians.

Since the beginning of the crisis in Syria, the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan has worked with the
international community to find a peaceful solution
that would avoid the destruction of Syria and the
displacement of its people. We have also helped to
contain the human impact and alleviate the suffering
of the brotherly Syrian people, as was clearly reflected
in our contribution to the development and adoption
of resolutions 2139 (2014) and 2165 (2014), on the
humanitarian situation in Syria.
Jordan will continue to support all multilateral
efforts to assist Syria in reaching a political solution.
That is why we hope to return to the Geneva process
and the implementation of resolution 2254 (2015) so
as to preserve the unity, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Syria and create an environment conducive
to restoring stability, which will reflect positively on
the political settlement and contribute to the return of
displaced persons and refugees. In this context, the
reopening of the Jaber-Nasib crossing point on the
borders between Jordan and Syria is a step that we
hope will help achieve stability and pave the way for
the voluntary return of refugees to their homes.

In the context of our commitment to the return of
stability in Syria, my country reaffirms its full support
for the efforts deployed by Mr. De Mistura and the
United Nations to reach a solution to this crisis through
the formation of a Syrian constitutional committee as
soon as possible, thereby launching a political process
that would include all Syrian parties and components
under the auspices of the United Nations.

My country currently hosts 1.3 million of our
Syrian brothers. We have exceeded our absorptive
capacity and are doing all we can to support and assist
those refugees, despite the enormous pressures of their
presence on the national economy. The costs of hosting
Syrian refugees, as well as the direct costs of the Syrian
crisis to the Kingdom, have now exceeded $10 billion.
This amount includes the costs of education, health
care and subsidies for electricity, water, sanitation
and the use of infrastructure, as well as security and
other costs.

We underscore once again that the refugee crisis is
a global responsibility. Everyone agrees on that, and it
therefore requires an international solution. However,
international assistance is not currently covering real
needs. There must be coordinated efforts to ensure
the flow of humanitarian assistance within Syria and
to support host countries and communities, including
Jordan, as we encourage the voluntary return of Syrian
refugees to their homes as an inevitable outcome. We
reaffirm the importance of coordinating efforts to
achieve this end through the creation of an atmosphere
conducive to the voluntary return of those refugees.

I am confident that the Security Council appreciates
the great responsibility and heavy burden it bears in
the service of Syria's citizens, who place their hopes
in the Council so that their spirits may be reassured
and the situation stabilized in order for normal life to
be resumed. The international community therefore
needs to make further efforts to meet the interests and
aspirations of the brotherly Syrian people.

