Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and Commissioner
Chergui for their briefings.

The United States congratulates the people of the
Sudan on the 17 August signing of the constitutional
declaration and political agreement between the Forces
of Freedom and Change and the Transitional Military
Council. We are encouraged by this first step in the
establishment of a civilian-led transitional Government.

The United States commends the mediators from
the African Union and the Government of Ethiopia
for their efforts to broker this landmark agreement.
Our own special Envoy for the Sudan witnessed the
signing, and the United States will continue to support
its implementation.

We are optimistic that those positive developments
will bring peace and security to the Sudanese people. The
international community now needs to see the speedy
implementation of the 17 August agreement, including
the formation of the Council of Ministers and the
Legislative Assembly. In that regard, the inauguration
of Prime Minister Hamdok and the Sovereign Council
on 21 August shows progress towards the formation of
a stable transitional Government.

We look forward to seeing the progress of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) vis-a-vis its benchmarks in the
September report of the Secretary-General. We expect
all Sudanese stakeholders to cooperate with UNAMID
with regard to the protection of civilians, the delivery
of humanitarian assistance and the return of internally
displaced persons in line with international standards.

UNAMID must have unhindered access to all team
sites so that the mission can carry out its mandate.
The Rapid Support Forces' delay in returning those
sites to community-based institutions and their lack of
cooperation with United Nations personnel is deeply
concerning, and we look forward to hearing Under-
Secretary-General's Lacroix's response to the question
by the representative of the United Kingdom about the
status of those sites.
We welcome the public Prosecutor's establishment
of the independent committee to investigate the 3 June
crackdown by the Rapid Support Forces and the news
that those allegedly involved in the 29 July shooting
deaths during the El Obeid protests were arrested
and are awaiting trial. It is imperative that all those
responsible for violence against civilians be held
accountable. The United States calls on the Sudanese
authorities to follow through on their commitments in a
timely manner so that UNAMID can continue to draw
down its forces and a broad transition to peacebuilding
can begin.

The United States will continue to support the
people of the Sudan in their pursuit of a future that they
deserve, with a civilian-led Government that protects
the rights of all Sudanese citizens and leads to free and
fair elections.

