Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
The Mexican delegation, too, would like to express its
profound concern not only at the continuing grave
deterioration of the situation in the field but also at the
dimming of prospects for an early, peaceful, just and
lasting solution to the conflict in the Middle East.

Mexico would like to convey to the people of
Israel its concern and express its sorrow for the Israeli
victims who have been killed or traumatized by the
merciless armed attacks that have been carried out in
recent weeks, in an atrocious manner, by suicidal
Palestinian extremists.
Mexico believes in the just cause of the
Palestinian people, in the rightness of its claim to a
Palestinian national State and in its justified rejection
of Israel's occupation of the territories where,
according to Security Council resolutions, such a
Palestinian State is to be established. That occupation
is the root cause ofthe violence in the region.

Nevertheless, my delegation does not believe that
it is through violent means, much less through suicide
bombings - which are unacceptable from any
perspective fl that the Palestinian cause will prevail.
The suicidal terrorist attacks that have occurred
recently in Israel - attacks that horrify us all -
demonstrate something that both parties should
recognize by now and accept: that terrorism one the
one hand and violent, offensive and disproportionate
retaliation on the other are two sides of the same
coin - the currency ofinjustice and hatred.

The continuation of suicide attacks shows that the
attacks carried out by Israel as retaliation - acts which
Israel considers to be a legitimate response to acts of
terrorism - are ineffective and unwise and run counter
to Israel's own security interests. Israel has every right
to enjoy secure borders, but it must come to realize that
if it uses these means, it will not win its war against
terrorism. It is setting fire to its own house.

What is happening in Palestine and Israel is a
tragedy, and, unfortunately, none of the efforts of the
international community, none of the resolutions of the
Security Council and none of the diplomatic
representations that have been made have been able to
end the violence and set the peace process back on
track. However, Mexico reiterates its intention to
intensify mediation initiatives to try to achieve a
political agreement that would lead to the resumption
of a peace process based on resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973) of the Security Council and on the
agreements emanating from Madrid and Oslo.

In this connection, Mexico believes that
mediation efforts should be carried out through
concrete and clear-cut activities that do not give rise to
any doubts or hesitancy. My country therefore urges
the "quartet" to play an even more active role in order
to unblock the situation on the ground and to create
favourable conditions that might in the short term lead
to the resumption of a genuine peace process and to the
establishment of a Palestinian State that would coexist
peacefully, within secure borders, with Israel.

A very long road has already been traveled, at
great expense and effort, and has produced many useful
proposals and agreements, which must not be cast
aside. This is not a time to turn back with proposals
that could be dangerous and revive distrust and
violence.

The Security Council must not only demand
compliance with its resolutions, but it must also, as the
representative of Mauritius has pointed out, study the
substance of the situation in the field and from a
political perspective, in order to devise avenues for
action - not reaction - that will help to create a more
favourable climate for negotiations and for an eventual
just and lasting peace process. The Security Council
must consider these proposals and must be prepared to
craft positions that will serve for the long run.

Mexico is concerned by the tendency of the
current Israeli Government to move away from the
legal standards of the international community, which
had enabled us thus far to speak of the existence of a
Middle East peace process based on agreements and
commitments.

In practice, Israel has already abandoned the Oslo
framework and has traveled a dangerous distance away
from resolution 242 (1967). Nor does Israel seem to be
accepting the peace offer contained in the Saudi peace
plan. It has been undermining the Palestinian
Authority, preventing it from being an effective
interlocutor.

Over the past few months, Israel has set about
systematically destroying the economic and
institutional infrastructure of the Palestinian Authority
in the territories, and it has consolidated the illegal
settlements, which, along with the terrorist attacks, are
the immediate cause, if not the root, of the prevailing
violence.

My delegation shares the concern voiced here this
afternoon by the European Union concerning the
extremely preoccupying situation of the population in
the Palestinian territories, and in particular about the
stranglehold imposed by Israel on the population.

The proposal to hold an international conference
on the Middle East should energetically be explored.
However, at this juncture, it is hard to see how this
project could come to fruition. For a just peace process
to exist, the parties to a conflict must display the
political will to arrive at an agreement. That will is not
visible. My delegation considers that we must
strengthen legitimate international mediation for the
benefit of both parties, which must be done through the
"quartet" formula. The Government of Mexico will not
recognize as viable any peace plan imposed unilaterally
that draws away from the political and legal framework
contained in Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1397 (2002).

Mexico proposes to the members of the "quartet"
that they play a more active role. We would also like to
suggest that they set parameters that are acceptable to
the parties and that lead to the cessation of violence
and the speedy establishment of a Palestinian State
within the framework of the resolutions of the Security
Council and the relevant agreements. Such parameters,
resulting from mediation, could be taken forward to an
international conference and could provide the basis
for the Security Council to adopt substantive,
operational and defining resolutions that go far beyond
ad hoc responses ofthe moment. We are convinced that
the Security Council can decisively support a proposal
that contributes to breaking the cycle of violence and

building lasting peace.

