Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes His Excellency Mr. Simeon Oyono Esono
Angue, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Equatorial
Guinea, who is presiding over today's meeting. I
also thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo, the
African Union High Representative for Silencing the
Guns in Africa, Mr. Lamamra, and Mr. Gounden for
their briefings.

Home to the largest number of developing
countries, Africa is also the most dynamic continent,
with the greatest development potential in the world
today. Peace and stability in Africa is key to security
and development around the world.

Over the past few years, the African Union (AU) and
African countries have been vigorously implementing
Agenda 2063 and the Silencing the Guns in Africa
by 2020 initiative, at the same time as the continent's
peace and security situation has steadily improved. At
the thirty-second AU Summit, held recently, a number
of decisions were adopted in such areas as establishing
the African free trade zone and strengthening the
African Union Peace Fund, which fully demonstrates
the resolve of the AU and African countries to work
together for self-empowerment in order to resolve
African issues through African-led processes. China
applauds those efforts.

However, the situation remains fragile in some
regions of Africa, where traditional security threats
are intertwined with non-traditional ones and other
prominent issues persist, such as intercommunal
tensions, terrorism, transnational organized crime, high
levels of poverty and unemployment and refugee crises.
In addition, regional collective security mechanisms
are underfunded and face other constraints. Those
are the ongoing challenges to achieving the goal of
silencing the guns in Africa by 2020. In that context,
China wishes to highlight the following three points.

First, United Nations-African Union cooperation
must be strengthened. Recent years have seen a
deepening of the United Nations-AU partnership,
following the signing of the Joint United Nations-
African Union Framework for Enhanced Partnership in
Peace and Security and intensified cooperation injointly
tackling issues of regional peace and development. The
United Nations should fully leverage its own strength
and provide greater assistance to Africa. In the spirit
of the Joint Framework, the two organizations should
collaborate more closely on conflict prevention and
mediation in the pursuit of lasting peace by addressing
the root causes of conflict, among other things.
The Security Council and the AU Peace and Security
Council should further enhance their communication
and coordination with one another. The Security
Council has just unanimously adopted resolution 2457
(2019), on silencing the guns in Africa, which China
welcomes. That resolution can help the United Nations
lend greater support to the AU's Silencing the Guns by
2020 initiative and bring the United Nations and AU
closer together in their joint endeavours.

Secondly, we should continue to support Africa's
capacity-building in the areas of peace and security.
The AU's peace and security operations are becoming
a critical means of responding to crises in the continent
and complementing United Nations peacekeeping
operations in important ways. The United Nations
should actively assist the AU and other regional and
subregional organizations in bolstering their mission
planning and management capacities in their good
offices, peacekeeping and disarmament tasks, including
by supporting African countries in resolving African
issues the African way. China supports the United
Nations by providing sustainable and predictable
financial support to AU peace and security operations
and by working with the AU to overcome funding issues
concerning their peace and security operations.

Thirdly, we must scale up assistance to Africa
for its economic and social development so as to
eradicate the root causes of conflict. International
partners should increase their contributions in priority
areas, such as agriculture, health care, education,
economic development and trade, connectivity and
other infrastructure sectors, and should lend effective
support to African countries in the region to help them
achieve the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
reduce poverty, develop their economies and improve
livelihoods. It will also increase the capacity of
African countries to achieve sustainable economic and
social development.

The international community must also pay close
attention to such issues as youth, women and children, as
well as refugees and employment in Africa. The issue of
internally displaced persons was included in the theme
of the 2019 AU Summit. The international community
should provide humanitarian assistance in line with
the needs of the AU and African countries. The United
Nations should provide constructive assistance by fully
utilizing the United Nations Development Programme,
the Peacebuilding Commission and other mechanisms.

From the outset, China has supported peace,
security, prosperity and development of African
countries and peoples. China has adhered to President
Xi Jinping's proposals on what should guide our
relations with Africa - the principles of sincerity,
practical results, affinity and good faith, combined with
the values of friendship, justice and shared interests.
We have stayed actively engaged in matters pertaining
to Africa's peace and security.

China announced the establishment of the China-
United Nations Peace and Development Fund in
2015, which covers a lO-year period and amounts to
$1 billion. Thanks to China's active efforts, the Fund
has focused on Africa's peace and development and has
provided financial support to many projects related to
the Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative.

At the Beijing Summit of the Forum on China-
Africa Cooperation held in September, Chinese and
African leaders unanimously adopted the Beijing
Declaration - Toward an Even Stronger China-
Africa Community With a Shared Future, in which
Sino-African peace and security cooperation is defined
as one of the eight cooperation priorities and in which
China pledges, in no uncertain terms, its continued
support for the Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative.

In addition, China will establish a China-Africa
peace and security cooperation fund to encourage
greater Sino-African cooperation on peace, security,
peacekeeping, sustaining peace and the maintenance
of stability. China is ready to continue playing a
constructive role in promoting peace, stability and
development in Africa.

