Mr. Richardson (United States of America): We are
pleased to support a limited but essential peacekeeping
mission for the Central African Republic. The Council's
actions today will help consolidate the work of the
multinational force, which we commend for restoring
order to Bangui and initiating an efficient disarmament
programme. The international community owes its
gratitude to the African nations that have participated and
to the Government of France for its support of this
mission. We welcome the continuing support of this
mission's sponsors through personnel, equipment and
voluntary contributions to the United Nations
peacekeeping operation - the United Nations Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINURCA) - as the
transfer from one command to the other takes place.

The role of this mission, as outlined in this draft
resolution, is to provide security long enough for the
Government of the Central African Republic to undertake
the reforms it has promised and to provide its own
security. This mission is designed as a temporary bridge
to give the Central African Republic time to re-establish
a secure State under good governance.

In Council discussions of this mission, we all agreed
that the United Nations will not assume responsibility for
security in the Central African Republic indefinitely. The
Government must use the opportunity that this mission
provides wisely and well. We have seen more progress by
the Government of the Central African Republic in the
last several weeks, as the threat of MISAB's departure
loomed, than in the previous year. That progress towards
reform must continue - progress towards regular and
complete payment of military and civilian salaries,
towards national reconciliation and towards military
restructuring that will ensure the security and stability of
the country.

We strongly support the initiatives of the Bretton
Woods institutions to assist the Central African Republic's
progress towards financial security, and we will review
the reports of those institutions as a measure of the
Government's dedication to serious economic reform.

We welcome a three-month initial mandate for this
mission. This will allow the Council to review progress

 

made and adjust the mandate of the mission as necessary in
July. If the Government of the Central African Republic
does not make concrete progress towards the necessary
economic, political and security reforms, we will find it
difficult to renew this mission for another period.

The role of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General is critical for this transitional period in
the Central African Republic. We look forward to the
Secretary-General's prompt appointment of a strong
Representative. As this draft resolution stipulates, the
Representative will be in charge of this mission but will
also assist the Government with its reform efforts and
oversee all the United Nations activities in the Central
African Republic. The coordination of United Nations
assistance programmes with other international efforts -
including those of the Bretton Woods institutions and other
multilateral and bilateral donors - is essential for the
ultimate success of this assistance. This mission will
provide the strategic elements of security and a carefully
targeted civilian police training programme to enable the
Government to take over its own security.

Elections are another important part of the Central
African Republic's democratic reform process. We welcome
the news that Parliament has passed the electoral code and
hope that firm dates for legislative elections will be
announced shortly. We hope also that election experts, from
agencies such as the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) or international non-governmental
organizations experienced in election planning, will provide
assistance to the Central African Republic. We welcome the
participation of the Representative of the Secretary-General
in coordinating potential international assistance for the
elections, and look forward to the Secretary-General's
recommendations to the Council in June. We do not think
that election assistance is best placed under the military
command of the peacekeeping operation but rather should
form a separate building-block of the broad programme of
assistance that the Secretary-General will coordinate with
support from other organizations.
The United States also supports the formation of a
"Friends of the Central African Republic" group to help
coordinate international economic assistance for this country
and to advise the nation as well. No one nation can do
alone what the international community can accomplish by
working together and pooling resources.

Finally, I should like to emphasize American support
for this African solution to an African problem. We see
United Nations involvement in this peacekeeping mission
as supporting and extending a regional initiative to help
a neighbour. We hope and expect that this mission, and
other programmes such as election assistance, will
reinforce the Central African Republic's own efforts to
enable the re-establishment of a stable and secure
Government.

