Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): We listened with great interest to the briefings
given to the Council by the Chairs of the three
subsidiary Committees at this meeting. We thank them
for their presentations.

Syria has never stopped reaffirming its
condemnation of terrorism, given that it is a criminal,
aggressive and unjust act that takes aim at the lives of
innocent people and at their property. Syria has called
for action at all levels to confront international
terrorism in all of its forms and manifestations, in
accordance with the purposes and principles enshrined
in United Nations Charter and in international law.

Syria reasserts that terrorism poses an ongoing
threat to international peace and security. We also
reiterate our commitment to relevant international
resolutions on combating terrorism. Syria is convinced
of the central role that the General Assembly must play
in fighting terrorism internationally and of the need to
reach international consensus in that regard.

Syria believes that the Security Council
Committees on counter-terrorism can also contribute to
the coordination of international efforts to fight
terrorism by using transparent, fair and impartial
mechanisms. The objectives of concerted international
actions to address the phenomenon of terrorism will
not be achieved as long as we remain silent on one of
the most serious forms of terrorism - State terrorism.
The clearest example of that is obviously seen in the
crimes perpetrated daily by Israel, the occupying
Power, against the Palestinian people since the
occupation of the Arab territories.

The most recent act of aggression against Gaza
occurred in international waters and targeted the peace
flotilla that was attempting to deliver humanitarian
assistance to a people under siege and suffering from
daily acts of violence and terrorism, not to mention the
killing of key national Palestinian figures in third
countries and nuclear terrorism in the countries of the
region.

Syrian citizens in the occupied Syrian Golan have
also been victims of practices that have been classified
and documented as war crimes, which provides a
crystal-clear example of State terrorism that violates
international law, resolutions of international
legitimacy and human rights instruments.

In the light of its suffering as a result of the
terrorist acts carried out in its territory, and in the
conviction that the United Nations plays a central role
in combating international terrorism, Syria is
cooperating fully with the three Committees
established by the Council in resolutions 1267 (1999),
1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004). Syria has established
national joint commissions to ensure that the
provisions of those resolutions are optimally
implemented.
References to the dangers of terrorism and the
need to address them are not based on theories alone.
My country continues to suffer from that scourge.
Armed groups are committing heinous terrorist acts
against civilians, the military and intellectuals. They
are burning and destroying both public and private
facilities, because they are prompted to do so and are
financed and protected by foreign sources in an effort
to undermine Syria's domestic security and stability, as
well as to implement agendas that serve neither
domestic peace nor regional stability.

Last Saturday, upon instructions from my
Government, I sent letters to the President of the
Security Council, the Secretary-General and the
co-Chairs of the Counter-Terrorism Committee. Those
letters contain detailed information on the trafficking
across the Syrian international border of weapons
destined for terrorists and on operations that would
facilitate communication through the use of
sophisticated devices, with support from external
parties.

Syria was among the first signatories to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT), in 1968. Syria opposes the possession of
nuclear weapons by any State or party. Syria also
signed a comprehensive safeguards agreement with the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), in 1992.
It is well known to all that Israel is the only State in the
Middle East that possesses a significant nuclear arsenal
and that refuses to accede to the NPT or to submit any
of its nuclear facilities to any monitoring authorities
associated with the International Atomic Energy
Agency. That was clearly evident at the 2010 NPT
Review Conference, held in New York.

The accumulation of those negative and
dangerous points in terms of Israel's refusal to accede
to the NPT is an indication of its non-compliance with
resolution 1540 (2004), the IAEA and the efforts of the
Committees combating the proliferation of nuclear
weapons. I should now like to refer to a recent English-
language article in the Israeli press on that subject,
which shows very clearly to what extent Israel is not
adhering to any moral, political or legal standards,
including with respect to the States that are protecting
it.

(spoke in English)
Speaking during an interview that was published
in Jerusalem on Friday, Professor Martin van Creveld
said that Israel could avenge the Holocaust by
annihilating millions of Germans and other Europeans,
and that it had the capability of hitting most European
capitals with nuclear weapons. "We possess several
hundred atomic warheads and rockets, and could
launch them at targets in all directions, perhaps even at
Rome". He added, "Most European capitals are within
range of our air force". Van Creveld, a professor of
military history at Hebrew University in Jerusalem, has
pointed out that collective deportation was Israel's only
meaningful strategy to get rid of the Palestinian people.
Van Creveld said that he was sure that Israeli Prime
Minister Ariel Sharon wanted to deport the
Palestinians. He said, "I think it is quite possible that
he wants to do that. He knows that nothing else we do
will succeed".

Asked if he was worried about Israel becoming a
rogue State if it carried out a genocidal deportation
against Palestinians, van Creveld quoted former Israeli
Minister of Defence Moshe Dayan, who said that Israel
must be like a mad dog - too dangerous to bother. Van
Creveld argued that Israel would not care much about
becoming a rogue State. Then he said, "our armed
forces are not the thirtieth strongest in the world, but
rather the second or third; we have the capability to
take the world down with us". It is a long article. I will
not go through it all.

My last comment pertains to the military
exercises that Israel is undertaking right now through
the air space of some European countries. Those are
military exercises being conducted publicly. Yet, there
has been no statement, no condemnation, no
denunciation from anyone. The aim of those military
exercises is to train Israeli pilots to conduct aggression
against other countries, sovereign States Members of
the Organization. I will not name the country targeted,
because everyone knows about whom I am talking.

