Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 1769 (2007) authorizing the deployment of
the African Union/ United Nations hybrid mission in
Darfur. We welcome also the presence of the Secretary-
General with us today and we pay tribute to the work
that he has done with Chairman Konare of the African
07-44445

Union to bring us agreement with the Government of
the Sudan on this issue.

It is right today to pay tribute to the work done
and the sacrifices made by the troops and other
personnel who have served in the African Union
Mission in Darfur (AMIS) over the past three years.
They have been peacekeepers without a peace to keep.

The replacement of AMIS by the African
Union/United Nations hybrid operation is an important
step forward, but for peace to take root and to endure
in Darfur, the hybrid operation needs to be part of a
more comprehensive approach. My Prime Minister and
President Sarkozy of France set this out in Paris
10 days ago. Prime Minister Brown focused on Darfur
over the weekend, yesterday with President Bush and
today with the Secretary-General. There is no higher
foreign policy priority for my Government.

The challenge ahead is multifaceted. It requires a
matching response, embracing urgent action on the
political, security and humanitarian tracks. The focus
now must be on securing a political settlement in
Darfur that engages all the parties to the conflict. We
applaud the efforts of the African Union and the United
Nations envoys, and we pledge them our full support
for the meeting in Arusha in the coming days and for
the crucial period ahead.

We must intensify efforts to ensure the delivery
of humanitarian assistance to relieve the suffering of
the 4 million people who depend on aid in Darfur. We
must ensure that a large, robust, effective and coherent
African Union/United Nations force deploys to Darfur
in the coming month to protect civilians, to prevent
armed attacks from any quarter and to give hope and
security to the people of Darfur. That is what we have
authorized today. It is an unprecedented undertaking in
scale, complexity and importance.

The Council calls on all the parties to the
conflict, on the Sudan's neighbours and on the wider
international community to support this effort. We call
for cooperation, and we welcome the evidence of
cooperation that we have seen thus far, including
particularly from the Government of the Sudan.

The sponsors made great efforts to consult the
Government of the Sudan during the negotiation of this
resolution. Its unanimous adoption is a strong signal
from the Council that we expect and we want
cooperation from all sides in the Sudan and that
cooperation should develop and grow. The path set out
in this resolution is one of cooperation with the
Sudan - with its Government and all the parties in the
Sudan - with the African Union and across the United
Nations.

But we call also for compliance. The resolution
requires the Secretary-General to report to the Council
on the parties' performance in complying with all the
requirements of this comprehensive resolution. If
compliance fails, consequences will follow. As my
Prime Minister and the French President made clear,
we will judge all the parties on actions, not on words.
Today's decision needs follow-up in all areas of the
international effort: political, economic, security and
humanitarian.

The catastrophe of Darfur will not be ended by
the raising of 15 hands in this Chamber. The suffering
will not be ended by our vote. But today's decision and
the actions that flow from it offer the prospect of a new
start for Darfur. That is our hope; that is our goal.

