Mr. Yassin (Sudan) (interpretation from Arabic): I
should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council for this month. We are
fully confident in your ability to lead the work of the
Council to the desired success and to permit transparency
in its work. We would also like to express our
appreciation to your predecessor, Mr. Legwajla of
Botswana, for his presidency of the Council last month.

When Security Council resolution 1044 (1996) was
adopted, the pretexts used by the Council were the claims
that Sudan had not complied with the requests of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) as contained in its
statements issued on ll September 1995 and
19 December 1995. Regardless of the validity of these
claims, the objective of Security Council resolution
1044 (1996), as was reaffirmed by most of the members
of the Council at that time, was to reaffirm the strong will

 

of the international community to combat terrorism, to
pursue terrorists and to support the efforts of the
Organization of African Unity to arrive at a solution to the
problem.

It is abundantly clear from the consultations that were
held prior to the adoption of Security Council resolution
1044 (1996) and the language used by the Council in its
provisions that the emphasis is placed on the particular
importance of the United Nations providing the necessary
support for the OAU Mechanism for Conflict Prevention,
Management and Resolution so that it can arrive at an
appropriate formula to resolve that question.

It is true that the provisions of Chapter VIII of the
Charter establish the legal framework for cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
including the OAU. Yet we find that the States parties to
the current dispute have resorted directly to the United
Nations in order for it to adopt measures to condemn and
punish Sudan. The OAU Mechanism for Conflict
Prevention, Management and Resolution was established
originally to play that role. It should have been given the
opportunity it needed to prove its ability in this regard and
should be enabled to intervene appropriately in the initial
stages of any dispute in order for those disputes to be
settled at the regional level. That organization's familiarity
with the conditions obtaining in the region makes it more
capable of using preventive diplomacy to contain disputes
and minimize their negative effects. This is one of the most
important reasons that inspired the Council to adopt the
aforementioned resolution, thus providing the necessary
flexibility for complementarity between the responsibilities
of the United Nations and those of the Organization of
African Unity.

The OAU has spared no effort in its search for a
solution to that dispute, and it is continuing its activities in
that regard. The matter is expected to be discussed at the
summit on the conflict-settlement Mechanism next month.

We would like to recall that the Secretary-General of
the OAU, in speaking to the President of the Council for
last month, affirmed that the OAU was continuing its
efforts to resolve the question. He also reaffirmed Sudan's
seriousness and its willingness to cooperate with the
Organization in order to arrive at that objective, despite the
fact Security Council resolution 1044 (1996) contradicts
that of the conflict-settlement Mechanism.

Despite the fact that the report (S/ 1996/ 179) of the
Secretary-General submitted pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1044 (1996) expresses the intention of the
Secretary-General to remain in close contact with all
parties concerned and with the Secretary-General of the
OAU with regard to all aspects of the resolution, we find
today that the Security Council is meeting in order to
adopt coercive measures against the Sudan. Thus, we
wonder about the value of Security Council resolution
1044 (1996), which is aimed primarily at giving the OAU
the opportunity it needs to do its work. What has the
Security Council done to assist that Organization? Has the
OAU officially informed the Security Council of the steps
it has taken in that regard? What has the OAU said about
Sudan's cooperation with it? Has the conflict-settlement
Mechanism reached a dead end, making it impossible for
it to solve the question, and therefore making it
incumbent on the Security Council to discharge its
responsibility under the Charter?

The draft resolution the Council intends to adopt
today falls within the framework of the measures
provided for in Chapter VII of the United Nations
Charter. We must pause here for a second to recall the
following.

Security Council resolution 1044 (1996), for the
reasons mentioned above, contains no condemnation of
Sudan: it only calls on Sudan to comply with the
resolutions of the OAU, under Chapter VI of the Charter.
Furthermore, the Security Council resolution did not take
the form of a warning to be followed by sanctions
because that was not the main objective of its adoption,
especially considering that the Security Council did not
consider the substance of the dispute and considered what
the OAU had done to be sufficient in that regard.

After the adoption of the resolution, both the United
Nations and the OAU took a number of steps to find a
way out of the current crisis. In implementation of
paragraph 7 of the resolution, the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General of the United Nations travelled to the
region, covering Ethiopia, Eritrea, Uganda, Sudan, Egypt
and Tunisia. He prepared a report of bizarre content and
form, in which he referred to some of what had been said
by the States neighbouring Sudan, two of which are
parties to the current dispute - and one of those two did
not state that Sudan was trying to create instability - and
two of which are antagonistic to Sudan and support
separatist rebels along its borders with Sudan. As for the
fifth State, many people do not understand why it was
covered in the Secretary-General's mission, not being a
neighbouring State of Sudan.

 

As is well known, Sudan has 10 neighbouring States.
The Secretary-General's selection of only those four
neighbouring States displays a premeditated intention to
collect accusations and fabrications in order to tarnish
Sudan's reputation at any price. Why did the Special
Envoy's trip not cover the other six neighbouring States?
The claim in the Secretary-General's report that all the
neighbours of Sudan visited by his Special Envoy accused
it of supporting its terrorist activities within their territories
reaffirms the validity of what we have said.

I would like to ask the Council to pause with us here
to wonder how the Secretary-General came to formulate the
mission of his Special Envoy in that way? That is to say,
why did he limit the scope of that trip to only those States
that were visited? Limiting the Special Envoy's trip to those
States meant that he was going only to come back with the
same fabrications that were repeated by some States before
this Council. Indeed, it was a strange mission.

The claim by the Secretary-General and his Special
Envoy is a mere fabrication based on no facts and with no
connection to reality. On the very day on which the Council
met to adopt resolution 1044 (1996), the President of Sudan
was participating in the tripartite summit held in Bangui on
31 January and 1 February and attended by the Presidents
of Sudan, the Central African Republic and Chad. In their
final communique, the Presidents reaffirmed the need to
make the triangle of Sudan, the Central African Republic
and Chad a model of regional cooperation and integration
on all levels. The meetings demonstrated the Sudan's keen
interest in developing good-neighbourly relations with its
neighbours and their appreciation of the Sudan's role and
potential.

Convinced of the Sudan' s earnestness in achieving that
cooperation and of its good-neighbourly intentions, the
President of the Central African Republic, Mr. Ange-Felix
Patasse, sent a letter to the President of the Security
Council (S/1996/294) in which he referred to the tripartite
summit, aimed at maintaining peace and security, which are
essential conditions for lasting development. The letter
appealed to the Security Council to search for a peaceful
solution precluding punitive measures against the Sudan,
which might compromise regional initiatives and set back
progress towards cooperation and development. Such
measures would be in contravention of the Charter and its
lofty principles.

As a reaffirmation of its commitment to those
principles, the Sudan participated in the summit meetings
of the Inter-Governmental Authority on Drought and
Development (IGADD) held in Nairobi on 21 March. In
his statement at that summit, the President of the Sudan
reaffirmed the Sudan's commitment to the policies of
good-neighbourliness and the development of regional and
bilateral cooperation with all its neighbours. He referred
to the potential and capacities of the States of the region
to set aside their temporary differences and to concentrate
on the development of their peoples. The final statement
of that summit stresses that the Presidents reaffirmed their
full commitment to improving regional and bilateral
relations between them and to the peaceful settlement of
the current disputes. The statement emphasized their focus
on the need for peace as an essential condition for
development.

It is worth noting that the Sudan supported the
Eritrean candidacy for the post of Executive Secretary in
order to achieve the necessary consensus. IGADD will
hold a ministerial meeting this month in Djibouti to
implement the summit's decisions.

In response to Malawi's initiative to normalize
relations between the Sudan and Uganda, as well as to the
invitation of that country's Government, the delegation of
the Sudan in the multilateral monitoring group travelled
to Malawi in mid-January to attend a meeting aimed at
pursuing those efforts, but the Ugandan delegation was
unable to attend.

At the domestic level, the President of the Republic
made an important statement at the inaugural session of
the new Parliament in which he said that the Sudan, as an
expression of its free will and not of fear, wished to
improve relations in all forms with all its neighbours, in
particular sisterly Egypt. This is how the Sudan views its
relations with its neighbours, which the Secretary-General
should not have ignored in his report.

Furthermore, observers had hoped that the visit of
the Secretary-General's Special Envoy would achieve
some positive results as regards narrowing differences and
helping the parties to open channels of communication in
order to exchange information and to clarify the facts.
The Special Envoy did not even meet those accused of
the assassination attempt, who are being held by Ethiopia
and on whose confessions it is to be assumed that
Ethiopia is basing its accusations and claims against the
Sudan. It is regrettable that such a meeting did not occur.

The Secretary-General's Special Envoy had
preconceptions of the Sudan as a State that supports
terrorism and does not respect good-neighbourly relations.

 

His mission was to collect all information that might
support such claims from the States neighbours of that
country and even from some that are at a great distance
from it. During his visit to the Sudan, the Special Envoy
discovered the reality of developments in the Sudan, in
particular the efforts being made by the Government to
comply with the resolutions of the Organization of African
Unity (OAU) Mechanism for Conflict Prevention,
Management and Resolution and of the Security Council.
All this has occurred despite the inadequacy of the
information requested. This was a great effort in View of
the weak technical support available in the country.
The Secretary-General's claim that the Sudan has not
complied with paragraph 4 of resolution 1044 (1996) is
indeed amazing. Paragraph 4 (a) of that resolution calls
upon the Government of the Sudan to comply with the
requests of the Organization of African Unity by
immediately extraditing to Ethiopia for prosecution the
three suspects. We wish particularly to stress here that the
Council has, in a dubious and suspicious manner, ignored
the text of the OAU Mechanism of 12 December 1995, in
which it called on all the parties to the dispute to cooperate
and to provide all the necessary data and information that
could help the Government of the Sudan to search for and
locate the suspects and extradite them to the Ethiopian
authorities.

Instead, it should be noted that the Security Council
not only ignored this particular paragraph of the OAU
resolution, but asserted in paragraph 4 (a) that the suspects
are sheltering in the Sudan. It should also be noted that the
resolution deliberately avoided any reference to the fact that
the suspects are Egyptian citizens. Moreover, the
international community has followed the circumstances
related to the resolution, foremost among which is that the
Council failed to consider the substance of these claims and
has not decided upon them. It has merely confined itself to
urging the Sudan to cooperate with the OAU.

As to the extradition of the suspects, the Government
has declared its full readiness to apprehend them once it
knows their location and subsequently to extradite them to
Ethiopia. The Government has informed the Secretary-
General's Special Envoy of all the steps it has taken in this
regard. It has given him a full dossier, contained in
document S/ 1996/ 197, outlining all the details of the
Government's efforts to search for the suspects and
apprehend them. It has called upon Egypt and Ethiopia to
cooperate and exchange information in order to clarify the
situation with regard to the suspects and to discover their
whereabouts.

Would it be fair to describe all these efforts of the
Sudan as constituting non-compliance with resolution
1044 (1996)? None of these efforts is referred to
anywhere in the draft resolution before the Council today.
When one reads the Secretary-General's report, it is not
very difficult to perceive all the signs of injustice it
contains. It does not reflect the truth and is biased against
the Sudan.

The move by some States to persuade the Council to
adopt a resolution imposing sanctions against the Sudan
under Chapter VII of the Charter, under the pretext that
it has not responded to the demands of paragraph 4 (a) of
resolution 1044 (1996), will lead to a dead end.
The Council's demand that Sudan extradite the
suspects to Ethiopia will make resolution 1044 (1996) and
all subsequent resolutions a whirlwind from which there
is no escape, especially since many States are convinced
that there is no evidence that the suspects are in Sudan's
territory. There are reports in the international media
about their presence in the territory of other States; since
the adoption of resolution 1044 (1996) there have been
many reports of some of those suspects being outside the
Sudan. On 27 February 1996, the Islamic group to which
all the participants in the incident at Addis Ababa belong
issued a long statement in which it clarified all the
circumstances of the incident and declared that Sudan had
played no role in the attempt. It also affirmed the fact that
none of them was in the Sudan before, during or after the
incident.

On 14 April 1996, the "Orient" radio station, which
broadcasts from Paris in both Arabic and French, stated
that a previously unknown person named Abu Hazim,
speaking in an Egyptian dialect, had contacted its office
in Beshawr and faxed a statement reaffirming that those
who had participated in the attempt on the life of
President Mubarak in Addis Ababa were outside the
Sudan, and that there were only two of them, not three as
the Ethiopian authorities claimed. The speaker said that he
was one of the participants in the attempt, which was
carried out by the Egyptian Islamic group with Egyptian
planning, and his presence in Kabul is evidence that the
suspects in that attempt are not in the Sudan. He denied
that his group had any relations with the Government of
Sudan.

On 21 April 1996, the Arabic newspaper Al Hayat,
issued in New York and London, published an interview
with a person called Mustafa Hamza in the Afghan
province of Konor. He revealed that he was the first

 

suspect in the failed assassination attempt on the Egyptian
President in Addis Ababa. He also revealed that he had
been in Afghanistan for eight months. He said that the
Sudan did not shelter the suspects, that the Islamic group
had carried out the fateful failed attempt, and that they had
no connections with any State or organization in carrying
out that attempt.

How did the parties deal with this information? First,
the Sudan referred the contents of the interview to the
President of the Security Council, asking that it be
distributed as an official document of the Council. It has
been circulated in document S/l996/311. The Sudan also
addressed a letter to the President of the Council drawing
his attention to this new information. It made it clear that
if the information is true it fully supports what the Sudan
has always said - that the suspects are not in its territory,
and that the Sudan has absolutely no connection with that
incident. The letter called upon the President of the Council
to confirm the information in the newspaper interview
through a fact-finding mission conducted on the basis of
previous similar practices of the Council.

Secondly, Egypt did not deny the fact that this suspect
was in Afghanistan. It turned a blind eye to the importance
of the confessions of the suspect, Mustafa Hamza, in order
to incriminate Sudan without any evidence. We had hoped
that for the sake of truth the suspect's statements would be
evaluated objectively so as to arrive at a productive
resolution of the matter supporting the cooperation called
for by the Sudan to combat terrorism in all its
manifestations. There are reports that certain diplomatic
sources have said that information exists confirming that
Mustafa Hamza entered the Sudan after the failed attempt.
It was also reported that Egyptian sources continued to say
that the Government of Sudan was still under suspicion and
accusation and that it must provide evidence of its
innocence. The declaration made by the Sudanese Foreign
Minister was actually altered. When speaking in Cairo, he
specifically mentioned the source of his information, which
was the "Orient" broadcast in Paris. I was standing next to
him at the time. He spoke about the source of the news, not
the news item itself. He said: "There are some reports about
the presence of the person named Mustafa Hamza in
Afghanistan", and mentioned the content of the "Orient"
broadcast in Paris, which was based on the suspect's
telephone and fax contact. Anyone who claims otherwise is
trying to distort reality.

The Egyptian reaction to what the suspect told the
newspaper, to the effect that the Sudan continued to be
guilty until proved innocent, is a contravention of the
established norms of all legal systems. We had thought
that the accused was always innocent until proved guilty.
The statement that the suspect, Mustafa Hamza, entered
the Sudan after the incident took place contradicts the
account contained in the Ethiopian account, to the effect
that he was in the Sudan for two years planning that
fateful operation.

The suspect also said that only two, not three, people
participated in that operation and managed to leave Addis
Ababa. That was confirmed by the weak information that
Sudan received from Ethiopia about what it called the
third suspect, which arrived without a photograph of that
suspect, which was not the case with the other wanted
suspects. Whoever examines this matter will find a great
many contradictions between Ethiopia's complaint to the
Council and the interview of the first suspect. Information
relating to the suspects' entry into Ethiopia, their
departure from the country, the fact that they received
passports and the States that they came from or passed
through, all raises serious doubts about the Ethiopian
complaints as a whole, especially as Ethiopia insisted on
trying its suspects in secret and refused to accept the
request of some Egyptian lawyers to defend them. It even
refused to give those lawyers a visa to go to Addis
Ababa. That newspaper interview contains important
information that the Council should not ignore. If it does
so it will have denied all the principles of justice and
equity.

I heard the statements made by all the speakers
when the question of Lebanon was discussed in the
Council. Most of them - there were only a few
exceptions - condemned the conduct of the Security
Council, accusing it of double standards and bias. If that
is how the Council behaves, will Sudan find redress and
justice here? The statement made by the first suspect has
much greater value in proving the facts than the claims of
the Ethiopians.

If the Council sincerely wants, for once in its recent
history, to arrive at the truth and, in particular, to arrive
at the realities of the bizarre question before it, it is high
time for it to evaluate the Ethiopian claims and their
sources in the light of what the first suspect revealed.

Paragraph 4 (b) of resolution 1044 (1996) is even
worse. Its demand for the Sudan to desist from supporting
terrorism is a condemnation of the innocent by delivering
a verdict and punishing the innocent without any
convincing proof. This, too, is a contravention of all legal
systems. Resolution 1044 (1996) has failed to clarify the

 

nature of these acts and their sources. It has also failed to
clarify the measures that the Sudan should have taken in
order to comply with that paragraph. As a result, the
Sudanese Government is bewildered. As a measure of
goodwill in implementing the resolution it issued an
invitation to the United Nations to send a fact-finding
mission to obtain the facts regarding Sudan's alleged
support for terrorism or giving shelter to terrorists, and it
called on the representative of the Secretary-General to
carry out the investigation himself if be deemed it
appropriate. But these calls have fallen on deaf ears. The
credibility of the intentions of the Sudan cannot be tested
without responding to its calls or by putting forward other
proposals. But that, too, has not occurred.

The claim by the Secretary-General in his report to the
Council that the Sudan has not complied with paragraph
4 (b) of resolution 1044 (1996) since all the neighbouring
countries visited by his Special Envoy have accused it of
supporting terrorist activities within their territories, gives
cause for suspicion and distrust and casts much doubt on
the organs of the United Nations.

The claim that all the neighbours of the Sudan that
were visited by the Special Envoy is a misleading
generalization. It runs counter to what was contained in the
report itself, since one of the four States did not say that
the Sudan was attempting to destabilize its territories.
Therefore, the use of terms such as "all" is a falsification
of the facts and dishonest.

The same report states that the Sudan was described
to the Special Envoy as a country that is subject to
destabilizing activities which are supported and encouraged
by its neighbours. Sudanese officials reminded the Special
Envoy of letters sent by the Sudan to the President of the
Security Council complaining about the active aggression
perpetrated against it by some of those States, letters
contained in documents S/1995/522, S/1995/6l6 and
S/1996/29.

One can only wonder how the Secretary-General can
justify his claim regarding Sudan's non-compliance with
paragraph 4 (b) of resolution 1044 (1996) on the basis of
some of the statements his Special Envoy heard in some of
the States he visited, while totally ignoring the Sudan's
accusations concerning those States that shelter terrorists -
for example, Uganda - even if we assume that both types
of statement have equal weight as evidence.

Sudan has repeatedly declared its full readiness to
cooperate with international and regional organizations to
solve this dispute since the adoption of resolution
1044 (1996). It has expressed its full commitment to all
the resolutions adopted by the OAU and the Security
Council. At the same time, the Sudan has called upon all
the parties to the current dispute to provide it with all the
information and data available to them that would
facilitate a quick end to this dispute.

The Sudan would like here to repeat that it has not
yet received any additional information about the
suspects, information that might help the Sudanese
authorities to determine their location. On the contrary,
the Sudan is daily surprised by the emergence of so-called
new information in the corridors here, presented by the
States concerned. Let us look at this new information.

First, Egypt has distributed two documents, the first
of which claims to be a transcript of the interrogation of
some of the suspects in the attempt who are currently
held in Ethiopia. This document does not reveal who
interrogated those mentioned in it. This is of extreme
importance in evaluating the value of such documents as
evidence.

Secondly, the interrogation was based on the
assumption that Sudan and its security organs were
involved in the matter. That is an assumption that has no
connection with what the suspects said.

Thirdly, the document goes on to mention names,
claiming that they are the names of Sudanese citizens, as
proof of Sudan's involvement in the incident. What was
given was only the first name of four persons, without
referring to their jobs or their connections with the State
and its organs.

Fourthly, in very general terms, the document claims
that the Sudan smuggles arms in order to prove that the
Sudan was involved in the incident. The interrogation did
not refer to the method or the persons or the organ that
carried out this smuggling operation.

Fifthly, as a general State policy of the Sudan, the
entry and exit of foreigners, in particular Arabs, without
a visa was a very easy matter at the time. The insinuation
that the facilities' being made available was proof of
Sudan's support for the suspects has no basis in fact, as
the document itself reveals, those suspects have received
greater facilities from Ethiopia. Why should that not be
used as proof of Ethiopia's involvement? The mere claim
that there is evidence that one of the suspects, or all of
them, entered the Sudan is not in and of itself evidence

 

that they actually did so and with the knowledge of the
Sudanese authorities. It is well known that Sudan, with its
vast territory, finds its open borders very difficult to
monitor or protect.

Sixthly, why did Egypt provide this document now?
Why did it not provide the Sudan with the information
contained therein? Although we find this information
unfruitful and unproductive as evidence, why was it not
given to the Sudan before the adoption of the resolution of
the Council, particularly since Egypt is obliged, under the
provisions of the 1973 New York Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of Crimes against
Internationally Protected Persons, including Diplomatic
Agents, to provide other States parties to that Convention
with the information available to it about the suspects, and
especially since the Sudan is a party to that Convention,
which was mentioned in the third preambular paragraph of
resolution 1044 (1996)?

Egypt also distributed another document, a photocopy
of a local Sudanese newspaper, Heart of the street, which
reported last March that the three suspects would be
holding a press conference in some State. when they would
dispel all the accusations of Sudan's involvement in the
attempt on the Egyptian President's life. The intent behind
distributing that newspaper was to prove that the Sudan at
least knew where the suspects were located. This newspaper
is privately owned; it is independent, and has no connection
with the Government. Therefore, it does not speak on
behalf of the State, and the State should not be questioned
about news reports in it.

Nevertheless, the Government has responded to that
news item with the necessary seriousness. It questioned the
editor of that newspaper, who refused to reveal the sources
of the information he published, claiming that the laws of
the country give journalists immunity from having to reveal
the sources of their information. The Government had no
choice but to release him.

It is obvious that the State is not supposed to respond
to sensationalist news in the media, either by confirming it
or by denying it. This is true of all States of the world. It
is worth noting that journalists in the Sudan are in close
contact with the press and journalists in Egypt. Egypt was
and continues to be a source of culture in the Sudan.

The second allegation employed in order to convince
the members of the Security Council to impose coercive
measures against the Sudan is the claim by the United
States of America that the Sudan was a party to a
conspiracy against facilities and persons in its territory in
1993. In escalation of these hostile claims, the United
States requested that a Sudanese diplomat of the
Permanent Mission of the Sudan to the United Nations
leave its territory, in contravention of the provisions of
article IV of the Headquarters Agreement of 1947, which
governs the presence of the Permanent Missions in New
York, and in contravention of the resolutions of the
General Assembly in that regard.

The Sudan has rejected strongly this conduct by the
host country. It has denied completely that the Sudan or
its representatives have any connection with any terrorist
acts, in any State or in any form. The Sudan called on the
host country to provide it with evidence proving its
claims.

Many delegations and Member States know the
diplomat who was expelled, on both an official and a
personal level. This is testimony enough to his innocence.

This action by the host country came at a time when
many observers were asking why it had chosen to remain
silent ever since 1993, and why it had not levelled any
charges against that diplomat? The answer to these
questions is very clear: these actions represent a political
mobilization to influence negatively the atmosphere of
discussions on the draft resolution currently before the
Security Council. All this is aimed at strategic and
political objectives that cannot be hidden from anyone.

The United States, through some of its
representatives, has spoken to the press in a manner that
is offensive to the Sudan and that is not usual in the
Security Council or in the corridors of the United
Nations. For our part, we will continue to act with
courtesy and decency. We are a people who show
patience in the face of adversity, and if we are offended
we also know how to forgive.

The third allegation is by the State that has put the
complaint before the Council and on whose territory the
crime took place. Ethiopia finds it sufficient to say that it
is in possession of evidence that cannot be revealed
currently for security reasons, but that indicates that the
Sudanese Government is aware of the location of the
suspects. It also says that it will consider the question of
providing additional information, if it proves necessary, to
expedite the legal steps necessary for extradition and that
it has started to try in secret those held in its prisons.

 

The conduct of the Ethiopian authorities in dealing
with this important and serious matter to a large extent
raises doubts and suspicions regarding its good will and its
real intentions and casts more shadows on the whole
question. This action would result in putting further
obstacles in the way of any efforts carried out by the
Sudanese authorities in their search for the suspects.

Anyone who has followed the development of the
events would not be blamed if he or she doubted the
credibility of those States, their seriousness and their
readiness to cooperate with the Sudan to provide it with
information in order to assist it in apprehending the
suspects. All this is done in order to incriminate the Sudan
and to tarnish its image with the charge of supporting and
being involved in terrorism.

We believe that such statements are clear proof that
the States parties to that dispute are bent on perpetuating it
by claiming that they have materials and evidence that
many doubt even exist. How could the Security Council
bear the historical responsibility of condemning the Sudan
and punishing it on the basis of such unclear and flimsy
statements?

The draft resolution before the Council today is
gravely inconsistent with the principles of justice and
equality on which this Organization was founded. This draft
resolution would be another blemish on the record of this
Council, which is replete with injustice, and will lead
ultimately to nothing but greater doubt in the credibility of
this Organization in its application of the concepts of
international peace and security.

When the United Nations Charter gave the Security
Council the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security and provided that the
Council would represent all the other States in discharging
its responsibility, it also stated that the Council should
discharge this responsibility in accordance with the
principles and objectives of the United Nations. Among
these is the resort to peaceful means, in accordance with the
principles of justice and international law, to resolve
disputes and to achieve international cooperation to that
end.

It is indeed regrettable that these principles are being
exploited as a pretext for punishing States and peoples that
are not well liked by some members of the Council, while,
at the same time, the Council turns a blind eye to the
practices of other States that perpetrate great atrocities that
would be punishable under Chapter VII of the Charter. All
this is done by using double standards and immense
selectivity, thus shaking the credibility of the Security
Council and belief in its true representation of
international opinion. Such behaviour was even accepted
by the members of the Council in its meeting to consider
the acts of aggression against Lebanon.

The draft resolution before the Council ignores
completely the positive developments that have taken
place in the Sudan during the last three months vis-a-vis
the first free presidential and parliamentary elections in
the history of the Sudan. From many quarters - in
particular the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and
the League of Arab States - the international community
has testified as to the freedom and fairness of these
elections and the lack of violence in connection with
them.

Among these positive developments is also the
establishment of the rules of democracy, the establishment
of a federal system in the country and the signing of
peace treaties with the rebels in the south in order to put
an end to bloody internal conflicts and to stop the civil
war between the sons of the country.

We would like to recall here the contents of the
letter contained in document S/1996/271, which proves
the good intentions of the Sudanese Government to
establish comprehensive peace in the country, to introduce
the concept of rights and duties on the basis of citizenship
and to promote and protect the human rights of the
Sudanese citizens by all means possible.

The adoption by the Council of any measures against
the Sudan under Chapter VII of the Charter will be an
obstacle to these achievements instead of helping the
Sudan to continue along that path, as if this were the
Council's reward to the Sudan for its great achievements.

The imposition of any measures by the Council
against the Sudan, whatever their political nature and
however limited they may be, will have a far-reaching
effect on the stability of the Sudan and on the unity of its
territory, and therefore will have a grave effect on the
stability of the region as a whole. They will also have
grave humanitarian repercussions throughout the region,
in particular in the States neighbouring the Sudan.

The draft resolution before the Council today ignores
completely all the efforts made by the Sudan to comply
with resolution 1044 (1996). This is a grave injustice. The
present draft resolution has renounced completely any

 

search for a solution to this dispute that would satisfy all
parties through the available diplomatic channels or through
the conflict resolution Mechanism of the OAU. Therefore,
that Mechanism has been stripped of any role it could play
to resolve this dispute.

There is no doubt that the overwhelming majority of
the States Members of the United Nations agree with our
rejection of the sanctions, since they are inhuman, selective
and run counter to morality, and have destructive
consequences for peoples. In addition, the victims are
always developing countries, and thus the sanctions increase
the poverty and the suffering of their peoples. They also
create instability in the countries on which they are
imposed. They block the channels of dialogue and
communication between States. Therefore, a working group
was established to study these sanctions in the light of the
experience of the United Nations.

The Council's return, at the instigation of some of its
members, to adopt a resolution to impose sanctions against
the Sudan, despite all those facts, raises a number of
questions as to the priority in the work of the Council, in
accordance with the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. Is it to promote the principles of international
cooperation and the maintenance of international peace and
security, or is it to increase the suffering of peoples and
impose sanctions on them, one after the other? The Sudan
is the third State in one geographical region to be isolated
and to have sanctions imposed on it. Can we consider this
a coincidence, or is this a deliberate strategy against that
region, its peoples, its cultures and its faiths?
Finally, allow me to reaffirm that the Sudan, true to its
principles, which are rooted in its religion and in its
traditions, maintains its commitment, entered into earlier
and since repeated in many forums and at all levels, to
condemn, in the strongest possible terms, terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations, regardless of its causes,
motivations or perpetrators. The Sudan has not allowed, and
will not allow, its territory to be used for any terrorist
action or to be a shelter for terrorists or for fugitives from
justice. The Sudan remains committed to the
implementation of all resolutions adopted by all
international organizations, including the OAU, and those
of this Council, however contrary they may be to the spirit
of justice and equality.

The Sudan will also take a keen interest in maintaining
good-neighbourly relations with all neighbouring States, in
particular Egypt, and will attempt to develop regional and
bilateral cooperation with these States. The Sudan will
continue to engage in dialogue with all the parties
concerned with this question. Our doors will continue to
be open for cooperation.

All this is due to Sudan's strong interest in clarifying
the facts and dispelling doubts. It is not seeking sympathy
or justifying its position. It wishes only to clarify the facts
and to take a clear stance on this important matter.

I apologize for speaking at such length.

