Mr. Baja (Philippines): I congratulate the
Ghanaian presidency, which is in the midst of its
successful leadership of the Council. We welcome His
Excellency Jose Luis Guterres, and congratulate him
on his new role as Foreign Minister of Timor-Leste. We
thank him for his important statement this morning. We
also thank Special Envoy Ian Martin for his briefing.

The Council is engaged in the discussion of
Timor-Leste in the context of the morning after the
morning after. We therefore have the opportunity to
apply lessons learned not only from recent
developments in the country, but also from similar
situations in other parts of the world.

As the international community, particularly the
United Nations, ponders its subsequent involvement in
Timor-Leste, my delegation believes that the following
factors have to be taken into account. First, Timor-
Leste ownership must be ensured in any peacebuilding
plan for the country. It is important that the views,
aspirations and sentiments of the Government and the
people of Timor-Leste be factored into any decision to
be taken by the Security Council, particularly when it
concerns the deployment of a United Nations mission.

We acknowledge and endorse Timor-Leste's
desire for the establishment of a new multidimensional
integrated United Nations peacekeeping mission,
which is also the recommendation of the Secretary-
General contained in his report of 8 August 2006
(S/2006/628). That will ensure sustained domestic
support and eventual success in the long run. However
great outside efforts in support of Timor-Leste may be,
they can only succeed to an extent based on the
effectiveness of the cooperation of Timor-Leste's
Government and its citizens.

Secondly, the root causes which precipitated the
latest crisis should be addressed. The Secretary-
General's report describes in comprehensive detail the
events of the past three months as a complex crisis
with political, institutional, historical, social and
economic dimensions. Action should therefore be
geared towards providing solutions to the problems in
those areas. Foremost is assistance in building and
strengthening institutions of State. Progress in that area
could have been maintained if the United Nations
presence in Timor-Leste had not been prematurely
diminished. The economic difficulties and deficiencies
of Timor-Leste should also be addressed. We note that
the new mission recommended by the Secretary-
General includes components which will specifically
tackle those issues.

Thirdly, it is necessary to listen to the Views of all
the major stakeholders in the issue - Timor-Leste,
States in the region, friends of Timor-Leste, donors and
troop contributors - so that the international
community, specifically the United Nations, can make
an informed decision on the next course of action for
Timor-Leste. Today's meeting fulfils that need.

We need once again to invest time, effort and
resources in Timor-Leste. We commend the immediate
response of Australia, Malaysia, New Zealand and
Portugal in deploying troops to quell the violence and
maintain law and order in the country. Their actions
show what countries in the region and friends can do to
assist in alleviating crises and preventing them from
further expanding. We hope that their valuable
contributions will find a role in the new mission.

Ultimately, the future of Timor-Leste depends, to
a large extent, on the Timorese themselves. Having
gained hard-won independence, they should now get
their act together. That means maintaining meaningful
dialogue among national players, addressing faction-
ridden splits, searching for employment opportunities
for young people and focusing on developing new
orientations and values that would promote tolerance
and openness. Timor-Leste can remain on track if it
follows a focused post-conflict peacebuilding
development framework with the assistance of the
international community. Also, the new mission should
serve as an early warning device to alert the Timorese
authorities and the international community about

developments which could lead to an impending crisis.
In that context, we believe that Timor-Leste is a prime
situation for consideration in the Peacebuilding
Commission. We wish to recall that several speakers,
including the Secretary-General and the President of
the General Assembly, mentioned Timor-Leste at the
inaugural meeting of the Peacebuilding Commission.

Despite the events of the past months, Timor-
Leste is still one of the best examples of a successful
international enterprise engineered through the
combined cooperative efforts of the United Nations and
regional partners and players. The international
community should continue to make Timor-Leste a
success story. We will maintain our presence in the
country and we are ready to contribute to successful
peacebuilding programmes there.

