Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): Let me begin
by adding our deepest condolences to those already
expressed to the families of the victims, to our friends
at the Egyptian Mission and to all Egyptians. We
join others in condemning this heinous attack in the
strongest terms.

I wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
report and for the recommendations of the strategic
assessment mission. I would also like to thank Special
Representative Sandra Honore for her briefing today.
Since the establishment of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), in 2004,
Haiti's development and stabilization have faced many
challenges: political instability, economic fragility and
natural disasters. Overcoming the devastation caused
by the earthquake of 2010 was particularly challenging.
Yet, in spite of these obstacles, the people of Haiti
have constantly displayed their strength and resilience
and their determination to build a better future for
themselves and their children. MINUSTAH has played
an important role in supporting their efforts.

In recent months, the people of Haiti exercised
their democratic right by electing a new President and
Parliament. We hope that the confirmation of a new
Government on 21 March will lead to a concerted effort
and renewed effort to address the most pressing issues
facing the country.

As Haiti continues on its journey of development,
the time has come for the role and composition of
MINUSTAH to evolve. In this process, we must learn
from the mistakes of the past; it is important that
there be adequate planning for a successor transition
mission after MINUSTAH. This includes managing the
handover to the United Nations country team, in the
spirit of the agenda on sustaining peace.

An integrated and joined-up United Nations
presence in Haiti, both during and after the transition,
will be needed in order to support the people and the
Government of Haiti as they address the long-standing
risks and drivers of instability. This includes joint
analysis and planning across the system. Continued
efforts will be needed to reduce social inequalities,
unleash the potential of the Haitian people by
spurring economic growth so as to alleviate fiscal
pressure and strengthen trust in, and the capacity of,
national institutions.

We welcome the strong rule-of-law and human
rights focus in the successor mission's mandate.
Working under an integrated strategy across all
United Nations entities in Haiti, we see a significant
opportunity for the United Nations to deliver as one
around these issues. The Global Focal Point for Police,
Justice and Corrections Areas in the Rule of Law in
Post-Conflict and Other Crisis Situations can contribute
to playing an important role in coordinating the ability
of the United Nations to deliver as one on the rule-of-
law mandate. However, these efforts should be planned,
led and mandated by Haitian counterparts. The United
Nations must continue to provide dedicated support
to the Haitian authorities, including to the Haitian
National Police, to strengthen their capacities.

The important work undertaken by MINUSTAH
on gender mainstreaming and against sexual violence
must not be lost in the transition process. It will be
important to maintain a strategic focus, dedicated
coordination and targeted budgeting for gender issues.
We welcome the recommendation that the successor
mission, along with the United Nations country team,
develop a coherent gender and sexual and gender-based
violence strategy, as well as support the systemization
of such strategy programming in the security and
judicial institutions.

The recent peaceful elections, the inauguration
of President Moise and the appointment of a Prime
Minister and Government are an important milestone
for Haiti. As the people of Haiti increasingly take
their future into their own hands, the United Nations
must stand ready to support their efforts. Sweden will
remain a committed partner for Haiti as it begins this
new chapter.

