Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): I would like to
thank you, Sir, for scheduling today's debate on the
situation in Afghanistan. We are grateful for the latest
report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/318) and are
appreciative of the briefing by his Special
Representative, Staffan de Mistura. We also thank
Ambassador Tanin, Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, for his statement.

As we move forward, the international approach
towards Afghanistan, including the London
Conference, has focused on the areas of security,
reintegration, development, governance, and regional
and international cooperation. We support the efforts of
the Afghan Government to reintegrate those individuals
who are willing to abjure violence, do not have ties
with terrorist groups, and are willing to abide by the
values of democracy, pluralism and human rights, as
enshrined in the Afghan Constitution. The process must
be inclusive and transparent. The forthcoming Kabul
Conference and the parliamentary elections scheduled
for September will be important milestones in
consolidating the progress made so far.

Complementary to the military effort, a
sustainable strategy for the stabilization of Afghanistan
must focus on development and governance issues. In
this context, the focus of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) on its priorities, in
particular support for elections, regional cooperation
and aid coherence would be helpful in achieving
greater synergy and coordination of efforts with the
Afghan Government.

The success of all our endeavours will be
enduring only if their ownership is vested in the
Afghan Government and people. In this context,
closely intertwined is the need for tangible and
sustained improvement in the security situation. This is
also absolutely critical to expanding the footprint of
the Afghan Government and to creating an enabling
environment for lasting peace and stability in
Afghanistan.

As we discussed today, an overall deterioration in
the Afghan security environment underscores the
significant challenges that confront Afghanistan. The
report of the Secretary-General notes that there was a
94 per cent increase in incidents involving improvised
explosive devices during the first four months of 2010,
a 45 per cent rise in killings of civilians by insurgents,
and an increase in complex suicide attacks.

Despite a reinforced presence of the International
Security Assistance Forces, the continuous
deterioration in the security situation is a stark
reminder that the challenge from a resurgent Taliban
and Al-Qaida is real, and it is one that threatens us all.
The wellsprings that sustain such terror still show no
signs of being drained. Civilians, humanitarian
personnel, international and United Nations staff and
diplomatic personnel, including in our mission in
Kabul, have been repeatedly targeted in terrorist
attacks. I join others in expressing our condolences for
the United Nations staff member killed only yesterday.

There is broad recognition that the increase in
terrorist actions in Afghanistan is due to the support
and sanctuaries available beyond its borders. The
security and stabilization of Afghanistan will remain a
distant goal unless we are able to isolate and root out
the syndicate of terrorism, which includes elements of
Al-Qaida, Taliban, Lashkar e Toiba and other terrorist
and extremist groups operating from within and outside
Afghanistan's borders.

We fully support efforts towards the expansion of
the capacities of the Afghan National Police and the
Afghan National Army. They should be provided with
appropriate resources, combat equipment, enablers and
training before any plan for a progressive handover of
security responsibilities is considered.

The security of Afghanistan and what happens
there impacts us, as a country in the region, a close
neighbour and a civilizational partner whose ties with
the Afghan people stretch into antiquity. A stable and
settled Afghanistan, where the rank and file of the
Taliban has given up violence against the Government
and the people, cut all links with terrorism and
subscribed to the values of the Afghan Constitution and
its laws, and where development is the hard rationale is
what we seek and strive for. It is important also that
such a structure be durable and enduring. Afghanistan's
neighbours and regional partners will need to be kept
in the picture, both by consultation and by adherence to
the principle of non-interference in the country's
affairs, ensuring that it thrives as a trade and transit
hub for the region and by eradicating transnational
terrorism.

While moving forward on the sensitive issues of
reintegration and reconciliation, we need to guard
against the impulse to arrive at quick-fix solutions.
Against the backdrop of today's worrying security
situation, these issues need to be tackled with prudence
and the benefit of hindsight, foresight and caution.

In India's efforts towards the stabilization of
Afghanistan, the focus has been on development and
humanitarian work to assist the Afghan people as they
build a peaceful, stable, inclusive, democratic and
pluralistic nation. We have sought to assist Afghanistan
within our means. Our $1.3 billion assistance
programme is aimed at building infrastructure;
capacity-building in the critical areas of governance,
health, education and agriculture; and generating
employment. Last year, over 300,000 Afghans, mainly
women and children, were provided with free medical
treatment at the Indian medical missions in Kabul,
Jalalabad, Kandahar, Herat and Mazar-i-Sharif. The
economy of the battle-scarred Nimroz province was
transformed with the building of the Zaranj-Delaram
highway, and the homes of the people of Kabul have
been lit, after more than a decade, by the Pul-i-Khumri
transmission line from the Uzbek border.

The international community as a whole has
made a contribution in assisting Afghanistan to stand
on its feet. We welcome these efforts and are fully
supportive of them. We support the good work done by
UNAMA. If lasting peace and stability are to be
established in Afghanistan, it is critical that the
international community remain engaged there, both on
the security side as well as in development and
capacity-building efforts.

