Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): First of all, we would like to express our
appreciation to the Permanent Representative of Chile,
Chairman of the Peacebuilding Commission, as well as
to the Chairmen of its country-specific configurations,
namely, the Permanent Representatives of Belgium,
Brazil, Canada and Switzerland, for their efforts to
strengthen the role of the Commission in the United
Nations system and beyond. We are also grateful for
the Commission's report on the work of its third
session (S/2009/444). We share its conclusions and
recommendations.

We have positively evaluated the results of the
Commission's third year of work. The Commission has
done serious work in its country-specific
configurations. It has built up important experience,
including in terms of establishing regular dialogue
between the Commission and the Security Council on
specific countries. We note that the mandates of United
Nations configuration offices in Guinea-Bissau, Sierra
Leone and the Central African Republic call for
assistance in implementing the peacebuilding
frameworks developed by the Commission with the

direct participation of the Governments of those
countries. Given the role of the configuration heads as
Resident Coordinators, we believe that we can achieve
significant progress in genuinely coordinating
peacebuilding efforts in the field - for example,
through the practical interaction between the Security
Council and the Commission. The great virtue of the
Commission lies in its ability to establish direct
dialogue with national Governments and ensure their
leading role and responsibility for the peacebuilding
process.

In a year's time, as called for in the relevant
resolutions of the Council and the General Assembly,
we will carry out a review of the Commission's work.
In our view, that review should be conducted on the
basis of the following elements: strict observance of
the Charter-enshrined principles governing the
relations between major United Nations bodies on the
basis of their relevant duties and functions, and full
consideration of practical experience gained through
the work of the Commission for the purpose of
consolidating the accumulation of positive results. The
review will probably touch on a wide range of issues,
such as the links between peacemaking, peacebuilding
and sustainable development and the coordination of
peacebuilding efforts inside the United Nations and
beyond.

We believe that one of the major tasks is to
harmonize the agreed functions of the Commission
with the mechanisms at its disposal. We reiterate our
willingness to support a reasonable and realistic
proposal aimed at increasing the authority of the
Commission and strengthening the central principle of
peacebuilding efforts, namely, national responsibility.
The review should result in further strengthening of the
advisory role of the Commission, increasing its
effectiveness in resolving problems associated with
coordinating international efforts, developing
recommendations on political stabilization, improving
security conditions, restoring Statehood and promoting
economic stability and the development of countries
that have experienced severe crises.

