Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): Let me first of all
congratulate Ambassador Valdivieso and the delegation
of Colombia on the successful conclusion of the
presidency. Thank you for the efficient and
professional performance of your presidential duties
that facilitated our work this month and contributed
greatly to the constructive consideration of the issues
on the Council's agenda.

One should recognize that in this month the
Council effectively continued applying in its work all
the good traditions and innovative approaches that have
evolved over the past years, thus strengthening and
building upon the trend toward greater transparency
and better working methods developed in the
successive presidencies.

I would particularly like to note here the holding
of the informal policy forum devoted to the
deliberations on regional approaches to managing
conflicts in Africa. This informal gathering allowed
Council members to have an open and frank exchange
of views on the pros and cons of the strategies that the
Council adopts. We believe that such informal debates
and brainstorming sessions are very useful and should
be continued.

We cannot but mention here the initiative of the
Colombian presidency to hold an open Council debate
on small arms, following the United Nations
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. This timely event -
with wide participation among Members of the United
Nations - and the adoption of the presidential
statement once again highlighted the areas where the
Council has a role to play in addressing the issue of
small arms.

As far as the Secretariat's briefings are
concerned, we particularly welcome what has almost
become a customary practice - the circulation of
briefings and briefing notes before the Council hears
the Secretariat's briefing and considers the agenda
item. We would encourage the Secretariat to apply such
an approach to all agenda items under consideration.

We regard yesterday's adoption of resolution
1366 (2001), which was based on the Secretary-
General's report on the prevention of armed conflict
(S/2001/574) and which followed up the debate held in
June, to be among the major positive results that the
Council achieved in August. In our judgement, that
resolution is a noteworthy document in which the
Council recognizes the importance of a conflict-
prevention strategy and outlines the ways to implement
a number of the Secretary-General's recommendations
relating to the role of the Security Council and other
players. Now it is important to make the resolution
work.

The record of the Council will always be mixed.
There are, of course, successes; sometimes there are
failures. In our view, one of the major events for the
Council in the past month - this was mentioned by
some earlier speakers - was the urgent meeting held
on 20 and 21 August on the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question. The tragic
course of events in that region required an immediate
reaction on the part of the Council, and the convening
of the meeting by the President at the request of the
Islamic group was timely and was the right decision.

The effectiveness of the Council's reaction to the
situation was, however, once again undermined by its
inability to act. It is truly regrettable that the Council
demonstrated that it was not in a position to reach a
unanimous decision on an outcome document
following that urgent meeting. The inability of the
Council to adopt such a decision aimed at putting a
stop to the ongoing violence and bloodshed in the
Palestinian territory and in Israel and at bringing the
parties back to the negotiating table can really be
viewed as the failure of the Security Council as a body
to fulfil its Charter obligations. It did not serve the
Council's image well, and it sent a very wrong signal
to the parties on the ground.

I have deliberately not touched in my statement
on the issue of the contents of the report of the Security
Council to the General Assembly, as mentioned in the
paper on the wrap-up meeting. It is evident that over
the past several years, steps have been taken to
improve both the contents and the format of the
Council's report. Yet a lot remains to be done to make
it better and- no less important - reader-friendly.
Many options may be explored here, from asking the
Secretary-General to prepare a yearly assessment, as
suggested by some Council members during our
previous consultations, to streamlining specific
chapters and paragraphs of the report. I do not think
that such a discussion would be useful without the
participation of the wider United Nations membership,
to which the reports are directed. But it is important
that we hold a separate discussion within the Council
following the review of the report in the General
Assembly to consider in a practical manner concerns
and proposals voiced during the Assembly's debate.

I also wish to lend my full support to what was
said by Ambassador Mahbubani and other speakers
regarding the importance of finalizing, hopefully
within the next month, the work on the draft report of
the working group on sanctions. We urge the next
presidency to allocate sufficient time for relevant
discussion in the Council on that issue.

Finally, I should like once again to voice our full
support for conducting wrap-up discussions, especially
for conducting them in open meetings of the Council.

