Mr. Cappagli (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, I would like thank the Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Annabi, for the
comprehensive and useful information he has provided.

This week we note that six months have passed since
the creation of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UN TAET). It is evident that
a task of great magnitude has been carried out, setting up
the bases and starting points for a future independent East
Timor. I would like once again to express my country's
gratitude to Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello and to all UNTAET
personnel for their excellent performance. I would also like
to highlight the positive attitude of the East Timor
leadership throughout this process.

This positive trend is confirmed by the fact that, in the
last 15 days, UNTAET has signed two memorandums of
understanding with the Indonesian authorities on topics of
fundamental importance. The first memorandum, on
cooperation in judicial, legal and human rights matters, will
facilitate the investigation and prosecution of those
responsible for the violence that occurred in 1999. The
second memorandum, on coordination in the border area,
was signed between the Indonesian military authorities and
UNTAET; its principal objective is to improve the situation
in security matters and to build trust along the terrestrial
borders of East Timor. This is undoubtedly a significant
step forward.

We would like to congratulate the Indonesian
authorities for their renewed commitment to cooperate with
the United Nations on matters of such importance, and we
appeal to them to fully implement both the letter and the
spirit of the agreements so that their commitments will be
translated into concrete measures in the field.

Unfortunately, in recent times we have also noted an
increase in social tension as a result of the precarious
employment and economic situation of most Timorese. We
trust that the many assistance programmes implemented by
international organizations, non- governmental organizations
and Governments will improve the situation. Nevertheless,
we believe that the United Nations must redouble its efforts
to convey a message of reassurance to all Timorese. To this
purpose, a broadcast network in Tetun, Portuguese and
Bahasa must be set up, and it must be accessible to 100 per
cent of the territory's inhabitants.

