The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Afghanistan, Belarus, Canada,
Germany, India, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Japan,
New Zealand, the Netherlands, Norway and Pakistan,
in which they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. In
accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Tanin
(Afghanistan) took a seat at the Council table;
the representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side ofthe Council Chamber

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend invitations under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Tom Koenigs,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan, and Mr. Antonio Maria Costa,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime and Director-General of the United
Nations Office in Vienna.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Koenigs to take a seat at the Council
table.

I invite Mr. Costa to take a seat at the Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
2
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2007/ 152, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security.

At this meeting the Security Council will hear
briefings by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Afghanistan and Head of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and
by the Executive Director of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime.

I now give the floor to Mr. Tom Koenigs, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan.


