Mr. Varli (Turkey): The rules-based international system is experiencing what is perhaps its gravest crisis since its emergence after the Second World War. For some, multilateralism is no longer the best way to work for global security and prosperity. Consensus- building and compromise are viewed not as virtues of strength but as signs of weakness. Long-standing legal norms have been eroded. The threat of force is used all too frequently. As a result, people are losing faith in international institutions, including the United Nations, which are viewed as ineffective and weak. Despite the narrative of some about the failure of multilateralism, it has produced many success stories over the past seven decades. It developed a culture and ethics of peace, as well as institutions, and adopted rules. These institutions and rules help us resolve conflicts and enable us to establish norms and platforms for dealing with global challenges, from climate change to weapons of mass destruction. That is why we have to protect multilateralism and defend international rules, norms, agreements and institutions. That is why we must take up the multilateral agenda with a renewed commitment; relaunch the narrative of multilateralism; and show the added value of international cooperation. This effort can start with evoking the spirit and letter of the United Nations Charter. The United Nations Charter is resilient and remains visionary, with its articulation of universal values, its grounding in peace, development, human rights and the rule of law, and its vision of countries living as good neighbours and sharing a common fate and future. It remains our most valuable legacy for future generations. Yet young people need to better understand the Charter and the United Nations system. They need to know what it would be like to live in a world governed by no rules at all or by a set of rules imposed by the most powerful among us. The seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations offers us a compelling opportunity to educate young people about the values of the United Nations Charter and the achievements of the United Nations system. We need to teach them that the United Nations is our unique platform to deal with global challenges, from climate change to weapons of mass destruction, and that the United Nations system must be saved. We must also remember that the Charter confers on the Security Council the primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security. The success of the Council is, in the eyes of many, indelibly linked to the credibility of the United Nations as a whole. When the Security Council fails, the United Nations fails and people lose faith in multilateralism. When the Council succeeds, it is a victory for the Charter and the rules-based international system. The Security Council therefore needs to fulfil its mission as the primary United Nations organ for maintaining international peace and security. Before I conclude, I must use my right of reply with regard to some statements made last week (see S/PV.8699). The representative of the Syrian regime repeated, as usual, delusional references to my country. Let me underline that the Syrian regime, which is responsible for massacring and torturing countless people for more than eight years, lost its legitimacy long ago. Let me also remind representatives that millions of Syrians have suffered and continue to suffer countless crimes at the hands of the regime. The representative of the Syrian regime is therefore not our legitimate counterpart. Also during last week's meeting, Egypt made some misleading remarks with reference to the recent memorandums of understanding (MOUs) signed by Turkey and Libya. I would like to remind the delegation of Egypt that the MOUs that Turkey signed with Libya's sole legitimate Government not only are in full compliance with international law and the relevant resolution 2259 (2015) but also seek to strengthen peace, security and stability in the eastern Mediterranean region.
