Mr. Zebari (Iraq): I will start answering the
questions in order.

First, to my good friend the Ambassador of
Algeria, I will speak in Arabic.

(spoke in Arabic)

I thank him for his kind words. The draft
resolution is extremely important to us in Iraq, to the
region and to other Arab countries. With regard to the
questions that he raised, I should like to state that the
current wording of the draft resolution on the nature of
the sovereignty, the terms of reference of the
Government and so on is quite adequate. Our
understanding of sovereignty is that it would be for and
enjoyed by the Iraqi people and that the Government
should run its own affairs, be free to make its own
decision and have control over Iraqi security affairs. It
should also control the country's financial resources
and represent the Iraqi people in international forums.

As for its terms of reference, as I mentioned in
my statement earlier, we understand that the ongoing
presence of the multinational force is needed more by
Iraq than by the United States, the United Kingdom or
Poland. We need that force and I have so stated very
clearly to Arab leaders and Ministers for Foreign
Affairs, the Organization of the Islamic Conference and
the League of Arab States.

The dangers are great and will be exacerbated if a
security vacuum should be created. We are not yet
prepared; we have not completed our security or
military preparations sufficiently to be able to say
good-bye to the multinational force. At this point -
we say this very clearly, without any hesitation or
feeling of shame - we are more concerned about the
fate of many thousands of Iraqis, about the country's
future and about the situation in the country. It is
important to us that Iraqi forces be under Iraqi
leadership. We should use our imagination to achieve a
kind of coordination among Iraqi forces and their
leadership and the leaders of the multinational force so
that they can work together as partners in meeting the
security threats confronting us.

There will definitely be correspondence between
the Iraqi interim Government and the Security Council,
and the continued presence of the multinational force
will definitely depend upon Iraqi approval - as
opposed to the situation under resolution 1483 (2003)
or 1511 (2003), in which the multinational force was
there as an occupying force, against the wishes of the
Iraqi people. This time, the force will be there by
approval of the representatives of the Iraqi people. This
is all I can say about that.

(spoke in English)

The representative of China asked two questions
concerning what we need to see in this draft resolution.
In my statement, I believe I enumerated the points that
are important for us. But, to repeat them briefly, I think
we need the draft resolution to be clear and
unambiguous and to reflect full sovereignty very
clearly. In particular, the people of Iraq need to see that
this is a genuine transfer of sovereignty and authority
to them, not a cosmetic attempt in that process. It is
very important that the people feel and see that. So any
language to consolidate and help us get to that point
would be very welcomed by us.

The following is a point that I highlighted in my
statement. Yes, we need the multinational force to help
us; we need the Council's efforts; we need assistance
from Member States and from the rest of the
international community. Iraq is no longer a local
issue; it has become a regional and international issue.
In fact, when we speak of the main front in the war
against international terrorism, that is real to us; we
feel it; we sense it. We are in the trenches every day.
Iraq is not like other countries such as Afghanistan or
Somalia. In fact, the collapse of the Iraqi State would
have a huge impact on the entire region and on the
Council's interests as well. We have constantly told
those of our neighbours who believe that continued
instability in Iraq will be in their interests that they are
making a fatal mistake. We have all seen the recent
spate of terrorist attacks in Saudi Arabia, Jordan, Syria
and Istanbul, and that is just the beginning if we lose
this battle, this confrontation. This is really a struggle
between two wills regarding what kind of country we
want to establish.

Of course, we really want clear references to the
status of the multinational force, to their operations and
to their relations of cooperation with the Iraqi interim
Government in a spirit of partnership. At this stage -
here, I will be very honest; one can ask any member of
the Iraqi Government or any Iraqi politician about
this - a call for immediate withdrawal or a fixed
deadline or timetable would be very, very unhelpful. It
would be used by enemies to complicate the problems
even further. If we are ready to assume responsibility, it
can be done as soon as possible. But, as we can see,
these attacks have a pattern: they are all politically
motivated. As we pass through each stage, we see that
the forces that want to derail this process are coming
back and playing politics with bombs and suicide
missions.

We also really need the sovereign Iraqi
Government to have control national resources and the
country's finances. It would be difficult to justify the
operation of a sovereign Government if that
Government were not able to manage its own finances.
So I believe Iraq needs to be represented fully in
whatever mechanisms or supervisory boards are
envisaged in that area so that it can have an important
or leading role in that regard.

In addition, because we really cannot operate in a
legal vacuum, we want a reference or an
acknowledgement to the effect that the Transitional
Administrative Law is very important for us, because
every step that we take now or in the future will be
implemented under that Law.

These are our main points. We welcome a very
important and central role for the United Nations in
this process. In fact, in the political, electoral and
reconstruction processes, we will need the United
Nations in many ways. I think there is now a greater
realization that the United Nations has an important
role to play than when we experienced difficulties in
December or January. Yes, that role is dangerous and
challenging, but when has the United Nations not
carried out its work in difficult circumstances? We
welcome that role. I believe that Mr. Brahimi and the
recent United Nations mission did a remarkable job. It
was risky and very dangerous for the members of the
team, but they rose to the challenge, and we are very
proud of their positive and constructive re-engagement.

Our friend the representative of Germany raised a
number of questions, and I will address them. But I
would also like to make a number of comments,
because we think it is important to clarify several
things.

We are here as the representative of the Iraqi
interim Government, and we can speak on behalf of the
Prime Minister and the new arrangements. We did not
read the text only a couple of days ago; we read it
weeks ago, when it was first distributed, and we are
completely familiar with it. We could take an
examination on it, explaining, item by item, what the
draft resolution entails and what it contains, because
this is not an academic exercise for us; this is our
future. So we definitely know what we are talking
about and what is at risk.

Secondly, I would say that we in the new Iraqi
Government are open to any consultation, at whatever
level the Council deems necessary, as it is very
important for us to reach out to as many people, as
many members as possible.

I answered some of the questions posed by the
representative of Germany, but let me say this with
respect to his two main questions on the principal two
elements that we need to see in any arrangement or
agreement to regulate relations between the Iraqi
interim Government and the multinational force. I
think that for us the first element is very important -
that Iraqi forces, the military, the police, security
forces, intelligence and whatever other arrangements
exist should come under Iraqi control and Iraqi
command, and that they not be part and parcel of the
multinational force or under foreign command. We are
talking about full sovereignty. I think that we should
say that very clearly and loudly.

There is also an understanding from our friends
and allies. They are helping us to build these forces.
They are investing money, giving assistance and
making sacrifices to train our police, our army and so
on. But leading up to that we need our own command,
let us say, to be there and to liaise or coordinate
through certain structures. I think that this is the first
condition.

The second principle is that we think that the
Iraqi interim Government and the Iraqi transitional
Government really should have a say about the final
status of these forces. We need them. The question is a
hypothetical one. I think that we are going to need
these forces for quite some time, but, as a sovereign
Government, we must definitely have a say in that
respect; it will not be open-ended forever. But we must
have a say in the duration of the mandate of these
forces. I think these are the two elements that we have
tried to explain.

I think that the Prime Minister, Mr. Ayad Allawi,
and the Cabinet held their official meeting today and
addressed this issue frankly today. We have been in
constant consultation and contact with them and are
considering preparing those letters on behalf of the
Iraqi interim Government.

I appreciate very much the comments of the
Ambassador of France, and I also enjoyed very much
our discussion this morning and the exchange of views.
I appreciate his support for the draft resolution's being
adopted by consensus, to show the people of Iraq and
of the world that the Security Council is united in its
desire to see a truly sovereign Iraqi Government
assuming real authority and power and overcoming
current difficulties. I think that is a shared objective
that we in Iraq highly appreciate and for which we
express our thanks.

The Ambassador of Chile raised a number of
questions. I will start with the last one, about the fate
of the militias. We have been working for some time
with the Combined Joint Task Force and the Coalition
Provisional Authority to dissolve them and, according
to the transitional administrative law, to abolish or to
put an end to all militias, whoever they are made up of,
that are working and operating outside of the law. That
includes Shi'a and Kurdish, political parties, and
integrating all of those militias into the new Iraqi army
and the new Iraqi army formations.

The process has already started. One of the
problems that we have faced recently with Moqtada Al-
Sadr is the use of violence and arms to prove a point or
to see recognition. Our position has been that there is
really another way to be represented; the political
process is open, and if one seeks recognition, there are
elections and other ways to do it. One does not need to
resort to violence in order to make a point.

That is the position of the Iraqi interim
Government. There will be no place - no room - for
militias in Iraq, apart from the one Iraqi army and the
police forces. Yes, we do need our country to have
control over security, authority over security, and this
has been an issue we have discussed. We have differed
sometimes with our Coalition friends. Security is a
complex issue. It is not only the use of force; it
definitely involves intelligence, political and economic
issues, the closure of borders - so it is a multifaceted
approach, the way we see it. We are making progress in
training and in getting better intelligence. In particular,
many new security agencies have been established
recently. The Defence Ministry has been re-established,
and the National Intelligence Service has been re-
established. We are making progress with the border
police and with the other military and security
formations.

I will skip some of the questions, because I have
answered some of them. I will go through some of the
questions posed and remarks made by the Ambassador
of Pakistan. I referred to 400 political parties, groups
and associations. That is the number that we have
managed to count; it is an ongoing process. One
definitely cannot include everyone, but in the context
of the political process the political conference is
coming up, which will include others. We will have the
elections - the local electoral commissions, let us
say - in which they can participate. We are not trying
to be exclusive; we are trying to be inclusive. But one
definitely cannot include every Iraqi political, tribal or
religious leader.

I think I have answered the question about the
time frame. I tried to answer the question about the

partnership. Concerning the reference to the arms
embargo in the draft text, I think that this is the first
time this has come up, which is a very hopeful sign for
Iraq, which was under embargo for so many years
under the previous regime - at least there is an
opening, and we should build on that.

Concerning the international development fund
monitoring board, I think we have discussed this issue
with our friends, and we are going to raise it. Yes, we
need a stronger Iraqi representation on that board and
we must have a stronger say and not be merely
symbolically represented. In fact, we need to be
strongly represented on that board.

On the question of neighbours - the neighbours
are very important and helpful, and we should engage
them. I personally attended the most recent conference
of Iraq's neighbouring countries, and our relations are
very good. I would describe them as very progressive
with all the countries - with Iran, Turkey, Syria,
Jordan, Saudi Arabia and Kuwait. We have been
informing them and explaining to them how important
Iraq's security and stability is, and we need their
cooperation, we need their support. They can play a
very constructive role in helping us stabilize, and we
have introduced our list to them - what they can do to
help us. We are reaching out to them, but at the same
time it is very important - as, I think, they understand
- that we, the Iraqi people, should freely determine
our political future without anything being dictated or
imposed, while at the same time respecting their
legitimate national security interests in the region. That
is how we are dealing with that issue.

With regard to the other question put by the
representative of the Russian Federation, I have
described the United Nations role we expect. We need
a leading role for the United Nations: a truly engaged,
positive role. That will not be easy, and assistance is
needed from the Security Council and from Member
States at large. Terrorists, who are blinded by hatred
and a culture of death and killing, make no distinctions
among humanitarian organizations and their
representatives, Western diplomats or military
commanders in the field. All of them have become
"legitimate" targets for terrorists, and they need
security and protection for their operations and their
facilities. I think the draft resolution very clearly
addresses the need for a unit of multinational forces to
protect such operations and installations.

On the question of weapons of mass destruction
and the International Atomic Energy Agency, we
understand that this issue is still outstanding - left
over from previous resolutions. We have discussed it
among ourselves in the new Administration. But at this
stage it is too soon to address it.

The idea of an international conference has been
on the table for quite some time. We Iraqis want as
much international support and aid as possible to help
us achieve our goal of a stable, peaceful and
prosperous country. In my personal view - and I will
be very honest and direct - I think an international
conference is long overdue. Such a conference should
have taken place much, much earlier. Now, I think, we
have passed the time: we have a political plan; we have
other arrangements. If we compare our situation with
that of Afghanistan for instance, I think the time gap
becomes apparent. Let us also answer the question of
what a conference would achieve in terms of
consolidating international support and involvement.
We are asking for those things publicly and openly,
with the United Nations as the main body in that
connection. We have welcomed the United Nations; we
have called on the United Nations; we have urged the
United Nations to be re-engaged and to come and help
us. In my personal View, internationalizing the issue
could complicate the matter, although there are so
many ways in which Member countries can help,
bilaterally or through the Security Council or the
United Nations.

Finally, I appreciated very much the kind words
of the representative of the United Kingdom.

I think I have answered all the questions. I thank
Council members for their patience.

