Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): I, too, would like to congratulate Special
Representative Carlos Ruiz Massieu on his new role and
thank him for his briefing. I also thank his predecessor,
Jean Arnault, for his considerable contribution to
the peace process. Finally, I welcome the presence
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia and
express the sympathy and condolences of the Belgian
Government following last week's attack against a
police academy in Bogota. We condemn that attack in
the strongest terms.

The year 2019 is crucial for peacebuilding in
Colombia. In that regard, I would like to highlight
three points 4 first, the Colombian Government's
commitment to the peace process; secondly, the
unacceptable violence towards human rights defenders
and local leaders; and, thirdly, the socioeconomic
and legal reintegration of the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Eje'rcito del Pueblo
(FARC-BF).

At the outset, Belgium welcomes the new
Government's commitment to the peace process as
demonstrated by the "Peace with legality" plan, which
recognizes that rural poverty and inequalities are the
root causes of the conflict. Today more than ever, after
last week's cowardly attack, the implementation on the
part of all parties of the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace
is essential in the framework of an urgent, inclusive
and concerted effort to advance the peace process
throughout the country. In that regard, Belgium calls
for the implementation of the affirmative action policies
contained in the agreements on the role of women.

My second point has to do with human rights.
Belgium is very concerned about violence against
human rights defenders and social leaders, too often
committed with total impunity. In 2018, a human rights
defender or leader was murdered, on average, every
48 hours. January is not yet over and already seven
people have been killed, as indicated by the Special
Representative. In that connection, the implementation
of the action plan for their protection, in consultation
with civil society, is key. We welcome the recent
convening of the National Commission for Security
Guarantees. Violence against former FARC-EP
combatants is also a source of concern.

We strongly encourage the Colombian authorities
to consolidate the State's presence throughout its
territory, not only in order to ensure security but also
to promote social programmes that focus on health
care and education so as to meet the expectations of
rural communities and historically marginalized ethnic
minorities, in accordance with the recommendations of
Special Rapporteur Michel Forst.

Finally, with regard to the socioeconomic and
legal reintegration of the FARC-EP, Belgium believes
reintegration to be a key element in the successful
implementation of the peace agreement and underscores
the need to make progress at the national, regional and
local levels. Even as we ensure transitional justice, we
must show ex-combatants, who have laid down their
weapons, that it is in their interest to be on the right side
of history. Access to legal revenue sources and to land
is at the heart of effective reintegration. In that context,
Belgium is pleased to note that illegal-crop-substitution
policies continue and have been successful.

Belgium underlines the central role of the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace, which must have the necessary
means to be able to carry out its mandate independently.
Further progress must be made in ensuring legal
protection for former FARC-EP members.

(spoke in Spanish)

Before I conclude, I would like to make some
remarks to the representative of Colombia. His country
serves as an inspiration throughout the world. Regions
affected by conflict see his country as a model to
overcome the past and to choose to build a peaceful
future. The coming year will require a concerted effort
on the part of the Government, the political parties and
civil society to reap the benefits of the peace agreement
with the FARC-EP. Last week's atrocious terrorist
attack reminds us of the urgent need for action.

Belgium recognizes that the situation in Venezuela
has an extremely negative impact on neighbouring
countries. As such, we commend Colombia for its show
of solidarity towards Venezuelans who seek refuge.

We cannot let this historic opportunity pass us by.
Belgium, along with the other members of the Council,
is fully committed and ready to collaborate.

