Mr. Negroponte (United States of America): We,
too, welcome the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2004/52) and its introduction by Assistant
Secretary-General Kalomoh.

We appreciate the particular insights offered by
participants in Security Council missions. We believe
that these missions provide an opportunity to learn the
situation on the ground and that they are an invaluable
means of informing Council deliberations. It has been
almost nine months since the Council mission under
discussion took place. Much of what has transpired -
thanks to the efforts of the United Nations and the
peoples and Governments of the region - has been
positive. Nonetheless, the peoples of Central Africa
continue to endure significant suffering.

In general, my delegation endorses the
conclusions of the Secretary-General's report. We
would wish to highlight certain points. With regard to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, my delegation
was deeply saddened by the death last week of a
Kenyan member of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC). He lost his life in a violent attack, while
carrying out his duties on behalf of peace and justice,
in Ituri. His family and his country have our
condolences.

Despite continued insecurity in parts of the
Central African region, there is cause for hope. Since
the mission travelled to the Congo, a transitional
Government and its administrative arrangements have
been established. The Security Council adopted
resolution 1493 (2003), which gave MONUC a more
robust mandate and authorized the expanded force
level required to carry it out.

The Council remains united in its determination
to stop the flow of illicit arms into the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and Member States should be
reminded of their obligation under resolution 1493
(2003) to halt the supply of arms to factions in the
Congo from their territories or by their nationals. The
adoption of resolution 1493 (2003) also allows the
United Nations to build on the impressive work carried
out by the French-led European Union intervention.
Operation Artemis successfully addressed the serious
violence then occurring in Bunia.

Last week, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Ambassador William Lacy Swing, focused our
attention on the many tasks that remain to be
completed by the 2005 election date set by the
Congolese themselves as the end of the transition.
These tasks include a commitment to continued
improvement in the relations between Governments of
the region.

We thank the Secretary-General and his
Representative for their efforts to create better relations
among Central African nations, and in that connection
we look to the Great Lakes conference now scheduled
for November 2004 as a forum to solidify and endorse
improvements in regional relations. We would ask
fellow Member States not to wait for the conference to
establish stronger ties with their neighbours, but to
arrive at the conference with those stronger ties already
cemented as an achievement. The Secretary-General's
report refers to increased resource requirements related
to the preparations for the Great Lakes conference. We
hope that the friends of the conference will direct
sufficient resources to the Special Representative ofthe
Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region, Mr.
Fall, to prepare for, and carry out, that important
meeting.

Recent months have seen a trend in Burundi
towards greater peace and stability. Burundi's people
have experienced violence and insecurity for too long.
The success of the peace process is critical to pave the
way for a normal democratic process and much-needed
economic development. We welcome the Conseil
national pour la defense de la democratie-Forces
nationales pour la de'fense de la democratic (CNDD- FDD) joining the ceasefire and the Government and
urging the remaining rebel group, the Forces nationales
de liberation (FNL) also to join the ceasefire.

We agree with the Secretary-General's report that
the African Mission in Burundi has been doing
outstanding work in Burundi, despite the serious
challenges it faces. The work of the African Mission in
Burundi is indispensable to the success of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes and to the overall peace process. We
applaud the efforts of the troop-contributing
countries- Ethiopia, Mozambique and South
Africa- and we would highlight in particular the
invaluable role of South Africa in furthering Burundi's
peace process and its leadership during the November
summit of the Great Lakes Regional Initiative on
Burundi.

We would also recognize the contributions made
to the African Mission in Burundi on a bilateral basis
by the United Kingdom, Italy, the Netherlands and
Germany, in addition to that of my own country, as
well as the more recent generous European Union
contribution. However, the African Mission in Burundi
continues to face a funding shortfall. We are looking
for additional funds to support that Mission, and we
urge others to provide financial support as soon as they
can. Burundi has been an excellent example of an
African solution to an African problem and of the
African Union's contribution to peace and stability on
the continent. The international community should
therefore do everything possible to support the
Mission's efforts.

My delegation looks forward to continued
engagement by the Council on the problems of Central
Africa, and to cooperation between the Council and
States ofthe region.

