Mr. Gutierrez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I would like to thank France for having
organized this debate. I am also grateful for the
briefings given by Ms. Valerie Amos, Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs; Mr. Alain Le Roy,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations;
and Mr. Ivan Simonovie, Assistant Secretary-General
for Human Rights.

In the previous debate on the issue last November
(see S/PV.6427), we outlined a clear message to the
effect that the United Nations can and must do more on
the ground to meet the requirements for the protection
of civilians. We believe that considerable progress has
been made in determining the operational mechanisms
and guidelines to accomplish that task, in particular in
the context of peacekeeping operations, as can be seen
in the strategic framework for drafting comprehensive
protection of civilian strategies and the
recommendations adopted only yesterday by the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations.

The treatment of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict is multidimensional and cuts across the
work of the various United Nations bodies, in
particular in the context of the General Assembly and
the work of the Third and Sixth Committees through
various resolutions, among which those on the "Status
of the Protocols Additional to the Geneva Conventions
of 1949 and relating to the protection of victims of
armed conflicts" and the "Intensification of efforts to
eliminate all forms of violence against women" stand
out.

The protection of civilians is a fundamental
factor in achieving peace, sustainable and viable
political processes, and the credibility and legitimacy
of this Organization. While parties in conflict have the
obligation and responsibility to take the steps
necessary to protect civilians and to assist the
provision of humanitarian aid, the political
commitment not only of such parties, but also of this
Organization, in particular the Security Council, must
be strengthened, bearing in mind that, as resolution
1894 (2009) notes, the deliberate targeting of civilians
and the systematic violation of international
humanitarian law and human rights norms in situations
of armed conflict may constitute a threat to
international peace and security.

In that regard, it is vital that protection of
civilians mandates be clear, viable and specific so that
their implementation is not left to the free
interpretation of those executing them. It is a priority
to underscore the elements that the mission must
address, and provision must be made for such mandates
to include appropriate and sufficient allocation of the
necessary resources for their implementation in order
to avoid expectations exceeding the capacity of the
missions, in particular with respect to the use of force.
When peacekeeping operations are charged with the
task of protecting civilians, their multidimensional
nature and the various actors of which they are
comprised, as well as the indispensable political
commitment that they require, must be considered.

Another clear message from the ongoing
consideration of the issue is the need to improve and
strengthen the fight against impunity in the light of
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law and the aforementioned responsibility to
protect civilians. There is international criminal
responsibility in the case of such violations. We should
recall that the international community, through the
four Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their Additional
Protocols, as well as under customary international

ll-33lll
law, provided mechanisms for States to try and punish
the perpetrators of war crimes.

Likewise, through the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court, the Court's jurisdiction to
try those who commit war crimes was established
pursuant to article 8 of the Statute, regardless - and I
repeat, regardless - of which party to the armed
conflict commits them, under the principle of
complementarity and through effective cooperation
with the Court. Allow me here to underscore once
again the importance of avoiding selectivity so that the
Court's work and the mandates of the Security Council
are not perceived as tainted with any political bias.

To conclude, as mandates for the protection of
civilians are developed case by case, we believe it to
be of the greatest importance to develop preventative
analysis prior to the deployment of a mission. That will
require an analysis of the risks to be faced in order to
have the best possible knowledge of the parties to and
circumstances of the conflict and to achieve a better
comprehensive political and strategic direction. It will
also make possible better guidance on the necessary
coordination in the field.

