Mr. De Gucht (spoke in French): At the
beginning of this year I had an opportunity to present
to the Council the highlights of the programme of the
Belgian chairmanship of the Organization for Security
and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE). I would like to
thank you, Madam, President, for the opportunity to
take the floor again today in this very important forum.

I am very pleased with the evolution of the
dialogue between the Security Council and regional
organizations. This dialogue is particularly useful in
strengthening the global security system. Indeed, the
security challenges that we all face require
consolidated and coordinated action.

(spoke in English)
The OSCE is the world's largest and most
inclusive regional organization under Chapter VIII of
the United Nations Charter. Its core mandate is to
promote security through cooperation. This is, and
should be, a matter of constant attention, continued
investment and common responsibility for us as it is
for the United Nations. We have built a body of
commitments, norms and principles, which bind us
together, which we share with the international
community, and which guide us in our actions.

There can be no lasting peace and security
without respect for democracy, civil liberties and
human rights. Conversely, effective and lasting
democratic rule is predicated upon stability. There will
also be no lasting stability without economic
development. That is why we should attach great
importance to each and every one of the three
dimensions of the comprehensive approach to security
that both our organizations share.

The OSCE Permanent Council adopted a
declaration on cooperation with the United Nations last
March, in response to recent calls from the latter to
further strengthen cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations in maintaining international
peace and security, in particular resolution 1631 (2005)
and the subsequent report of the Secretary-General.

(spoke in French)

In this regard, I am particularly pleased with the
productive cooperation with the United Nations in
many fields of activity of the OSCE. Thus, the stress
that we have placed on the fight against organized
crime has made it possible to strengthen our
cooperation with the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime and to use the OSCE framework to promote
the ratification of the 2002 United Nations Convention
on Transnational Crime. This effort has also made it
possible to provide specific support to the
implementation of this Convention by the participating
States of the OSCE.

In the area of transportation, a priority theme this
year in the economic sphere, the Belgian chairmanship
cooperates closely with the United Nations High
Representative for Landlocked Developing Countries
and supports the implementation of the United Nations
Programme of Action approved in Almaty in 2003. I
would also like to draw attention to the enhanced
cooperation between the OSCE and the United Nations
Economic Commission for Europe in implementing
legal instruments and norms for the latter.

(spoke in English)

06-5287}

Some activities of the OSCE result directly from
various Security Council resolutions, for instance in
Kosovo and in Georgia. In addition, the OSCE assists
in the implementation of Security Council resolutions,
for example in the area of terrorism and weapons of
mass destruction. Through these activities, as well as
through the transmission of data, evaluations and
analyses, the OSCE can provide information and
assistance to the Security Council.

We look forward to further developing that
cooperation in other fields, for instance, in conflict
prevention and post-conflict rehabilitation, where the
OSCE has proved its added value through the work of
its specialized institutions and 18 field missions in 16
countries.

Regarding the so-called protracted conflicts in
Georgia-South Ossetia, Nagorny Karabakh and
Moldova-Transdniestra, the OSCE offers its good
offices to the parties to prevent escalation and to create
the right conditions for a peaceful settlement.
Naturally, although the ultimate responsibility for
finding solutions lies with the parties themselves, the
OSCE and its Chairman-in-Office will avail
themselves of every opportunity to move the peace
processes in those conflicts forward and to assist the
parties in reaching a solution.

I should also like to underline the OSCE's strong
record in the field of human rights, including
protecting minorities, preserving freedom of the media,
promoting tolerance and furthering democracy. The
High Commissioner on National Minorities, for
example, is the organization's main tool for identifying
ethnic tensions between and within member States.

Furthermore, the Office for Democratic
Institutions and Human Rights has an important role
not only in election monitoring but also in assisting
countries in furthering democratic development and
human rights.

The OSCE's Forum for Security and Cooperation
acts as the keeper of disarmament treaties and
confidence-building measures. Since 2002, the annual
Security Review Conference has grown into a
comprehensive forum for security dialogue within the
OSCE area. Through its regular contacts and meetings
with Asian and Mediterranean partners for cooperation,
the OSCE also encourages the implementation of
confidence- and security-building measures. It is also
engaged in capacity-building activities related to out-
of-region organizations, such as the African Union, the
League of Arab States and the Organization of the
Islamic Conference. It is ready to continue and expand
the sharing of its experience with interested
organizations.

(spoke in French)

In assuming the chairmanship of the OCSE,
Belgium wanted to clearly show its commitment to
multilateralism and international cooperation.
Promoting close cooperation between our two
organizations is an integral part of that commitment.

On behalf of the OSCE, I have the honour of
reaffirming our support for that partnership.

