Mr. Motomura (Japan): I would like to thank
you, Sir, for giving me the opportunity to participate in
today's discussion.

My thanks go as well to Mr. Sergio Vieira de
Mello for his detailed briefing on the current situation
in East Timor. I also wish to extend a warm welcome to
Mr. Ramos-Horta. In fact our discussion has benefited
greatly from the participation of both Mr. Vieira de
Mello and Mr. Ramos-Horta, who have firsthand
knowledge of the situation in East Timor.

In the months since our last Security Council
open debate on the situation in East Timor, in May,
progress has been made towards the achievement of
East Timor's independence, thanks in no small measure
to the competent leadership of Mr. Vieira de Mello, the
dedication of the United Nations staff and the constant
support of the international community.

We are delighted that the registration of voters
has been completed and that the election of the
Constituent Assembly will take place on 30 August as
scheduled. As part of an open, fair and democratic
political process, that election will be a significant
milestone on the path to a viable East Timor.

Although preparations for the election seem to be
going smoothly, I would like to stress the importance
of ensuring that the electoral process is conducted in an
orderly manner. With their memories of the events of
August 1999 still vivid, there is a widely shared
concern among the Timorese population that the
political process may not remain peaceful. Thus I
welcome the pact of national unity by which 14 of the
16 political parties concerned committed themselves to
respect the results of the election on 30 August and to
defend the principle of non-violence. Their
commitment to peace and stability is of essential
importance.

The international community, for its part, must
remain committed to maintaining order in East Timor
and extend the necessary assistance towards that end.
Japan has made a contribution of approximately $1.2
million to the United Nations Development Programme
for the election of the Constituent Assembly, and we
plan to dispatch electoral observers to East Timor.

My delegation commends the Secretary-General
for his work in producing the well-considered report at
this juncture. As for the United Nations presence once
East Timor achieves independence, I strongly believe
that the United Nations should continue for a certain
period its military and civilian police presence for the
maintenance of public order, as well as a minimum and
indispensable civilian personnel presence to provide
essential assistance for economic reconstruction and
nation-building.

The current situation in East Timor is extremely
tenuous. It is therefore of utmost importance not to
give a wrong signal which might exacerbate of the
situation. In the longer term, a staged reduction of the
United Nations presence may be required when the
situation on the ground improves. This process of
reduction, however, should be carried out in a careful
and gradual manner. Therefore we support the
Secretary-General's recommendation to maintain a
flexible approach that takes into account the evolving
situation on the ground.

In this context, I look forward to the Secretary-
General's recommendations on the composition and
mandate of a peacekeeping operation to succeed the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET) - recommendations to be contained
in his report to be submitted to the Security Council in
late October.

I must take this opportunity to comment on the
complex and difficult refugee problem. My delegation
would like to urge the new Indonesian Government to
make further efforts to comprehensively resolve the
refugee problem in West Timor, based on an
appropriate follow-up of the refugee registration
process during the past month. In this connection we
welcome the dispatch to West Timor of the inter-
agency security assessment mission and look forward
to its report. It is important for the international
community to continue to provide the refugees with
much-needed assistance in an effective manner.

In order for East Timor to become a truly
independent State, UNTAET's authority will have to be
transferred to the East Timorese people, with the
international community playing an advisory role.
This, of course, cannot happen all at once on the day of
independence. But it is imperative, during this
transition phase, to foster a sense of ownership among
the East Timorese and to help them develop the
necessary skills and capabilities for governing a nation.

The realization of an independent and stable East
Timor is a challenge that reaches beyond the Asia-
Paciflc context; it is in fact a matter of global
significance. Therefore, the international community
must remain committed to East Timor and continue to
assist its people in their efforts to develop the
capacities necessary for building an independent
nation. Japan, for its part, will give high priority to
human resources development in East Timor and will
continue its joint efforts with the Association of
South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) countries in this
regard.

In conclusion, I would like to stress again that the
strong commitment of the international community is
the key to maintaining public order and achieving a
viable East Timor. I sincerely hope that the election of
the Constituent Assembly will take place peacefully
and will pave the way towards building a peaceful,
democratic and prosperous East Timor.

