Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank our briefers, starting with my Swedish colleague
and, through her, I thank all who have done so much
on the Peacebuilding Commission and the Liberia
configuration. I would also like to thank Assistant
Secretary-General Zouev for his impressively
multilingual briefing, and Chid Liberty for what I
thought was an inspiring and uplifting story. I think
his comments showed just how important it is that
the Security Council remain focused on the impact of
conflicts on children and women. He really brought
that home to us in an inspiring and uplifting way.

In 2003, when the United Nations Mission in
Liberia (UNMIL) was launched, the then-Secretary-
General made his first report to the Council based on
assessment mission. He said in his report then:

"Liberia remains highly unstable, however, as
armed groups, militia and criminal elements
operate throughout the country"; (5/2003/875, para. 22)

"[police] officers lack training and have not been
paid since early 2002"; (ibid., para. 24)

"[n]early 1 million Liberians, or a third of the
population, are displaced"; (ibid., para. 30)

"[i]t is estimated that Liberia has some 27,000 to
38,000 combatants, many of whom are children."
(ibid; para. 42).

It is clear to us all that the Liberia of today is not
the Liberia of 2003. We in the Council should be united
in congratulating Liberia's leaders and people and in
thanking UNMIL for that remarkable achievement.
UNMIL has been able to keep and build the peace since
2003, which is a considerable feat given the history of
exclusion, political instability and cycles of violence.
We therefore pay tribute to Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Farid Zarif and to all United
Nations peacekeepers and staff who worked in Liberia
for their work and their duty. We particularly remember

the 202 United Nations peacekeepers who, sadly, gave
their lives in service to the people of Liberia and in the
service of all of us here who send those peacekeepers
on such missions.

I want to use this moment to reflect on some of
the lessons learned from UNMIL, in particular with
regard to what went well but also what could have been
done differently. They are important lessons not only
for other peacekeeping missions but also for how we
sustain peace more generally - a concept that we are all
debating in different formats at the moment. As to what
it did particularly well, UNMIL encouraged inclusive
national ownership and supported local capacity,
which are two key conditions for sustaining peace. The
change brought about in Liberia's police force from the
description by the then Secretary-General in 2003 to
what exists now is perhaps an excellent example of that.

UNMIL also coordinated extremely effectively
with international and regional actors, especially the
Economic Community of West African States, which
remains a shining light in the Council's engagement.
The good offices of UNMIL were very effective at
preventative diplomacy. For example, that helped
to ensure that a difficult election process remained
peaceful in accordance with the Constitution and the
rule of law. UNMIL demonstrated the strengths of a
comprehensive approach to sustaining peace. The joint
peacebuilding plan between the Mission, the United
Nations country team and the Government set clear
and shared priorities to guide the transition. Under
Sweden's leadership, the Peacebuilding Commission
played an invaluable role.

However, we should also be honest about the
shortcomings of the Mission and learn from those as
well. Arguably, the Mission stayed for too long and
created overdependence on the United Nations. A
reluctance to discuss an exit meant that the transition
planning started too late, which resulted in funding
gaps and United Nations development actors not
stepping up earlier. The Mission implementation plan
should have included benchmarks and timescales in
order to better focus staffing, resources and effort and
allow the Security Council to better track progress. In
the Security Council - and I know that it is a feature
of some of what the Secretary-General has said to us
over the past couple of months - we could perhaps
have ensured that there were more realistic mandates
with greater clarity on what constituted a sustainable
end state.

Looking forward, through an enhanced Resident
Coordinator office there is a clear role for the United
Nations to support the new Government in consolidating
stability and in promoting inclusive development. With
its commitment to peaceful, just and inclusive societies,
the framework of the Sustainable Development Goals
provides a strong basis for that. The United Nations
will also have a unique role in promoting coordination
among the international donors in a way that supports
the priorities ofthe Government of Liberia. The United
Nations must be careful that, while it absolutely must
provide that support, it must also not assume any of the
responsibilities of the new Government. We would urge
the Government to meet the commitments made in the
peacebuilding plan.

In 2003, in his report the then Secretary-General
concluded: "The road to lasting peace and security in
Liberia is still fraught with multiple and formidable
challenges" (ibid., para. 105). Liberia has certainly
faced its fair share of challenges in the past 15 years.
However, today we should celebrate the fact that, with
the support of the United Nations, the people of Liberia
have overcome them. Perhaps a reflections for all of us
around this table is the fact that Liberia was once an
intractable conflict. Once it hosted the largest United
Nation peacekeeping mission. Once it saw terrible
violence against women and children, including through
child soldiers. A quarter of a million people died in the
second civil war. There were the very familiar issues
of internally displaced persons, refugees and food
insecurity. Today we can look across some of the issues
on our agenda and, very sadly, note the similarities.
However, the ultimate lesson is perhaps that, with hard
work, sustained engagement and the determination
of us all, we can see more Liberias emerge out of
today's agenda.

