Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I wish to thank the briefers for their statements
and the Secretariat for its thorough and detailed report
and for its commitment and professionalism. It may rest
assured of our full support.

We are meeting today for the eighth time in
this format since the entry into force of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), on 16 January
2016. Its adoption was the outcome of the tireless
efforts undertaken by the international community
to achieve the common goal of ending the serious
nuclear-proliferation crisis in the region. The merits
of the agreement in terms of non-proliferation have
been established and verified by the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), which confirmed that
up until July 2019, Iran had complied with its nuclear
commitments. The E3 and the European Union (EU),
for their part, fully complied with their commitments,
including the lifting of sanctions set out under the
agreement, and went beyond that by making efforts to
facilitate legitimate trade between Europe and Iran.

Today's meeting is being held amid alarming
uncertainty. Like the Secretary-General, France
deplored the decision by the United States to withdraw
from the JCPOA and to reinstate national sanctions
against Iran. We are deeply concerned by the nuclear
measures taken by Iran since July last, which the IAEA
has described in its various reports. These recurrent
actions are at variance with the provisions of the
JCPOA and indicate a regrettable departure from the
agreement on the part of Iran and a serious threat of
nuclear proliferation. Iran must immediately return to
full compliance with its commitments under the J CPOA
and refrain from taking any additional measures at
variance with the agreement.

The commitments that have been undertaken do
not stop with the JCPOA but extend to cover the whole
of resolution 2231 (2015). We are especially troubled by
the information highlighted by the Secretary-General
in his report vis-a-vis the ongoing non-compliance by
Iran with several of the agreement's provisions. I am
referring here to various arms transfers to two other
actors in the Middle East, which must end. We have
taken note of the information in the report regarding
the dual attack conducted on 14 September last
targeting Saudi oil facilities. It is clear for us that Iran
bears responsibility therefor, as we established last
September with our British and German partners.

Furthermore, Iran continues to carry out particularly
destabilizing missile-related activities. I would mention
its efforts to develop a ballistic programme that is at
variance with resolution 2231 (2015). Iran is deploying
efforts, which France has flagged in the Council
on a number of occasions along with its British and
German partners, to improve the precision, reach and
lethality of those missiles. Beyond the development
of a domestic programme, Iran continues to engage in
ballistic material and technology transfers to State and
non-State actors in the Middle East, which attests to its
non-compliance with several Council resolutions; these
transfers are particularly destabilizing. It is vital that
Iran put an end to such activities and fully abide by the
resolutions adopted by the Council.

Given the mounting nuclear and regional
tensions in the Middle East, there is a vital need to
de-escalate and reach a political settlement through
ongoing diplomatic efforts and a commitment by all
parties. France, alongside its partners, stands ready
to engage to create the necessary conditions, promote
the achievement of a political settlement and foster
a de-escalation of tensions. Our commitment to the
JCPOA remains intact, as does our determination to
pursue our efforts on the basis of a broad and long-term
approach to its preservation. As the Foreign Ministers
of France, Germany and the United Kingdom and the
High Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy underlined on 11 November,
we remain ready to consider all mechanisms of the
JCPOA, including the dispute resolution mechanism,
to resolve issues related to Iran's compliance with its
commitments under the JCPOA.

All stakeholders must do their part to preserve our
leeway to act and make progress. It is our collective
responsibility, and in the interest of all parties, to work
together to preserve the nuclear agreement and reach a
diplomatic settlement within the existing framework.
France calls on everyone around this table to rally
around that objective in the interest of preserving
international peace and security, of which the Council
is the guarantor.

