Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, I wish to thank Special Envoy De Mistura for
his briefing and express our appreciation for his efforts
to facilitate a political settlement of the Syrian issue.

Thanks to the efforts of the Syrian people themselves
and with the support of the international community,
the situation in Syria remains generally stable and the
process for a political settlement has maintained its
momentum. The Syrian Government invited Special
Envoy De Mistura to visit Damascus for an in-depth
exchange of views on facilitating the political process
in Syria, including the formation of the constitutional
committee. The Russian Federation, Turkey and
Iran met in Moscow and jointly sent out a positive
message in support of the facilitation of the political
process in Syria. We appreciate the efforts of all of the
parties in that regard. China has always supported a
political solution to the Syrian issue. The international
community should push for the revitalization of the
Syrian-owned and Syrian-led political process, in
which Syria's sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity must be respected.

The Syrian conflict has been ongoing for more
than seven years. Resolving differences requires all
parties to work together and meet one another halfway.
The formation of a constitutional committee must be
conducted in a consistent and orderly manner, while
striking a balance between the legitimate concerns of
the Syrian Government and those of the other parties
to make sure that the committee is representative of
and acceptable to all in order to ensure that the Syrian
political process is sustainable and constructive. The
future of Syria will ultimately be determined by the
Syrian people themselves. The international community
should continue its support for the good offices of the
United Nations and Special Envoy De Mistura, properly
leverage the role of the Astana process and help to
ensure that the Syrian parties remain fully engaged
in dialogue and consultations, thereby facilitating
the efforts of the Syrian parties to gradually achieve
reconciliation, resolve differences and find a realistic
and lasting political solution. We hope that all the
parties concerned will jointly ensure the effective
functioning of the Idlib demilitarized zone, consolidate
the gains made in the fight against terrorism, assist
in the clearance of explosive remnants of war, rebuild
infrastructure and ensure the return of refugees and
internally displaced persons as soon as possible.

China stands ready to work with the international
community in a joint effort to facilitate a political
settlement in Syria, improve the humanitarian situation
and play a constructive role in restoring peace and
stability in Syria and the region.
