Mr. Castro C6rdoba (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): We thank you, Mr. President, and your
delegation for convening this important debate. As an
unarmed democracy, Costa Rica considers disarmament
and non-proliferation to be fundamental pillars of its
foreign policy, as they contribute to the well-being
and survival of humankind. Therefore, such topics are
always of the highest relevance to us.

My country recognizes the fundamental
responsibility of States, consistent with their respective
national and international obligations, to maintain the
effective security of all nuclear, chemical and biological
material under their control, including material used
for military purposes. We firmly believe that the best
tool available to nuclear-weapon States to increase
nuclear security within their territories is precisely a
reduction of non-civilian material, thereby contributing
to the laudable and broader goal of achieving general,
complete, verifiable and enduring nuclear disarmament
for the sake ofboth its citizens and the rest ofhumankind.

Once again, we iterate our support for negotiating a
universal legally binding instrument prohibiting nuclear
weapons, with a view to their complete and verifiable
elimination. We therefore welcome the adoption by
the First Committee of the General Assembly of draft
resolution A/C.1/71/L.41, entitled "Taking forward
multilateral nuclear disarmament negotiations", with
a View to establishing and maintaining a nuclear-
weapon-free world.

Globalization and technological development can
help the international community to limit new risks
and threats. However, these tools are a double-edged
sword, since they also allow for the possibility that in
the long term weapons of mass destruction may fall
into non-State hands. We must therefore continue to
work to promote the full implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) by all States; continue to seek cooperation
in order to facilitate that implementation; research
and develop mechanisms for monitoring and reporting
implementation; improve awareness of the information
gathered and its availability to States; encourage the
exchange of information on best practices and national
legislation that can assist other States; strengthen
international mechanisms for controlling technology
and the materials needed to develop such weapons;
and redouble efforts to prevent terrorist groups from
acquiring any weapons of mass destruction and
to control the export and import of the materials,
equipment and technology needed to develop them.
We continue to call for compliance with Article 26
of the Charter of the United Nations, which states that
the Security Council shall promote the establishment
and maintenance of international peace and security
with the least diversion for armaments of the world's
human and economic resources. We firmly believe that
a world without weapons of mass destruction is essential
if we are to achieve humankind's chief objectives, that
is, peace, security and sustainable development.

Our great challenge lies in effectively implementing
all the international instruments created for that purpose,
including resolution 2325 (2016), adopted this morning,
and of which Costa Rica was a sponsor. In Costa Rica,
from the President to the relevant institutions, we
are working and coordinating our efforts to achieve
a more robust national nuclear security strategy, in
accordance with the instruments of the International
Atomic Energy Agency, international standards and
recommendations for best practices. Similarly, in
the first quarter of 2017, with the assistance of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) and other international organizations, we will
be reviewing Costa Rica's current legislation in order
to improve the application of our obligations under
resolution 1540 (2004).

As a country without an army, we do not possess
any weapons of mass destruction and our laws prohibit
anything that when activated produces asphyxiating,
poisonous, paralysing, irritating or tear gases, as well
as any substance that has irreversible physical or mental
effects. That is why we will continue to work until a
world free of nuclear weapons and mass weapons of
mass destruction - for some a utopia but for us an
attainable goal - becomes a reality.

