Mr. Nishida (Japan): I would like to thank
Mr. Mahiga for his first briefing to the Council as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Somalia, and extend our appreciation for the very
strong messages from the Foreign Minister of Kenya
and the Permanent Representative of Somalia.

Japan continues to be concerned at the very
fragile security situation in Somalia, as evidenced by
the recent series of terrorist attacks against the
Transitional Federal Government (TFG) and the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM),
including the latest attack at Mogadishu Airport. It is
our view that, in order to stabilize the political and
security situation in Somalia, the TFG must first of all
strive for political unity and improvement of
management within itself. The international
community, in particular AMISOM. and the United
Nations, can then focus on making concerted efforts to
support the TFG. Japan hopes that the mini-summit
meeting on Somalia at the margins of the new General
Assembly session next week will lay a foundation for
countries, including donors, to further strengthen and
better coordinate their cooperation in support of
Somalia.

Japan takes note of the efforts of the TFG in
promoting the Djibouti process, including the
reorganization of its cabinet to include Ahlu Sunna Wal
Jama'a, since our last briefing in the Security Council.
However, we are concerned that little progress has
been made in the political dialogue with moderate
opposition groups. Japan believes that it is of the
utmost importance that the TFG intensify its efforts to
garner support from moderate opposition groups, and
that the role of international community is to help to
create an environment conducive to that end.

The role ofAMISOM. is significant for protecting
the TFG and maintaining security in Mogadishu. In this
regard, we pay tribute to the troop-contributing
countries, Burundi and Uganda, for their dedication
and commitment. Japan also appreciates the efforts of
the African Union and the Inter-Governmental
Authority on Development to achieve the mandated
AMISOM. troop level of 8,000, as authorized by
resolution 1910 (2010). In this context, we welcome
the recent deployment of an additional battalion by
Uganda, and hope that other countries that have
pledged deployments will follow through.

We recognize that the steady implementation of
United Nations logistical support to AMISOM. is very
important in supporting the Mission's work. In this
regard, Japan is ready to continue consultations on the
issue of AMISOM. contingent-owned equipment, taking
into account the course of discussions in the Security
Council towards adopting relevant resolutions. We
believe that this issue must be discussed as part of an
integrated strategy, under which the strengthening of
AMISOM. will contribute to the political process in
Somalia.

The efforts of the TFG and AMISOM. need to be
reinforced by the support of the international
community, including the United Nations. In this
regard, Japan appreciates the engagement of
Mr. Mahiga and the Secretariat in establishing a light
footprint presence in Mogadishu. Japan further
appreciates the continuing provision of humanitarian
assistance under very difficult circumstances.

Japan, for its part, has been actively engaged in
discussion on Somalia issues in the Security Council,
the International Contact Group on Somalia and other
forums, and has provided assistance of $124.4 million
since 2007, focusing on two pillars: humanitarian
assistance and restoration of infrastructure, on the one
hand; and the strengthening of security in Somalia,
mainly through the trust funds, in support of Somali
security institutions and AMISOM, on the other. We
are determined to continue our engagement to support
Somalia, in cooperation with all Member States.

