Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations Keita for her substantive
briefing. We regret the fact that we were unable to
hear the views of Mr. Ismail Wais, Special Envoy for
South Sudan of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), due to the fact that he is taking
part in a meeting of IGAD Ministers in Abidjan. The
sole way to stabilize the state of affairs in South Sudan
is through the launch of a genuinely inclusive process
of national reconciliation.

We do not think it is fair to continue to lay all the
blame for the persistent violence on Juba alone. The
Government has worked to meet the opposition halfway,
and now it is up to the opposition to do the same and
take a more constructive position. Unfortunately, all
we are seeing from them is destructive action instead.
There is no other way to describe the attempts to
launch a counteroffensive on the eve of the December
negotiations in Addis Ababa. We affirm our position
that it is counterproductive to impose targeted sanctions
or an arms embargo. Such measures will worsen the
crisis rather than easing it.

We are pleased with the speed with which the
Regional Protection Force (RPF) is deploying in South
Sudan. It should continue its operations while respecting
the country's sovereignty and the core principles of
peacekeeping. We are pleased that mutually acceptable
modalities for the operation are being worked out
with the South Sudan authorities, including the RPF's
deployment in the area of the capital's airport. It is
important that the advance unit is already patrolling
critical supply routes in the region of the capital and
that preparations for the arrival of the main part of the
force are on schedule. We urge South Sudan and the
troop-contributing countries to work together to ensure
that the RPF is fully operationalized.

We hope to see the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development's high-level revitalization forum
succeed. We note the mediation efforts of Kampala and
Nairobi and should not omit to mention the attempt in
Cairo in mid-November to consolidate the opposition
parties. However, we should once again emphasize the
importance of coordinating all the negotiation tracks.
It is also very important to ensure that the approaches
of the regional Powers to the settlement in South Sudan
remain united. Any destructive competition or attempt
to advance narrow national agendas via the South
Sudan efforts could adversely affect the peace process.

While noting the balanced nature of the Secretary-
General's latest monthly report, we should also point
out that much of the factual information in it has
already been presented to the Council in one form
or another. We believe that the overall situation with
the deployment of the Regional Protection Force
should enable us to think seriously about reducing the
frequency of the reports with a view to improving the
general effectiveness of our work.

