The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank Major
General Serra for his briefing.

I now give the floor to Major General Obi.

General Obi: I have been asked to speak as
Force Commander on the challenges of dealing with
a complex political environment in peacekeeping
operations. 1 will draw from my experience as Force
Commander of the defunct United Nations Mission in
the Sudan (UNMIS) and of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS), with particular reference
to the inter-communal crisis that took place in Jonglei
state, South Sudan, at the turn of the year, in December
2011 and January 2012.

Briefly, by way of background, the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement (CPA), which was signed in Naivasha
in 2005, left several issues unresolved by the time South
Sudan seceded on 9 July 2011. Among the unresolved
issues are border demarcation and the sharing of oil
revenues, both of which have become pivotal issues
in the most recent crisis between the Sudan and
South Sudan, with accompanying challenges to the
implementation of the UNMISS mandate.

As to the challenges, in the case of the previous
Mission, UNMIS, the Abyei issue posed a range of
challenges. Of particular note is the challenge of
protecting civilians when parties to the Agreement
were in conflict, as was the case in May 2011. The issue
of the commitment, or lack of it, of the parties was
well highlighted in that case. As Force Commander,
one had to remain actively engaged with the militaries
on both sides and also work closely with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General at the political
level. Doing that ensured that air routes were kept open,
reinforcements made possible, certain evacuations
carried out and humanitarian operations conducted.

The South Kordofan crisis, at the point of liquidating
UNMIS, posed a complex range of challenges. One of
those was having United Nations troops in enclaves,
for example Kauda in the Nuba Mountains and
Julud, which effectively became out of control of the
parties to the CPA. The challenges at that point were
complex - having to deal with the liquidation of the
mission, mandate implementation and even protecting
and sustaining the troops themselves, in a thoroughly
complex environment. Again, active engagement
with all parties concerned was crucial under such
circumstances.

In the current Mission, UNMISS, some of the
challenges naturally stem from the mandate of
the Mission, which on the face of it looks fairly
straightforward but, as is so often the case, the devil is in
the details. A key word in the mandate is "support". Of
course, we support peace consolidation, the protection
of civilians and conflict mitigation. This means that
we must provide support to the Government of the
Republic of South Sudan as it fulfils its responsibility
to protect civilians. But what is also key is the task of
UNMISS to protect civilians in imminent danger when
the Government of the Republic of South Sudan is not
doing so.

Out of this arise the military tasks and, again,
support and assistance to the Government of the
Republic of South Sudan in creating and sustaining
a safe and secure environment. Of course, that in
itself causes challenges, since the Government of the
Republic of South Sudan has occasionally had priorities
other than ours, not the least of which is engaging in
conflict on the border with the Sudan. There is a real
risk in UNMISS not being seen as committing efforts
and resources towards the protection of civilians, and
instead giving the impression of simply backfilling the
Sudan People's Liberation Army (SPLA) while it fights
on the border.

Equally, there is a perception among the people of
South Sudan that UNMISS is failing in its mission to
protect civilians, since it appears to be doing nothing
to prevent the Sudanese Armed Forces from bombing
civilians near the border; thus, a question arises
regarding the need for a Chapter VII mandate.

Of course, we can do nothing but report what we
see to New York for the Security Council to take action,
as getting into direct conflict with a Member State
would fall outside our mandate. The mandate is not
well understood by the people of South Sudan and much
effort has to been expended, including in organizing
seminars and various other outreach programmes,
to explain just what our mandate is. The absence of a
border monitoring mechanism has not helped issues
in that case. Also, the mandate recognizes national
ownership and primary responsibility, yet the Mission
must be prepared to protect when the host nation is not
doing so. That, to me, is a leading rule.

Of course, when humanitarian organizations are
working in the border areas to sustain those who are
fleeing fighting, it behooves us to ensure that they
can operate in a safe and secure environment. But
understandably, some humanitarian organizations are
uncomfortable with that arrangement because of its
inherent conflict with their humanitarian principles. So
it often happens that one cannot win. I must say, however,
that we have been actively involved in the protection
of civilians, even in those areas, in conjunction with
humanitarian agencies - the Yida and Pariang areas
are two of the many examples.

Finally, I should like to present to the Council the
dilemma of what we should do if it is the SPLA itself
that is threatening civilians. My rules of engagement
would allow the soldiers under my command to use
force - and indeed lethal force - if required, but to
do so could in some cases, I sense, be a game changer
in terms of our relationship with the SPLA and the host
nation and the amount of consent that we currently
enjoy. My fellow Force Commanders may have their
views on that, and I would be pleased to share them.
Those are some of challenges of dealing with a complex
political environment.

As to the Jonglei crisis, let us turn to the events
of late December 2011 and January this year. Many
will be familiar with how cattle and access to grazing
areas and water are pivotal to the lives of the people in
that region of Africa and how cattle rustling, among
other acts, often results in violent clashes and many
deaths. Thus it was in 2011 when, following attacks and
revenge attacks, the Murle tribe attacked the Lou Nuer,
and the Lou Nuer chose to exact their revenge in late
December, and advanced with a strength of over 6,000,
which is a conservative estimate, upon Likuangole, a
Murle community.

The Mission's early warning early/response strategy
paid off, leading to the spotting ofthe advancing column
on 23 December 2011. Before that time, we conducted
daily air and ground patrols that enabled us to spot the
advancing column. That information was immediately
shared with Government officials, security agencies
and the humanitarian community, which enabled those
in harm's way to move out while others were evacuated
by the Mission.

UNMISS carried out necessary deployments
and reinforcements, along with the SPLA and, later,
the Southern Sudan Police Service. We had rightly
identified Pibor as the centre of gravity, as it is the
seat of Government and county headquarters, with a
substantial civilian population. A decision was taken
to prevent the advancing ravaging youth from causing
harm to the civilians in the town. The decision was also
shared with the Government of the Republic of South
Sudan and the SPLA, and together we took the measures
necessary to protect civilians in the town.

The Mission's crisis management support team
had been activated upon receipt of the report of an
advancing column of armed Lou Nuer youth, in order
to assess our options. It was quite clear to me that
we had to be prepared to intervene to support the
SPLA, provide it with physical and moral support,
and encourage it to take responsibility in protecting
civilians. I therefore directed that our troops in
settlements - including Likuangole, Gumuruk and
other front-line settlements - be reinforced.

Clearly, as a member of the senior leadership team
in the Mission, I was required to act at the political
level. By acknowledging that the ultimate solution to
the problem could only be a South Sudanese solution,
we agreed that Vice-President Riek Machar should
be flown to the area to speak to the Lou Nuer. That
decision, and holding my troops in Likuangole to
facilitate his visit in the face of such a force, were very
crucial decisions I had to take.

There then followed a lengthy process ofnegotiation
and mediation, but the Lou Nuer youth, having
attacked Likuangole, proceeded forward to Pibor,
where most of the Murle from smaller settlements,
including Likuangole, had moved. By those actions, we
encouraged the SPLA to be also prepared to defend. I
moved my armoured personnel carriers over a distance
of 200 kilometres through muddy terrain to reinforce
and embolden the SPLA. With our APCs in manoeuvre,
the Lou Nuer were engaged in Pibor. Having taken
some casualties, that became a turning point and the
Lou Nuer had to withdraw.

Now, what are the lessons learned? Our early
warning strategy had paid off. Our crisis management
support team had activated in good time. Efforts
were shared with Governments, which emphasized
the importance of cooperation with the host nation.
Together, we worked with the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees as a team and
a force multiplier, including by using the media.

What, then, did not work well? Poor communications
and the absence of military helicopters were very
crucial. It became difficult to reinforce the troops
because some of the civilian helicopters would not
carry our ammunition, classifying them as dangerous
cargo. Finally, given that the major events took place in

late December 2011, a few months into the lifespan of
the Mission, there was a shortage of required staff and
the Mission had not fully generated its force. While the
force had the available combat power, half of it had to
be committed towards that operation.

Having said that, I would like to say that collectively,
with the Government and the people of South Sudan,
although there were casualties, we were able to prevent
a situation in which we would have lost more people.

The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank Major
General Obi for his briefing.

I now give the floor to Major General Goulart.


