Mr. Kinkel (Germany) (spoke in German; interpretation provided by the delegation): Allow me first
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on the way in which
you have steered the Security Council through a very
difficult month.

The recent dramatic developments in the Palestinian
territories and in Jerusalem fill us with grave concern. I
would like, on behalf of my Government, to express our
sympathy for the victims and relatives of the Victims on
both sides. The Federal Government will immediately make
available financial assistance for the medical treatment and
medical care of the victims.

The recent incidents have shocked the region and
endangered the process of peace and autonomy, which is so
vital to the region. This is a process without alternative, a
process that must continue. Those on both sides who are in
a position of political responsibility must remain level-
headed at this time. We must do everything in our power
to put an immediate end to the violence and bloodshed;
there must be no further casualties, no more people killed
and wounded.

Following other encouraging developments of the last
few years, and now that the cessation of the East-West
conflict has put an end to so many awful situations, the
developments in the Palestinian territories and in the
Middle East have become very promising. There must be
no return to violence and terror. I believe that on such a
day, on such an occasion, it should also be said quite
clearly that what has already been achieved in the Middle
East peace process has created a situation in which both
sides were awarded the Nobel Peace Prize. I think this
must be said.

A return to the negotiating table is indispensable
now. I believe we should appeal to both sides to try to
negotiate in a constructive manner, oriented towards
achieving the objectives they are working for. What must
now take place is a meeting between Prime Minister
Netanyahu and President Arafat. This is of course of
central importance. Yesterday I tried to make a
contribution towards this end in numerous telephone
conversations, as did Federal Chancellor Helmut Kohl,
and I warmly welcome the initiative taken by the
Egyptian President, who invited the parties to Cairo.

Of course, the weapons must remain silent, but what
we need above all is a general de-escalation of the
situation. Another factor I deem to be very important is
that the confidence that has been lost should be restored,
and this applies to both sides. I therefore believe that the
meeting not only has to take place, but that it ought to
lead to concrete results.

My third point is that I should like to appeal to the
parties to implement the agreements already entered into,
to stick to their spirit and their letter of them, because I
believe that only in this way can we bring about a
calming of the situation.

The issue of Hebron will have to be solved, and of
course - and here I refer back to the speech I made
earlier this week to the General Assembly - a solution
has to be found to the situation of the people sealed off
in the Palestinian territories, because the people have to
get the feeling that the peace agreement is paying off, that
it is something from which they too benefit. Both sides
must contribute to avoiding an escalation of the situation.
And of course each side must respect the religious
feelings of the other, and must respect the holy sites. Here
I warmly welcome the announcement that the tunnel is to
be closed.

We Europeans feels a special responsibility, and
therefore Prime Minister Major, President Chirac, and
Federal Chancellor Kohl urgently appealed to Prime

 

Minister Netanyahu and President Arafat today. They said,
"You have to sit down at one table, you have to regain
confidence in each other. The peace process has to
continue."

I would like to appeal to all parties involved: please
let reason return. The whole world is looking to this region,
filled with a great feeling of hope, and at the same time
scared that the peace process might have come to an end,
might be in danger. We have the feeling that a renewed
effort is called for now. We must not allow the peace
process to die together with the victims. That would be
terrible, but there is still time.

