I would like to express Germany's deepest condolences to the Government of Indonesia and the family of the peacekeeper who lost his life in the ambush on 22 June. The incident tragically demonstrates the level of persisting violence. We remain extremely concerned about the deteriorating situation in the east and the increasing activities of armed groups, especially in North Kivu and Ituri. Germany agrees with the Secretary-General, who, in his report (S/2020/554), observes that a military-only strategy will not lead to lasting stability. We are particularly concerned about the high number of human rights violations, most notably sexual and gender-based violence. Although the number of such violations committed by State security actors has decreased, the overall high numbers of human rights violations remains alarming. The dire humanitarian situation continues to hit the most vulnerable groups - women, children and internally displaced people - the hardest. Given that some 300,000 new internally displaced persons have arrived since the beginning of the year in Ituri alone, the protection of civilians and humanitarian assistance must remain the top priority. We take this opportunity to reaffirm our support for the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire. We urge all armed groups in the Democratic Republic of the Congo to adhere this call. We would like to reiterate Germany's support for the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and Special Representative of the Secretary-General Leila Zerrougui. MONUSCO remains essential in supporting the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The situation has become even more challenging due to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and the unsatisfactory security situation. We commend Special Representative Zerrougui and the Mission for adapting to the new conditions on the ground. We encourage the Mission to further enhance its abilities in the country to implement the recommendations made in the report by Lieutenant General Carlos Alberto dos Santos Cruz and to put a special focus on fulfilling its mandate to protect civilians. On the reconfiguration of MONUSCO, we understand the difficulties posed by COVID-19. Still, it remains important to ensure national ownership in developing benchmarks. These benchmarks must be realistic if we want to achieve a sustainable and conditions-based reconfiguration. COVID-19 has a worrisome impact on the security, socioeconomic and humanitarian situation. For instance, due to limited capacities, as vaccination rates are low and decreasing, so the vulnerability of children to such diseases as polio, measles and yellow fever is increasing. This shows that international support and solidarity is urgently needed. As part of the COVID-19 Global Humanitarian Response Plan, Germany has already provided €300 million in additional funds for COVID-19-related humanitarian assistance, and is currently the fourth-largest donor to the Plan. The Plan includes a regional response plan and a humanitarian response plan for the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In addition, Germany is very positively disposed towards providing support to MONUSCO in the form of medical facilities through its Enable and Enhance Initiative. We are concerned that the pandemic might undermine political, security and socioeconomic reforms in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. For this reason, it is important that the Government continue on its path of reform, especially in terms of the security sector, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, and the justice sector. The population needs a new perspective: powerful democratic institutions, a strengthened rule of law and the fight against impunity and corruption are key to achieving sustainable peace, stability and development. Before concluding, let me also say a word about regional cooperation. Against the background of severe security, socioeconomic, health and humanitarian challenges, such cooperation is absolutely crucial. Supply networks empowering armed groups must be cut off, and illicit war economies must be eliminated. But regional collaboration creates new legal and sustainable opportunities for development and economic growth. In this context, Mr. Usseni Jamael's assessment is very important: fighting the illicit trafficking in minerals and transforming such activities into legitimate sources of revenue are an essential part of the reform process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
