Mr. Mukerji (India): Today is the auspicious
festival of Divali in my country, and I greet you, Madam
President, on this occasion.

Let me begin by thanking you, Madam, for
organizing this open debate on the working methods
of the Security Council. I thank your delegation for
circulating the concept note (S/2014/725) for this debate.
I put on record our deep appreciation of your stewardship
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Procedural Questions during the period 2013/2014.
The working methods of the Council are of paramount
importance and interest to all States Members of the
United Nations, given the fact that under Article 25 of
the United Nations Charter, all Member States "agree
to accept and carry out the decisions of the Security
Council".

The concept note advises Member States that the
issue of Security Council reform, which is being debated
by us in the General Assembly, does not constitute the
subject of this debate. We beg to differ with this advice.
Any debate on its working methods must have the issue of
Security Council reform as its overarching framework.
The three paragraphs on the Security Council in the
2005 Outcome document of the sixtieth anniversary
of the Summit (General Assembly resolution 60/1) are
clear on the subject. The accountability of the Council
to the wider membership of the United Nations, as well
as the need for transparency in its functioning, require
us to address the shortfalls in the Council's working
methods in the context of the urgent need for early
reforms of the Council. My delegation therefore aligns
itself with the statement delivered earlier today by the
Permanent Representative of Saint Lucia on behalf of
the L.69 group.

In the interest of brevity, I would like to speak

today on two issues related to the topic of our debate.
These are, first, the shortfalls in the methods which the
Council is using in drawing up the mandates of United
Nations peacekeeping operations, and, secondly, the
impact of the Council's particular use of its working
methods, which we feel dilute the international effort
against terrorism, which is fast emerging as the single
most important challenge to the maintenance of
international peace and security.

On the first issue of peacekeeping mandates,
Madam President, you have yourself been witness to
the complete disregard in the working methods of the
Council for the clear provisions and obligations set out
in Article 44 of the United Nations Charter. Whereas
the Article calls for troop-contributing countries not
represented in the Council to be invited "before" such
mandates are drawn up "to participate in the decisions
of the Security Council concerning the employment
of contingents of that Member's armed forces", India,
for example, has not been so consulted. This is despite
the fact that India is the single largest contributor of
troops to United Nations peacekeeping operations,
having contributed more than 170,000 troops in 43 of
the 69 peacekeeping operations mandated so far by the
Council.

What is the impact of this shortfall in the working
methods of the Council? It is clear that a major casualty
has been the absence of the contribution that troop-
contributing countries could give the Council during
Article 44 consultations on issues such as deployment,
the required profiles of troops and equipment, as well as
the nuances of strategy. In the process, the perceptions
available within the United Nations membership on
how to actually use peacekeeping to bring about peace
have been sacrificed in favour of enforcing the will of
a small, privileged minority within the Council to look
at peacekeepers as instruments to wage war. This has
resulted in an increasing demand for more and more
resources, military and financial, and experiments
with new technology. This demand is at the expense of
a politically brokered peaceful settlement of disputes,
which, in our View, is also the most effective and
sustainable way to protect the civilians caught up in
conflicts where peacekeeping operations are mandated,
not to mention the steadily rising toll on the lives of
United Nations peacekeepers themselves.

On the second issue of the impact of the working
methods on countering terrorism, we strongly believe
that the Council must seriously and transparently
take the measures available to it under the Charter to
require Member States to implement its resolutions on
countering terrorism without exception. To condone
the use of terrorism on account of perceived political
purposes is counterproductive and will engulf more
and more Member States in an ever-widening spiral of
violence and destruction.

We therefore specifically call for the Council's
working methods to include a mandatory time-bound
reporting requirement to the wider membership of
the United Nations on the implementation of Council
resolutions on countering terrorism. Let us make a
beginning on this proposal by having a report to the
wider membership of the United Nations with respect
to the latest such resolution adopted by the Council,
resolution 2178 (2014), of 24 September. We would
be interested especially in the Council's assessment
of the implementation of operative paragraphs 11 and
12 of that resolution, which deal with international
cooperation. My delegation would like to participate in
any open and transparent exercise that the Council may
organize under its working methods on this subject,
given the fact that my country has been one of the
longest-suffering victims of terrorism.

We have noted the use ofthe working methods ofthe
Council to regulate the mechanism of the Ombudsman,
created by the Council in 2009. We note that though the
General Assembly has the responsibility for electing
the non-permanent members of the Council, the
appointment of the Ombudsman is outside the purview
of the General Assembly. As the Ombudsman deals
with substantive aspects of international law, including
the implementation of Security Council resolutions
pertaining to countering terrorism, we have concerns
regarding the operation of this mechanism within the
opaque working methods of the Council. Matters are
exacerbated when we look at the highly unsatisfactory
nature of the annual report of the Council to the General
Assembly, in which there is no transparency or detail
regarding the way in which the Council actually works.

The Council's provision that "where the
Ombudsperson recommends that the Committee
consider delisting, the individual or entity will be
delisted unless, within 60 days, the Committee decides
by consensus to maintain the listing" appears to us to be
contradictory to the uniform application of the rule of
law, which would impact adversely on the use of legal,
as opposed to political, means to counter terrorism.

To conclude, we would reiterate that our interest
in participating in this debate stems from the primary
role given by the United Nations Charter to the Council
for upholding international peace and security. Our
concern is that the current working methods, which
have been provisionally applied since the Council was
established, have deviated from the clear provisions, and
indeed, objectives of the Charter of the United Nations,
making the Council ineffective and unrepresentative of
the world as it is on 23 October 2014. Can we at least
expect the Council to adopt clearly defined working
procedures, taking into account our views expressed in
this debate, by the time our Organization celebrates its
seventieth anniversary in September 2015?

