Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to begin by
welcoming the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Ghassan Salame, and to thank him and
Ambassador Skoog for their informative briefings.
I would also warmly welcome His Excellency
Mr. Mohamed Siala to the Council.

Japan reiterates its support for the ongoing process
among the Libyan people, in accordance with the
action plan presented by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in September. We support the
Special Representative's efforts to advance the process.
The window of opportunity must be seized now. We
are all aware that the negotiations will not be easy and
that they will occasionally experience some bumps
along the road. The important thing is to maintain the
momentum of the dialogue in order to complete the
transition, and that should be driven by the will of the
Libyan people.

The Council should support the process by
providing the necessary assistance. In particular,
parties that have influence over relevant actors should
contribute to containing any action that may negatively
impact the process. Japan's Foreign Minister Kono
directly conveyed Japan's readiness to support the
Libyan-owned process to Foreign Minister Siala when
they met in September.

Reflecting this commitment, we are now
considering relocating our embassy to Tunis so that
we can more closely follow the situation on the ground
and strengthen cooperation with relevant countries and
organizations. At the same time, in order for the year-
long process to maintain its momentum and eventually
bear fruit, the Council should not only be supporting
dialogues among influential political figures, but must
also consider how to strengthen the confidence and
support of the Libyan people in the process. In order
to build the confidence of the people in the ongoing
political process, the provision of basic public services
and enhancement of the capacity of the Government of
National Accord and local Governments are essential.
Assistance to internally displaced persons is also
much needed.

We appreciate the action plan, as well as the
presidential statement that followed (S/PRST/2417/ 19),
recognizing the need to address these issues in parallel
with the political process. Japan has been actively
supporting local peacebuilding efforts in Libya, such
as capacity- and institution-building, economic and
social development and local reconciliation. These
activities aim to help consolidate peace and stability
from the local level. We have prioritized contributions
to the Stabilization Facility for Libya, which is led
by the Government of National Accord, and we are
considering further peacebuilding assistance.

I would like to conclude by reiterating Japan's
strong commitment to helping the Libyans overcome
their challenges. The Libyan Political Agreement
remains the only viable framework for Libya's
transitional period, and we will continue to work in
close coordination with the international community
for its success.

