Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): We
welcome Special Representative De Mistura back to
the Council and thank him for his briefing today. We
commend his strong leadership of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). I hope
that he will convey our deep appreciation to the
Mission's staff for the work that they do on behalf of
all of us to help build a stronger Afghanistan.
Also, we wish to extend a special welcome to
Ambassador Tanin and thank him for addressing the
Council once again. I wish to underscore our support
for strengthening Afghan leadership and sovereignty,
which Ambassador Tanin discussed earlier. The
transition to an Afghan security lead, the beginning of
United States troop reductions in July, and the ongoing
efforts to establish a new United States-Afghanistan
strategic partnership declaration are all important
aspects of restoring Afghan ownership.

Let me touch on three issues this morning. First,
the process of transferring security responsibility to the
Afghan National Security Forces is beginning. At their
11 March meeting in Brussels, the defence ministers of
States members of NATO and the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) endorsed the
recommendations of the joint Afghan-NATO Inteqal
Board to begin the transition to Afghan-led security
responsibility. In the coming days, we expect that
President Karzai will announce which areas of
Afghanistan will first undergo this transition. That
decision will be based on a thorough assessment of
conditions on the ground performed jointly by the
Afghan Government and ISAF in the months since
Lisbon. The transition process will be gradual and will
further bolter Afghan capacity.

Although this transition will largely be security-
focused, it will also have an important civilian role. We
are pleased that the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2011/l20*) identifies several areas where the United
Nations can play a valuable role in this process,
including mediation, conflict resolution, human rights,
Afghan capacity-building and supporting Afghan
coordination of international assistance. We encourage
continued strong cooperation between UNAMA and
ISAF as the transition gets under way.

Secondly, we welcome the conclusion of last
year's legislative elections with the 26 January
inauguration of the Wolesi Jirga. The Secretary-
General has concluded that despite significant flaws in
the elections, Afghanistan's electoral institutions
performed admirably under extremely challenging
circumstances. We concur. We understand that the
Special Court has begun a recount of elections in
several provinces. We remain concerned about any
actions that could undermine the integrity of the
electoral process, and we urge all Afghan institutions to
act within their clearly defined areas of competence, in
accordance with the relevant Afghan laws and the
Constitution. We look forward to having the United
Nations continue its partnership with the different
branches of the Afghan Government as they carry out
their respective functions under Afghan law, including
the electoral reform process.

11-2662]

Thirdly, as Secretary of State Hillary Clinton
noted in her remarks at the Asia Society last month, the
year 2011 will see the confluence of three surges: a
joint Afghan and international military offensive
against Al-Qaida and the Taliban; a civilian campaign
to bolster the Afghan Government, economy and civil
society; and an intensified diplomatic push to bring the
Afghan conflict to an end and chart a new and secure
future for the region.

The security and governance gains produced by
the Afghan and international military and civilian
surges have, as Secretary Clinton put it, created an
opportunity to get serious about a responsible
reconciliation process led by Afghans and supported by
intense regional diplomacy and strong United States
backing. Under Afghan leadership and ownership,
important efforts are already under way to begin a
national discussion on reconciliation. President Karzai
has formed the High Peace Council, which includes
representatives from across Afghanistan. Council
leaders are holding meetings in key provinces
throughout the country with tribal leaders, civil society,
including women, and villagers to hear their hopes and
concerns. They are working to form local councils to
begin engaging the insurgents and the broader
community. We fully support this Afghan effort. We
also applaud UNAMA's efforts to support the High
Peace Council through the Salaam Support Group.

Over the past two years, the Government of
Afghanistan and the international community have laid
out clear conditions for insurgents who wish to
abandon the fight and rejoin Afghan society. They must
renounce violence, cut all ties with Al-Qaida and abide
by the Afghan Constitution, including its provisions
protecting the rights of women and minorities.
Insurgents who choose the path of peace will find a
willing partner in the United States.

Reconciliation will require the support of
Afghanistan's neighbours, including, most importantly,
Pakistan. Pakistan has legitimate concerns that the
Afghan Government must acknowledge, but Pakistan
also has important responsibilities, including taking
firm action to prevent the Afghan Taliban from using
Pakistani territory as a safe haven to continue its
insurgency. Pressure from Pakistan will help push the
Taliban towards the negotiating table and away from
Al-Qaida.

Let me also comment briefly on recent civilian
casualties. Our principal goal remains to protect the
Afghan people. We deeply regret the unintended injury
or death of any civilian in the course of military action.
The United States and international forces have made
extraordinary efforts to reduce civilian casualties and
have seen some success, although there is more work
to be done. Insurgents, on the other hand, are
responsible for at least 75 per cent of civilian
casualties, and they use innocent civilians as human
shields, extort them for support, take them as hostages
and tax their harvests.

We believe that this year holds great promise for
Afghanistan and the wider region. We are committed to
continued support for the Government and the people
of Afghanistan as they move beyond the current
conflict towards a brighter future.

Finally, the United States supports the extension
of the UNAMA mandate for a further 12 months and
thanks the German Mission for its leadership of these
negotiations.

