Mr. Martinez Blanco (Honduras) (interpretation from Spanish): Allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. We are well aware of your experience and your
great professional qualities, and we therefore have no doubt
that the work of the Security Council under your guidance
will be crowned with success. I hardly need to say that, to
that end, my delegation will provide all the cooperation we
possibly can.

We wish also to thank and congratulate your
predecessor, Ambassador Gambari, and the entire
delegation of Nigeria on the outstanding work they did last
month in the Security Council.

Throughout the conflict in the former Yugoslavia,
particularly in the territories of Bosnia and Herzogovina and
of Croatia, there have been systematic and massive
violations of human rights, as well as grave violations of
international humanitarian law. The practice of "ethnic
cleansing" has been the direct cause of that situation.
Through mass killings, persecution, discrimination, illegal
detentions, torture, rape, summary executions, relocation of
populations by force, forced labour, deportation of civilians,
confiscation of property and destruction of homes, we have
seen in Bosnian and Croatian territory the systematic
elimination of one ethnic group by another. All of these
acts deserve the condemnation and repudiation of the
international community. They have been described in
several reports of bodies entrusted with promoting respect
for human rights.

The Council has adopted many resolutions and
issued many Presidential statements condemning in the
strongest possible terms all those violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law. Furthermore, on
many occasions all the parties have been reminded of
their obligation to comply with the Geneva Conventions
of 1949 for the protection of victims of war and the direct
responsibility of those persons who commit or order
violations of those Conventions.

Today, even though we are close to achieving a
peaceful solution to the conflict in the former Yugoslavia,
in particular in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and despite the
Council's repeated appeals the Bosnian Serb party
continues to violate humanitarian law. To our
consternation, we have received reports of grave
violations of human rights in Srebrenica and in the
regions of Banja Luka and Sanski Most, which my
delegation strongly condemns.

We are similarly concerned by the information
provided by United Nations humanitarian organs
regarding the situation that persists in Sectors North,
South and West of the Republic of Croatia. In its
resolution 1009 (1995) and its presidential statements of
7 September and 3 October of this year, the Council
pronounced itself on this question, condemning the
actions of the Croatian Government against United
Nations personnel and demanding that it respect the rights
of the local Serbian population, including its right to
remain or return in conditions of security. The Croatian
Government is under the obligation to take measures to
prevent violations of international humanitarian law in
those Sectors and to determine the identities of the
persons responsible so that they can be tried and
sentenced. It must also rescind the menacing and illegal
deadlines it has imposed on refugees for returning to
Croatia to claim their possessions.

My delegation considers it deplorable that the parties
have not fulfilled their commitment to allow the
representatives of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, the International Committee of the Red
Cross and other humanitarian organizations to have access
to persons displaced and persons reported missing or
detained in the regions of Srebrenica, Zepa, Banja Luka
and Sanski Most. Such access is of priority importance in

 

order to determine what actually happened in the cases
reported. It is equally important that all the parties to the
conflict in the former Yugoslavia cooperate fully with the
International Tribunal established by the Council in 1993,
which is entrusted with the investigation of violations of
humanitarian law committed since 1991 and the trials of all
persons responsible for them.

For these reasons, my delegation will vote in favour
of the draft resolution now under discussion.

