As the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic persists, Governments across the globe are taking measures to address the unprecedented political and socioeconomic impacts of the pandemic on their populations. For most countries, the challenges are multifaceted. Kenya therefore commends Indonesia for bringing the global reality of pandemics and their implications for peacebuilding and sustaining peace before the Security Council for consideration. Resolution 2532 (2020), adopted on | July and regarding COVID-19, is further evidence that we need to act together to address the challenges posed by pandemics in sustaining peace and peacebuilding. Efforts to flatten the curve are happening amid diverse realities in the peace-conflict continuum. The multiplicity of these challenges are indeed a test of international crisis management. It is therefore critical for the Council to have an established framework to mitigate the threat of pandemics in future, including in the areas of sustaining peace, health and economic security. Climate change and environmental challenges have also proved to be additional hurdles that countries have to overcome during the pandemic. Kenya and other countries in the Horn of Africa and the Central African region are addressing the pandemic amidst other competing emergencies, including floods and waves of locust infestations. The various briefings by Secretary-General Antonio Guterres, former Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and Ms. Sarah Cliffe, Director of the Center on International Cooperation, have further demonstrated that pandemics have multifaceted implications on peace and security and are spiking humanitarian needs, not to mention reverting peacebuilding and development gains with a disproportionate impact on the poorest and most vulnerable. Therefore, pandemics cannot be addressed solely as health concerns, particularly in conflict-affected regions and countries emerging from conflict. In that regard, it is indeed critical to strengthen socioeconomic capacities of countries in alignment with the Sustainable Development Goals, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and Agenda 2063 of the African Union (AU). Given the significant impact of COVID-19 on the global economy, there is an even greater possibility of setbacks to the gains that have been achieved in ensuring food security, poverty eradication, the growth of domestic industries and regional integration. We saw significant setbacks during the 2014-2015 Ebola crisis in West Africa, and therefore there is a need to prioritize, invest and identify new security partners, including health and technology experts, to build resilient infrastructure. The role of regional and subregional organizations in addressing the impact of COVID-19 is critical. The African Union has continued to champion the region's work in solidarity with the ongoing mitigation efforts through the Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention to ensure Africa is not left behind when it comes to production of vaccines and essential equipment. Existing fragility and conflict situations are some of the triggers that can transform a health crisis into a security threat. The pandemic's impact in fragile and conflict-affected countries, for example, in the Sahel, the Horn of Africa and other regions that are in protracted conflict situations, is proof that pandemics can be an evolving threat to peace. This health crisis also has the potential to create a platform where violent extremism and terrorism can further thrive, and has proved to create interruptions to ongoing peace negotiations. In that regard, Kenya stands behind the Secretary-General's call, on 23 March, for silencing the guns globally. We also fully align ourselves with the call of the AU Commission Chairperson, His Excellency Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat's, on 8 April, that all of us focus on collectively fighting COVID-19 as a united global community. The COVID-19 pandemic is also having a huge impact on peace operations in mission settings. Similarly, humanitarian aid flows and ongoing peace negotiations between warring parties have also been negatively impacted, particularly in refugee and internally displaced persons camps. In that regard, my delegation wishes to recognize the sacrifice of peacekeepers, local peacebuilders, community leaders, women and youth organizations, civil society and health personnel in Africa and globally. The implementation of a global ceasefire will ensure that peace operations continue to deliver on their mandates in times of health crises. National and regional policies that include transparency and accountability measures during pandemics will further ensure the safety of all personnel, including the free movement of humanitarian aid to the most vulnerable. We have also witnessed the essential contribution of women in peace operations. namely, women as community leaders and also as front-line health responders. However, women and girls have also been disproportionately hit by the health, economic and social impacts of the pandemic. The pandemic-related security situation creates an important opportunity to broaden and hasten the implementation of the existing recommendations contained in the resolutions on women and peace and security and on youth, peace and security, particularly with respect to the pillars of participation, protection, prevention and partnership within the pandemic framework. Additionally, the international community, upon request from national stakeholders, can rally around fragile countries and offer support in building resilient critical governance infrastructure, particularly health-care systems, and ensure the training of personnel and the provision of essential equipment. Access to functioning health facilities can mitigate the risk posed by the health and insecurity nexus. The pandemic has also put tremendous strain on national health-care systems and economies across the globe, no matter the country's development level. Consequently, the health crisis also has the potential of exacerbating underdevelopment as a trigger to instability, particularly in already weak economies. Sustainable funding is therefore essential for the sustainability of essential infrastructure. An interdisciplinary approach is needed to harmonize medical, public and political responses to pandemics. In conclusion, the Council also needs to start looking ahead in terms of what the world post-COVID-19 will look like for women, children, displaced persons and marginalized and vulnerable populations in conflict-affected and fragile countries and regions. In partnership with other United Nations bodies, funds and agencies, particularly the Peacebuilding Commission, it will be critical to start building on and centralizing the findings and reports of national, regional and international stakeholders on this dynamic of health and peace, including the gendered and disproportionate impact of COVID-19, in order to have informed and contextualized guidelines and recommendations moving forward.
