Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
thank Rwanda for organizing, under its presidency,
this informative meeting on the activities of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). I commend the
Permanent Representative of Croatia, Ambassador
Drobnjak, and his predecessor, Ambassador Vilovic,
for their commitment at the helm of the Commission
in 2013. I commend the Permanent Representative
of Brazil, Ambassador Patriota, for his leadership of
the Peacebuilding Commission in general and for
his leadership of the Guinea-Bissau configuration
in particular. I take this opportunity to express my
gratitude to Assistant Secretary-General Judy Cheng-
Hopkins for the work she has undertaken with the team
of the Office of Peacebuilding Support.

Luxembourg has worked actively during the
past year to strengthen the interaction between the
PBC and the Security Council. While there has been
no progress on the participation of the Chairs of the
country configurations in Council consultations,
practical arrangements have been established with a
View to going beyond the stage of formal interactions.
At this time, it would be appropriate to deepen those
exchanges, engage in substance and discuss topics
such as the root causes of conflict, including their
socioeconomic causes and the possible risk of relapse
into conflict.

The countries that are on the agenda of the
Commission, especially those in West Africa, are faced
with complex and entangled crises. The risks of conflict
are often exacerbated by the political dimension or
by the weakness or absence of State institutions. We
cannot ignore the realities of the political economy
of a country, the root causes of conflict, the risks
of corruption, governance that is not conducive to
development; political, economic or social exclusion;
human rights violations; transnational organized crime
or even political cultures in which the winner takes all.
To overlook those root causes is to risk a resurgence of
conflict and violence. We saw that painfully in Guinea-
Bissau in 2012 and in the Central African Republic and
South Sudan in 2013 and 2014.

In order to learn from past mistakes, the Secretariat
has undertaken significant initiatives, such as the "Rights
up Front" action plan. We must also learn to question
some of our approaches with regard to peacebuilding
and State-building. I am thinking, for example, of
the approach to the principle of national ownership.
Sustainable peacebuilding requires the establishment of
processes, inclusive political settlements and competent
and accountable national institutions to negotiate and
implement a new social contract. That undertaking can
take more than a generation. The long-term support and
partnership of the international community are needed.
In that regard, we welcome the efforts made by the
fragile States meeting in the context of the Group of
Seven Plus and the conclusion of national agreements
under the New Deal for Engagement in Fragile States.

States and Governments have fundamental
responsibilities towards their populations. By carrying
out its regulatory functions, the State preserves its
legitimacy. The State must assume its responsibilities in
the promotion and protection of human rights, the rule
of law and the delivery of public services to citizens.

In post-conflict situations, peacebuilding processes
must be inclusive. We should aspire to reflect a true
national consensus. By supporting the establishment
of inclusive partnerships at the national level, the
Peacebuilding Commission can make a real difference,
in particular in strengthening the full participation of
women, young people and other groups that are too
often excluded.

In 2013, the Guinea configuation of the
Peacebuilding Commission, which I have the honour to
chair, began its third year of activities. The efforts ofthe

Peacebuilding Commission in Guinea were focused on
supporting the organization of the legislative elections
that took place on 28 September, following an inclusive
political dialogue, facilitated by the United Nations. It
is now important to consolidate those gains in order
to enable the Guinean people to fully benefit from the
dividends of peace and democracy.

Allow me to conclude by turning to next year. In 2015,
the peacebuilding architecture established in 2005 will
be reviewed in depth. That review should acknowledge
the true value of the Peacebuilding Commission's
potential as an advisory body and a support to countries
emerging from conflict. The review should be based on
lessons learned not only by the Commission but also
by the Secretariat and the entire United Nations system
in order to make our support in restoring States and
societies in the aftermath of a conflict more strategic
and sustainable.

Luxembourg is ready to contribute to that sensitive
but necessary exercise so as to strengthen the work of
the United Nations in support of peacebuilding.

