The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make a
statement in my capacity as the representative of Egypt.

At the outset, I should like to thank everyone for
the kind words addressed to the Egyptian presidency
during the month of May, and I express our deep
gratitude to all members of the Security Council for the
support provided to Egypt throughout this month.

May was a busy month, during which the Council
addressed extremely important issues that have a
direct impact on international peace and security.
The main purpose of this wrap-up session is to draw
lessons from dealing with issues that have an impact
on international peace and security. We must build
on the lessons learned from our working methods
during this month and evaluate the effectiveness of
the Council's activities in terms of transparency, scope
and objectivity. In that regard, the Egyptian presidency
distributed an informal concept paper in which we
proposed focusing on a limited number of issues
during this meeting and addressing them in both their
procedural and substantive aspects. The aim of this
exercise was to affirm the important relation between
those two aspects in increasing the effectiveness of the
Council's work. Accordingly, I will now focus on the
following topics.

First, the unanimous adoption of resolution 2286
(2015), with its focus on health care in armed conflict,
is an indicator of the important and constructive role
that the elected members of the Council can play.
That initiative, which was launched by five elected
members of the Council - Japan, Spain, New Zealand,
Uruguay and Egypt - addressed the increased attacks
against health-care facilities and health-care workers
in conflict. The broad support for the resolution, with
the sponsorship of 85 Member States, reflects the
ability of the Council to reach new heights in facing
emerging challenges that threaten international peace
and security. It also indicates the Council's ability
to mobilize support for relevant resolutions that
enjoy legitimacy and acceptance in the international
community. Accordingly, that improves the credibility
ofthe Council and points to its seriousness in addressing
and dealing with the perpetrators of such attacks.

I would also like to draw attention to the unique
way in which we shaped that initiative. It was the first
time that five members of the Council collectively
developed a draft resolution in a measured way, with
openness, transparency and inclusivity in dealing with
all members of the Council, all interested parties and
actors that are not Council members, all with the aim of
enriching the content and in reaching unanimity. That
is different from the usual practice, whereby a single
member presents a draft resolution without enough
time to hold consultations on it.

Secondly, the open ministerial debate (see S/PV.7690) on the theme of countering the narratives
and ideologies of terrorism reiterated the importance of
expanding our approach to combating terrorism. It is no
longer enough or effective for international efforts to
focus on security aspects alone, for this is a phenomenon
that has gained ground in all societies, regardless
of their level of development. The participation of
representatives from the Al Azhar Islamic Research
Academy and the Microsoft Corporation reflected
the importance of the Council's openness to the
perspectives of the real actors and players in the area
of countering the narratives of terrorists. In addition,
the participation of more than 70 speakers in the open
debate reflected the extreme importance and concern
that the international community attaches to the topic.

The summary in presidential statement
S/PRST/20l6/6, which was the outcome of the open
debate, requests the Counter-Terrorism Committee to
submit a proposal to the Security Council by 30 April
2017 for a comprehensive international framework
to counter the narratives by extremists. That fact
constitutes an affirmation of the Council's seriousness
and of its political will to build on the broad interest
in the topic in a practical manner. That is a challenge
to Member States to work in a unified manner and to
show their commitment in fulfilling that task. In that
regard, we call upon the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
which Egypt is honoured to chair, to begin immediately
implementing the task mandated to it and to consult
closely with States, organizations and the relevant
parties to allow the Security Council to consider the
framework in all its aspects after the Committee has
finalized it. That will enhance the credibility of the
Security Council and its resolutions and illustrate the
international consensus on the issue.

Thirdly, many briefings and consultations were
held this month on the situation in Syri. The most
important one was the briefing held on 4 May (see S/PV.7687), which was unique because it did not include
the adoption of a draft resolution on the situation in
Syria, as had been previously agreed. Interventions by
Member States, which included the participation of the
Syrian delegation, revealed points of both convergence
and divergence with regard to violations of the ceasefire
by Syrian and regional parties. While that does not
represent the ideal manner for the Council to act, it
nevertheless serves to highlight the clarity and realism
with which the crisis and its magnitude are described.
Despite that - or perhaps as a result of it - the
Council was able to issue two press statements in which
it reaffirmed its rejection and condemnation of the
targeting civilians and civilian structures and its call
for a cessation of all hostilities against humanitarian
and medical personnel. We also reaffirmed our
condemnation of terrorism.

The main principles that bring us together - in line
with international law, international humanitarian law
and our resolutions, without selectivity - are sufficient
to enable us to agree upon the main principles for
resolving the situation in Syria and ending the suffering
of the Syrian people. In that regard, I would like once
again to reiterate Egypt's support for the International
Syria Support Group and to encourage the Group to
lead the crucial, necessary coordination between the
United States and the Russian Federation under their
joint leadership.

Fourthly, the time chosen for the Council's visit
to Somalia, Kenya and Egypt in May reflected the
importance of timing of the Council's field visits. The
visit coincided with the tension related to the stalemate
in the Somali Parliament in adopting the electoral
model for 2016, thereby allowing the Council to send
a powerful message to all Somali parties about the
importance of building on the achievements made
since 2012 and the fact that the Council will not tolerate
anything that hinders the political process. Days
following our visit to Mogadishu, the Somali President
exercised his executive powers to adopt the electoral
model, paving the way for taking the necessary
measures to complete the election process in time.
In that context, and coinciding with the political and
security developments in Somalia and the humanitarian
crisis in the Horn of Africa, the Council's visit and its
meeting with the President of Kenya, Uhuru Kenyatta,
provided a good opportunity to hear the perspectives of
an important actor in the Horn of Africa and to listen
to his views on the challenges facing regional efforts
to securing peace and security in Somalia and the
possible means for strengthening cooperation between
the Security Council and the important regional players
in confronting the crises in those areas.

Based on the Council's interest in soliciting the
views of regional actors, the Council concluded its visit
with a meeting with the Permanent Representatives to
the League of Arab States in Cairo. That was the first
such meeting with the Arab League, in which we held
a frank dialogue about the challenges in the region,
including terrorism. We also discussed the means to
support the process in Somalia and the peace process
in the Middle East, which encompassed the Arab
League's perspective on the French initiative and the
existing consensus on a number of principles that allow
for the return to direct negotiations between the Israeli
and Palestinian sides.

Fifthly, the joint meetings between the members
of the Security Council and the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union were an opportunity for
a strategic review of the state of our partnership on the
tenth anniversary of the first such consultations. The
in-depth discussions during the meetings reflected the
common desire to develop joint cooperation towards a
deeper and more effective partnership, the advantages
of informal meetings between the two sides and the
possibility of holding them regularly, when the situation
allows, to permit regular dialogue between the two sides
and form a common understanding of the challenges in
the continent. The meetings also raised important issues
about how to best use the annual consultations as a way
to coordinate efforts and positions between the two
sides and draw lessons to be applied within the broader
sphere of promoting the role of regional organizations.

Finally, as this is the last meeting under the Egyptian
presidency in the month of May, I would like to express
my appreciation for the outstanding efforts on the part
of my colleagues in the Egyptian delegation to making
our presidency a success. I would also like to express
my thanks to all delegations for the support provided to
the Egyptian delegation during its presidency. I cannot
forget to thank in particular the Council's secretariat
and the entire team of interpreters for their excellent,
professional work, which was a direct reason for our
smooth operations during the month of May. I wish
every success to His Excellency Ambassador Francois
Delattre and his delegation during France's presidency
in June. We assure them of our support in successfully
carrying out their tasks.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.

The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.
