Mr. O'Brien: The recent images of the 3-year-old
boy Aylan Kurdi lying lifeless on a beach in Turkey
encapsulate the profound and prolonged desperation
of the Syrian people, too long exposed to the horrors
of a brutal and savage conflict. I recount the words
of Abdullah Kurdi, Aylan's father, who said, "I tried
to catch my children and wife, but there was no hope.
One by one they died." Tragically, far too many Syrian
families have spoken similar words over the last five
years. It is civilians who continue to bear the brunt of
this war.

As the plight of Syrian refugees desperately
trying to reach Europe in recent weeks has shown,
the effects of the Syria crisis are not just national or
regional, but global in nature. The conflict in Syria
has propelled one of the largest refugee exodus since
the Second World War. These refugees are fleeing for
their lives from war and violence, and have a right to
seek asylum without any form of discrimination. As
an international community, it is our responsibility to
support the neighbouring countries that shoulder most
of the burden. At the same time, stronger efforts must
be made to address the root causes that force people to
leave their homes and seek asylum abroad - addressing
the flee-or-die response natural to each and everyone of
us faced with peril or a challenge to our survival. For
Syria, it should be clear to all that this means a political
settlement that brings about an end to the crisis.

In the absence of such a political solution, the
Security Council adopted resolution 2139 (2014) in
February, which demands action by the parties in a
number of areas, including an end to attacks against
civilians and civilian infrastructure and facilitating
unhindered humanitarian access. I deeply regret to
inform the Council that, some 18 months later, the
Council's strong demands continue to go unheeded. By
any measure, human suffering in Syria has worsened,
not diminished.

Over the past month, violence has continued
throughout the country. There has been no reduction
in the appalling patterns of violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law. Indiscriminate
attacks, including with explosive weapons, continue to
cause widespread death and destruction. For example,
between 17 and 26 August, Government forces
repeatedly attacked residential areas in Douma, in rural
Damascus, killing at least 90 civilians and wounding
nearly 300 more. Meanwhile, in the last week ofAugust,
non-State armed groups launched hundreds of shells
on civilian-populated areas of Damascus and rural
Damascus, killing at least 20 civilians and injuring
many more, while yesterday, shelling by non-State
armed groups on civilian populated areas of Aleppo
killed at least 33 people, including women and children,
and injured over 150 more people.

Allegations of attacks with chemical agents
continue to be received. The joint mechanism of the
United Nations and the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons established by resolution
2235 (2015) is the relevant body to investigate those
allegations.

The deliberate targeting of civilian infrastructure
continues to occur with alarming frequency. Attacks
by non-State armed groups have resulted in significant
disruption to municipal water and electricity networks
in Aleppo, Damascus and in Dar'a over the past weeks
and months. Most recently, approximately 2 million
people went without water in Aleppo city for two
weeks in August. Deliberately depriving families and
communities of water and electricity only serves to
worsen humanitarian conditions and drive ordinary
Syrians into greater despair and desperation.
Hospitals and medical facilities continue to be
attacked. In August, Physicians for Human Rights
documented 12 attacks on medical facilities, while
15 medical workers were killed. Since the start of 2014,
there have been 169 attacks on medical facilities and
252 medical workers have been killed. Attacks on such
facilities have had a multiplier effect, not only killing
and injuring, but also destroying the health-care system
as a whole, leaving many Syrians unable to obtain the
most basic levels of care.

Schools, which should be safe places for children
to learn and grow in, continue to be attacked. Since
the start of 2014, the United Nations has verified at
least 84 attacks on or near schools, although the actual
number of schools attacked is likely higher. One in four
schools cannot be used because it has been damaged or
destroyed, or is being used as a shelter for the internally
displaced or for military purposes. Deliberate attacks
on hospitals and schools are war crimes. All parties will
unquestionably be held to account now and however
far into the future it takes after investigation and due
judicial process.

I have spoken before about the impact of the
conflict on Syria's children and young people, but
it bears repeating once again. Today, Syria is one
of the most dangerous places on Earth to be a child.
Over 5.6 million children are in need of immediate
assistance. Although the school year commenced this
past week, over 2 million children - one out of every
three - are not in school in Syria, and an additional
450,000 children are at risk of dropping out. We are
extremely concerned about hundreds of thousands of
children in areas controlled by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL), forced to follow a curriculum
designed by the designated terrorist group. According
to reports of the Commission of Inquiry and others,
children are murdered, tortured and subjected to
sexual violence by all parties to the conflict. Millions
of children have been traumatized by the horrors they
have witnessed. Young people have few prospects. The
conflict is not only destroying Syria's present, but it
is also destroying its future. One missing cohort of
educated young people will soon become two cohorts.

Despite the volatile and insecure environment, the
United Nations and non-governmental organization
partners continue to deliver life-saving assistance to
millions of people in need. In the past month alone,
4.2 million people received food aid, medicines and
supplies for 1.1 million treatments were dispatched, and
nearly 450,000 received relief items and other support.
We should all recognize the commitment and bravery
of the thousands of workers who deliver much-needed
aid at great personal risk, particularly the Syrian
organizations and volunteers who are often the first
responders on the front lines.

While we are reaching a significant number
of people, we are still unable to deliver sufficient
quantities of aid to people in the hardest-to-reach
areas. Fighting and insecurity hamper our ability to
respond. For example, during August, the World Food
Programme was unable to reach over 1 million people
in rural Damascus, rural Horns and rural Hama. A
further 750,000 people in ISIL-controlled areas cannot
be reached with food due to safety concerns.

In addition to insecurity, the parties to the conflict
continue to place restrictions that limit or obstruct
where, to whom and how often we deliver assistance.
Some 422,000 people continue to live under the most
intolerable siege conditions, unable to leave their
communities, and we are largely unable to get in to
deliver much needed humanitarian assistance. Over the
past three months, only 9 per cent ofpeople in besieged
areas have received much-needed health assistance
from the United Nations per month, while no food or
other basic relief supplies have entered these areas
despite the overwhelming need.

Approval for 46 requests for inter-agency convoys
remains pending with the Government of Syria. If
approved, the United Nations could reach an additional
1.2 million people in desperate need of assistance.
Meanwhile, Government-approved convoys to Nubul,
Zahra, Afrin in Aleppo and to Foah and Kefrayah
in Idlib have been stalled by the lack of approval
by non-State armed groups for safe passage. There
can be no justification for deliberately obstructing
humanitarian access and depriving civilians of access
to services essential to their survival.

On a more positive note, I welcome the recent
progress made in August on visas, with the Government
of Syria granting of 109 visas for United Nations staff
members from 12 different offices. Some 96 per cent
of the visa applications submitted in August were
approved during the same month. I very much hope that
this trend will continue, not only with visas, but also for

other administrative obstacles.

The lack of funding for humanitarian operations
continues to be a major challenge. We require some
$738 million to fund essential life-saving operations
until the end of this calendar year in Syria. I appreciate
the generosity of donors in 2015 already, and ask
them to consider making additional pledges given the
extraordinary level of need we are facing.

We are running out of words to describe the utter
disregard for human life and dignity that has become
the hallmark of this crisis. Every day that passes, more
Syrian children, women and men die. Millions more are
forced to live in appalling conditions where there is no
safe refuge in their country, where their basic needs for
protection are unmet, where their fundamental rights
are trampled upon, and where their futures and that of
their country appear increasingly bleak.

While the parties to this conflict are responsible
for upholding their obligations under international law,
the members of the Security Council and other Member
States with influence can and must do more to demand
that the indiscriminate violence stop, that sieges be
lifted, that civilian infrastructure be respected, and
that vital humanitarian assistance reach all areas of the
country without delay.

But above all else, the Council must focus its
efforts on finding a political solution. I call again on
members of the Council to set aside their differences
and work together to finally bring an end to this
nightmare for the Syrian people. As bestowed by the
Charter of the United Nations, the Security Council has
an inescapable responsibility to help the Syrian people
realize a future of peace. I very much hope that, for the
sake of the people of Syria, a political solution will be
found as soon as possible.

