Mr. Lambertini (Italy): I thank the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his precise and clear
analysis and briefing.

I would like to begin my statement by reaffirming
our extreme concern to the Council about the spiral
of tension and violence in Jerusalem and in all of the
West Bank. We mourn the tragic loss oflife. On 14 July,
Italy condemned the terrorist attack that took place on
the same day in the holy city of Jerusalem against the
Salomon family. There is no justification for murders
or for the glorification of violence, and we welcome
President Abbas' condemnation of that attack. The
deaths oftwo policemen in the holy city ofJerusalem and
those ofthe three Israelis in the Halamish settlement, in
the West Bank, are also tragic.

We mourn the loss of life among Palestinians, with
several young people killed during the recent clashes,
and we reaffirm the right of peaceful demonstration.
We take note of Prime Minister Netanyahu's assurance
that no change to the status quo of the holy sites will be
introduced. We stress the special role ofthe Kingdom of
Jordan and His Majesty King Abdullah II, with regard
to the sites. We call on all parties to do their utmost to
diffuse the escalating violence, restore calm and uphold
the status quo in the holy places in Jerusalem, in word
and in practice. The decision of the Israeli Government
to remove metal detectors is a step in the right direction.
We call on Israel to further coordinate with Jordan on
all measures concerning the holy places, including
with regard to enhancing security. We also stress
the importance of maintaining security cooperation
between Israel and Palestine.

Let me now reiterate our full adherence to Italy's
long-established position on the Middle East peace
process, including with regard to the 1967 lines and to
East Jerusalem, as set out in the relevant conclusion of
the Council of the European Union, and our unwavering
support for all efforts to resume peace talks between
Israel and Palestine. We believe that just and lasting
peace between Israel and Palestine needs to be based on
a two-State solution, as the only achievable objective of
direct negotiations between the two parties.

Many obstacles need to be overcome on the road to
peace, among them violence, as sadly confirmed by the
most recent events I alluded to earlier in my statement,
and settlements, which deserve special consideration.
Italy condemns the intensified expansion of Israel's
settlements following the recent approval by Israeli
authorities of a plan to build almost 1,000 housing
units in a settlement in East Jerusalem. We believe that
that decision runs counter to the prospect for a two-
State solution and undermines the chance of ensuring a
future of peace and security for the parties.

The dire situation in Gaza deserves our utmost
attention. The most recent report by the United Nations
country team provides an alarming description of the
de-development of the Gaza strip in the past decade.
Italy supports President Abbas as the legitimate
representative of the Palestinian leadership and it
upholds the goal ofincreasing pressure by the Palestinian
authorities on Hamas in order to retake control of the
Gaza Strip and to restore the whole of Palestine under
a single democratic and legitimate authority. While
doing so, the humanitarian consequences on the people
living in Gaza must be taken into account as a priority,
particularly in the health sector.
Against that demanding background, I find it
appropriate to acknowledge some positive, though
limited progress. First of all, we always believe that
technical collaboration between the parties in the
delivery of basic services is critical, not as a substitute
for peace but to crucially improve the living conditions
of all Palestinians. Therefore, it is significant that two
agreements on electricity and water have been signed in
recent days. We encourage the parties to keep working
on cooperation at the ground level and to devise new
joint initiatives. Secondly, we welcome the recent
meeting of the Envoys of the Middle East Quartet and
wish to reaffirm the role that the Quartet can play in
order to create an environment that is conducive to the
resumption of peace talks.

Turning to Lebanon, Italy commends all Lebanese
parties on reaching a historic agreement on the new
electoral law. We are convinced that the renewal of the
Parliament next year will be a milestone in terms of
strengthening Lebanon's institutions. It is hoped that
that will create better conditions for increasing the
State's presence and authority across the country, as
requested by relevant Security Council resolutions. In
that regard, I would like to stress the essential work
carried out by the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL) in the south of Lebanon, faithful to
its mandate as a crucial player for the stability of the
country and the geographical area plagued by conflict.
Finally, while reiterating Italy's firm support to the
Lebanese authorities, I would like to acknowledge
the unwavering commitment of Prime Minister Hariri
and his Government to the full implementation of
resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006), through its
cooperation with the Special Coordinator and UNIFIL.

I would like to conclude by mentioning the
liberation of Mosul from Da'esh, undertaken by Iraqi
Government security forces, with the support of a
global coalition, as a sign of hope in a geographic area
marked by multiple crises. That result is a landmark
in the joint fight against terrorism in the Middle East
and points to future achievement in the region. While
the military fight against Da'esh is not over and the
need to ensure the protection of human rights must
still be upheld, our attention should now also turn
to stabilizing the territory once under the control of
Da'esh. Humanitarian assistance and the restoration
of essential services are crucial in order to underpin
the military victory and allow the return of internally
displaced people.

Reconciliation in Iraq and a political transition in
Syria remain the keys to preventing any resurgence of
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. In that regard,
I would like to emphasize the need to uphold and
protect the right and freedom of all ethnic and religious
communities in the region, including the Christian
communities.

