Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): My delegation congratulates
you and your team, Madam President, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
September, and conveys our felicitations to our United
Kingdom colleagues for their able stewardship of the
Council last month.
At the outset, we would like to thank our briefers
for their interventions. We also welcome the presence
of Minister for Foreign Affairs of Nicaragua Dennis
Moncada Colindres.

Kazakhstan is closely monitoring developments
in Nicaragua. We acknowledge the right to peaceful
assembly and condemn all acts of violence and attacks
on civilians. We express our deepest sympathy and
condolences to the families of those killed.

We firmly believe that the Government and the
people of Nicaragua will be able to overcome the
current situation and find a solution to the problems
for the sake of peace and security, with due respect
for fundamental rights and freedoms. Such a solution
should be peaceful and democratic and found within
the framework of the Constitution, in particular by
promoting dialogue between the country's political
actors. We also believe that all stakeholders should
refrain from violent or provocative actions.

We note with satisfaction that the level of tension in
Nicaragua has decreased and the situation is gradually
normalizing. We positively commend the launch of the
national dialogue in Nicaragua, with the mediation of
the Catholic Church, which is called upon to develop an
algorithm for resolving existing problems in the interest
of ensuring the sustainable development of the country.

Kazakhstan is a firm proponent of the preventive
diplomacy principle, but is against external influence
in the internal affairs of independent countries under
that pretext. Kazakhstan is strongly committed to
the principles of sovereignty, territorial integrity and
non-interference in the internal affairs of other States.

The situation in Nicaragua does not constitute a
threat to international peace and security, and therefore
should not fall under the mandate of the Security
Council. At this stage, the United Nations involvement
should be only through the mediation efforts of the
Secretary-General's good offices.

Lastly, we believe that stronger engagement and
respectful cooperation by regional organizations,
particularly the Organization of American States, in
resolving the situation would be a crucial step towards
the normalization of the political situation in Nicaragua.

