Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): My
delegation fully associates itself with the statement to
be made in due course by the Ambassador of Ireland on
behalf of the European Union. I would just add a few
words.
First, the events of March definitely represented a
serious blow to the process supported by the
international community in Kosovo. We are grateful to
Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno for his frank and very useful
briefing this morning.

It seems to us that - as the Under-Secretary-
General emphasized - it would be helpful to
undertake a process of collective soul-searching about
what happened during the recent violence. The main
lesson is doubtless an understanding that, even today,
the role played by extremist forces in Kosovar society
remains extremely significant and that we must make a
renewed effort to isolate those extremists from the
majority population that seeks a democratic Kosovo.

The second lesson unquestionably relates to the
attitude to the international presences in Kosovo. In
this regard, we agree with Mr. Guehenno's statement.
We welcome the review process to determine how we
arrived at this point. I am sure that the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and the Kosovo Force reacted promptly and
appropriately during those events, although UNMIK
appeared to have been taken by surprise. We might
wonder, therefore, whether UNMIK has the kind of
dialogue and close relationship with Kosovar society
that is necessary to its ability to fulfil its crucial job
there in implementing policy.

We also might question the nature of the
economic plan for Kosovo because, as was indicated
by our British colleague, there is no doubt that the
deplorable economic environment in Kosovo
contributed to the violence that we observed. But apart
from this useful collective soul-searching, what should
we do in the coming stages?

First of all, we, like others, think we now need to
reassure the Serb minority, see to it that the property
that was destroyed can be rebuilt, implement a policy
for refugees who want to go back home, give
assurances to the Serb community regarding security,
and see to it that those responsible for the violence are
prosecuted and punished.

Secondly, of course we need to look to the
provisional authorities of Kosovo, who must adopt a
responsible attitude. We are not against a transfer to the
provisional authorities of greater responsibility in a
certain number of specific areas, but it must be clear
that it is the provisional authorities of Kosovo who are
the first ones responsible for restoring a climate
conducive to progress in Kosovo. Here, like others, we
welcome the open letter of 2 April and hope that the
positive commitments that it contains will be backed
up by specific action.

Thirdly, should we change our approach to the
Standards Implementation Plan? We do not think so.
Like others, we are in favour of continuing with the
current process. We have taken note here of the
Standards Implementation Plan that was submitted by
the Special Representative on 31 March. It seems to us
to be a useful document and we are prepared to work
on it. I am sure that that document needs to highlight,
in the current context, a number of points, such as the
rights of minorities, human rights and the rule of law. I
also think that it is important that this document not
give rise to any ambiguity with regard to the meeting
scheduled for 2005. As was indicated by the Security
Council in its statement of 12 September, only
sufficient progress by the Provisional Institutions in
implementing standards will make it possible to get the
discussion going.

Finally, we are prepared to work on a presidential
statement, which seems to us very useful for again
stressing a number of messages from the Security
Council and the international community in the current
circumstances: a message to condemn the violence and
a message to express a hope for the future.

