This is a rather sensitive period for the Central African Republic, and it is important for me to be able to address the Security Council. Through me, the Central African Republic has the honour of addressing the Security Council at this crucial time, when humankind is fighting the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Before I begin my remarks, I would like very humbly to extend my warm and heartfelt congratulations to the President on his country's assumption of the presidency of the Security Council. I would also like to thank all previous speakers for the encouragement they have given to the Government of the Central African Republic. I would also like to take this opportunity to thank the President for convening this important meeting of the Security Council and to express, on behalf of the people and the Government of the Central African Republic, our gratitude for the kind attention we have received and for the unwavering esteem in which my country is held. Allow me also to reiterate our confidence in Secretary-General Antonio Guterres as well as our complete gratitude for his sustained commitment to peace and development in the world. We are above all grateful for the constant and multifaceted support the United Nations has extended to the Central African Republic. My thanks also go to Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations, Mr. Smail Chergui, Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African Union, Mr. Koen Vervaeke, Managing Director for Africa of the European External Action Service, and Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye, Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the Central African Republic and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA). I particularly thank Mr. Ndiaye for the work carried out by MINUSCA and all the contingents represented therein, who, despite the diversity of their nationalities, are working together in the service of peace. As MINUSCA is the expression of tremendous international solidarity, the Central African Republic, through me, wishes to pay a vibrant tribute to the peacekeepers who have fallen on Central African soil. I would also take this opportunity to call on the Security Council to support the renewal of MINUSCA's mandate in order to meet the many challenges that remain, including this year's specific challenges, namely, the presidential and legislative elections and the return to peace. On 6 February 2019, the Central African Republic took a major political step forward with the signing of the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic (S/2019/145, annex), whose first anniversary we celebrated this year and which indisputably testifies to our determination to make progress and transcend inertia and resistance to stability and to our desire to achieve prosperity for the Central African people. It is important to recall that the Agreement was drawn up on the basis of, on the one hand, the 2015 popular consultations, which led to the Bangui Forum on National Reconciliation, and the demands of the armed groups, on the other hand. The proper implementation of the Agreement, which was reached after lengthy negotiations, requires that we - the Government, the 14 armed groups, the facilitators, the guarantors, the countries of the subregion and the international community - work synergistically to address the challenge of achieving lasting peace. The successful implementation of the Agreement requires the firm and unanimous support of the international community. Silencing the guns in the Central African Republic, in line with campaign organized by the African Union for this year, is not only achievable but inevitable. The crusade for peace, within which we have been building, for more than four years and through a multisectoral strategy, our gradual return to stability and the rule of law, is a commitment by the Government that has been implemented under the leadership of the President of the Republic and Head of State, Mr. Faustin Archange Touadera. It is therefore incumbent upon all of us who wish to promote the culture of peace - the United Nations, the African Union, the Economic Community of Central African States and all States members of the Security Council - to make the Central African experience a successful model for conflict resolution in Africa. The Government of the Central African Republic has consistently demonstrated its good will in the implementation of the main provisions of the Political Agreement, in particular through the formation of an inclusive Government and the adoption and promulgation of the laws called for therein, including those on decentralization, the status of former Heads of State and the regulation of political parties. The Government of the Central African Republic has also consistently demonstrated its good will by making progress in the restoration of the State, including the recruitment, training and redeployment of defence and security forces; undertaking efforts to mobilize the countries of the subregion; supporting the work of the facilitators and guarantors of the Political Agreement that has contributed to stability in the country; and participating in the joint commissions initiated in 2019 with Cameroon, the Congo and Chad, and in other joint commissions planned for 2020. Despite the fact that we had to postpone some recent meetings owing to restrictions stemming from COVID-19, these meetings are still being planned, specifically those with the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Sudan and South Sudan. With the support of the international community since 2015, several initiatives have been undertaken by the Government as part of the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation (DDRR) process. Following the pilot programme in September 2017, a full DDRR programme was launched in December 2018. In April 2019, these efforts resulted in the implementation of the programme in the north- west, with the disarmament of combatants from a number of armed groups and their reintegration into the socioeconomic fabric of the country, the special mixed security units or the national defence and security forces, including the armed forces. In Ndeele, in the north-east, the full DDRR programme is being operationalized. In fact, the teams responsible for implementing the programme in the north-east arrived in the area this weekend and were due to begin their work today. With regard to the special mixed security units, the legal framework associated with their concept of operations has also been set up. On 12 May 2020, the first contingents of these units, which were trained in Bouar, officially received their certificates of completion. Despite its stated commitment to implementing the recommendations of the Political Agreement and the tireless struggle for the return to peace, the Government continues to face several challenges, including many forms of violence resulting from the non-compliance with or outright violation of the provisions of the Agreement by armed groups that are signatories thereto. As a consequence, there has been a resurgence of violence in the hinterlands and a rearming of certain armed groups, in particular the Unite pour la paix en Centrafrique, the Front populaire pour la renaissance de la Centrafrique and the Retour, reclamation et rehabilitation group. Nevertheless, the Government remains committed to continuing its efforts aimed at engaging in constructive dialogue with all actors, combating impunity and strengthening the rule of law, including through arrests and the redeployment of the judicial administration. In the light of the multiple violations of the Agreement by recalcitrant armed groups, a majority counterweight to build peace is imperative. To remain passive would mean disassociating ourselves from the counterbalancing effort; it would be tantamount to choosing not to oppose the violence of others. We cannot be spectators of human interactions of a nature that discourages our ideals and values nor can we be mere witnesses to the fatalities suffered by the Central African armed forces during the recent cantonment operation in the west of the armed group Retour, reclamation et rehabilitation. The Government of the Central African Republic is also showing its determination to organize inclusive, free and transparent elections. I therefore take this opportunity to express the Central African Government's thanks and encouragement to the European Union for funding the elections in the country. I would also take this opportunity to appeal to international partners and other friendly countries to mobilize resources in order to preserve the efforts made and strengthen the democratic foundations in memory of the victims. Respect for the constitutional deadline for the upcoming elections is a collective commitment by all - and one that it is important to keep. Despite the difficulties relating to the COVID-19 pandemic, the National Electoral Authority is working hard to do everything possible to ensure that the constitutional deadline is met. Dismemberments at the national level have been finalized and voter-registration operations are being initiated. To this end, the electronic equipment, the software for managing the electoral register and all related equipment have been purchased and delivered. The resources mobilized for this purpose have already surpassed the 50 per cent mark. Progress has also been made in the promulgation of decrees establishing the period for establishing the electoral lists and the list of countries where Central Africans abroad will be allowed to participate in the presidential elections. All of that is sufficient evidence of the Central African Republic's firm commitment to moving forward in holding the 2020-2021 elections. In addition, the law on the National Electoral Authority is being drafted at the legislative level, and it will be taken up at an extraordinary session of the National Assembly starting on 25 June. It should also be noted that the Government is allowing Central African refugees to participate in the vote, subject to the agreement of the countries concerned to take the steps necessary to ensure the exercise of the civil rights of Central African refugees present on their territories. I would conclude by reiterating the request of my country, the Central African Republic, for a strengthening of multifaceted support of MINUSCA, in particular in terms of its equipment and human-resource capacity. We make this request because we must compel peace, which would be possible if MINUSCA had a more robust mandate. I hope that the international community will remain mobilized alongside the people and the Government of the Central African Republic and continue to support us in our efforts to restore our country and achieve the complete lifting of the embargo that still hangs over us - a people who aspire only to genuine peace.
