Mr. Park (Republic of Korea): My delegation
appreciates the initiative of the President of the Council for
this month, Sir John Weston, in arranging this orientation
debate, and believes that this and future orientation debates
in formal meetings of the Council will further enhance the
Council's transparency and facilitate its democratization.

We are of the view that the issue at hand clearly
warrants this type of open forum. Given the critical stage
of the situation in Liberia, the continued attention of the
international community is more necessary now than ever
before. In this regard, my delegation commends the
initiative and efforts of Ambassador Albright, who
undertook an important mission to flashpoints in Africa,
including Liberia. Her observations and sombre reflections
should provide useful input for our debates.

My delegation would also like to thank the Secretary-
General for submitting his fifteenth progress report on the
United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL).
In particular, we express our appreciation to the Chairman
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), President Jerry Rawlings of Ghana, and the
Secretary-General's Special Representative, Mr. Anthony
Nyakyi, for their strenuous efforts to facilitate the peace
process in Liberia.

The peace-keeping operation in Liberia is unique in
the sense that, for the first time in Africa, the subregional
organization, ECOWAS, has taken a primary role, while
the United Nations has assisted and monitored the
activities of the ECOWAS Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG).

In some ways, the Liberian operation, together with
the ongoing collaboration between the United Nations and
the Commonwealth of Independent States in Georgia, can
be regarded as a test case for the capability of countries
in a given region and regional organizations to deal with
their problems. The success of ECOMOG's involvement
in close coordination with UNOMIL will set an example
to be emulated elsewhere. In this regard, ECOMOG and
UNOMIL deserve every encouragement and support from
the international community.

The peace process, which began with the signing of
the Abuja Agreement on 19 August 1995, is now at a
critical juncture. Since late December, serious cease-fire
violations have been committed by several Liberian
factions. As a result of these renewed hostilities, many
ECOMOG soldiers and innocent civilians have lost their
lives. My delegation expresses its deep regret over these
casualties and extends its sincere condolences to the troop
contributing countries and to the families of those killed
or wounded.

We are also very concerned at the further setback of
the disarmament process caused by the Tubmanburg
incident, which forced the withdrawal of peace-keepers
from the area. This incident, however, must not be
allowed to derail the peace process envisaged in the
Abuja Agreement. In this connection, I should like to
welcome the firm commitment to the Abuja Agreement
reaffirmed by the Foreign Minister of Liberia through his
statement this morning.
We strongly urge all factions, particularly ULIMO-J,
to honour their commitments to the peace process and not
to engage in any activities that may disrupt it.

 

The issue of disarmament and demobilization lies at
the heart of the difficult situation in Liberia. We emphasize
the importance of the faction leaders' role in ensuring the
cooperation of their soldiers with ECOMOG and UNOMIL
in the process of disarmament and demobilization. Without
the successful disarmament and demobilization of the
estimated 60,000 combatants, peace cannot prevail in the
war-ravaged Liberian society.

My delegation is also of the view that the cooperation
of the Liberian National Transitional Government (LNT G)
is essential for the success of the peace process in Liberia.
In this context, the peace-keeping operation and
humanitarian assistance in Liberia should enjoy full
cooperation and coordination with the LNTG. We underline
the LNTG's responsibility to ensure complete freedom of
movement of those personnel in carrying out their work.

Despite the unfortunate aspects to which I have just
alluded, there are some positive developments that have
occurred during the last few months and that should not go
unnoticed.

My delegation welcomes the Secretary-General's
intention to appoint a senior electoral officer and notes with
satisfaction that the United Nations Humanitarian
Assistance Coordination Office has become fully
operational in discharging its responsibility for the
coordination of humanitarian assistance as well as the
reintegration aspects of demobilization.

We are also pleased that the LNTG and the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees have
concluded an agreement establishing the framework for the
repatriation and reintegration of refugees, and hope that the
voluntary return of refugees currently taking place in
northern Liberia represents a growing trend.

Echoing the Secretary-General's notion, contained in
the Agenda for Development, that development is a
prerequisite for peace, we welcome the plan to convene a
special consultation meeting of the LNTG and its
international partners in March 1996 to address Liberia's
recovery and reconstruction process.

As mentioned in the report, recent events in Liberia
have caused serious concern and have regrettably delayed
the implementation of the Abuja Agreement for more than
two months. I believe that it is indeed time for all Liberian
factions to renew their commitment to the peace process by
adhering to the established timetable leading to elections
seven months from now. Whether their country can become
a land of liberty, peace and prosperity, as envisaged by
their ancestors, is essentially in their hands.

This delegation is poignantly reminded of a recent
article in The New York Times quoting General Charles
Taylor, one of the faction leaders, in a conversation he
reportedly had with Ambassador Albright in Monrovia
last week regarding the seven-year-old Liberian civil war.
He said:

"I started it and now I don't know how to stop it."

The answer to this fundamental question is plain and
simple. All the factions concerned must abide by and
implement the commitments they freely entered into in
Abuja last summer.

