Mr. Sharma (India): Mr. President, we express our
appreciation to you for convening this timely open debate
of the Security Council to consider the situation prevailing
in Afghanistan. Such open debates are a healthy
development in the Council's work which we hope will be
maintained.

This meeting of the Council comes in the midst of one
more manifestation of the Taliban's relentless pursuit of the
mirage of military solutions for the resolution of the civil
conflict in Afghanistan. Its recent campaign in the Shomali
plains, with direct external assistance and involvement of
foreign defence personnel in operations as well as planning,
has displayed its complete disregard of the international
community's efforts for a peaceful settlement of the
Afghanistan situation. This Taliban campaign against the
forces of the Government of the Islamic State of
Afghanistan has been vicious. Its methods include the
targeting of the civilian population, the brutal massacre of
innocent people, the torching of houses, the use of bombs,
the destruction of standing crops and the deliberate
displacement of women and children. These acts constitute
base crimes and follow the same pattern as the massacre of
thousands of innocent people in the wake of the Taliban
capture of Mazar-e-Sharif in August 1998 and the
systematic "ethnic cleansing" in Bamiyan in April/May this
year.

It is most pertinent that all these actions are contrary,
indeed repulsive, to Afghan traditions. They reflect an
inspiration derived from outside Afghanistan. The
international community has taken serious and adverse note
of the criminal conduct of the Taliban and the negative
implication of the Taliban phenomenon for peace and
security in Afghanistan and the region. The Council must
accordingly take meaningful and effective measures in this
regard.

There cannot be a military solution to the civil conflict
in Afghanistan. The way forward lies through peaceful
discussions and negotiations for which President Rabbani,
Commander Ahmad Shah Masoud and other leaders of the
Islamic Front for the Defence of Afghanistan have shown
readiness and commitment, and through the formation of a
broad-based government which truly represents all political
forces and ethnic groups in the country, is dedicated to the
urgent task of national reconstruction, is independent, is
autonomous in action, and works for the good of all the
people of Afghanistan. Such a government will be rooted
in the Afghan personality, which transcends ethnic
consciousness and has sustained itself through the long
travail of violence and strife. The international community
must nurture and strengthen that personality. The Taliban
and their foreign mentor cannot be allowed to create and
perpetuate ethnic cleavages to pursue their vested
interests.

The unity, independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Afghanistan is vital for the Afghan people. It
is also critical for peace, stability, security and economic
development in the entire region, of which India is a part.
The international community must act purposefully to
ensure that those who continue to imperil regional peace
and stability through obscurantist ideology, extremist
violence and the distortion of faith are prevented from
doing so. The cessation of interference in Afghanistan
from across its southern borders is essential for the return
of peace to that country.

The territories in Afghanistan which the Taliban
have occupied through military force have become a
breeding ground for international terrorism. International
terrorist groups find a safe haven here and in the areas
straddling Afghanistan's southern borders. There are
numerous training camps for terrorists, and from these
camps and bases extremists and terrorists go out into the
region and beyond to carry out acts which are the very
antithesis of all civilized life. The international
community cannot remain indifferent to the dangers
which emanate from the Taliban and their nexus with
terrorism. India is a victim of terrorism and is acutely
alive to the death and destruction perpetrated by these
terrorists. We call on the international community to take
collective action against these terrorists and their mentor.

Historically, as well as under the internationally
accepted conventions and norms of behaviour, diplomats
are protected. A year ago, in a sordid and brutal action,
the Taliban murdered some Iranian diplomats,
disregarding all international norms for treatment of
diplomats. Even though this action has been condemned
by the international community, which has asked the
Taliban to bring the culprits to book, there has been no
substantial progress in the investigations, as the
Secretary-General has also stated recently. Should the
international community sit and wait while the
perpetrators of this outrageous crime and their masters
roam about freely? A message, loud and clear, should go
out from this Chamber today to the Taliban that the

 

perpetrators of these crimes must be made to face the
consequences of their acts.

The Taliban-controlled areas have emerged as one of
the largest producers of narcotic substances in the world.
There is a close nexus between the Taliban and the mafias
operating across Afghanistan's southern border and in the
region in promoting this diabolical trade. The menace
grows, and firm international action is the need of the hour.

The efforts of the international community to bring
peace and stability to Afghanistan have to be active and
purposeful. We are convinced that these efforts have to be
channelized through the United Nations. We are equally
convinced that they have to be broad-based. All countries
that have an interest and influence in Afghanistan must be
brought within the ambit of these peacemaking efforts.
Narrow and segmented approaches cannot work. We
support the United Nations efforts for peacemaking in
Afghanistan and appreciate the untiring efforts of the
Secretary-General's Special Envoy to bring different
Afghan groups together in the quest for peace.

India has historical, cultural and civilizational ties with
the Afghan people. Hence, the continuing strife and
violence in Afghanistan is all the more painful for us. We
have contributed, as best we can, to alleviate the suffering
of the Afghan people by sending humanitarian assistance.
Our efforts in this direction will continue both bilaterally
and through the United Nations system. The international
community needs to take urgent action to ensure timely
assistance to all Afghan people. We hope that the
constraints on delivery of humanitarian assistance which
were brought out in Secretary-General's report of last year
(A/53/346) will soon be overcome. It is essential to do so,
as, with the onset of winter, it will become even more
difficult to deliver aid to the needy and poor in
Afghanistan. Immediate steps in this direction are therefore
required.

India will continue to play, as it has done in the past,
a positive and constructive role towards bringing peace to
Afghanistan.

Finally, we were very much concerned to learn of the
sudden hospitalization of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Ambassador Lakhdar Brahimi, and we
wish him a speedy recovery with all our heart.

