Ms. Frechette: As you know, the Secretary-
General very much wished to attend this debate in
person, but is unable to do so because of his
commitment to visit a number of Member States in
Asia this week. He is, however, very anxious to give
the Council the benefit of his Views on an issue of such
great importance. Exceptionally, therefore, he has
asked me to read you the following statement on his
behalf:

"I applaud you for holding this open debate
on Iraq, and much regret that I cannot be with
you in person.
"The situation created by Iraq's failure to
comply fully with the resolutions of this Council
since 1991 is indeed one of the gravest and most
serious facing the international community today.

"It poses a great challenge to this
Organization, and in particular to the Security
Council. In Article 24 of the Charter, the Member
States have conferred primary responsibility on
this Council for the maintenance of international
peace and security.

"That is a grave responsibility indeed, and it
is essential that the Council face up to it.

"But let me add that the situation also
presents the United Nations with an opportunity.
If we handle this properly, we may actually
strengthen international cooperation, the rule of
law and the United Nations - enabling it to
move forward in an purposeful way, not only in
this immediate crisis but in the future as well.

"It is therefore entirely proper that the
Council should debate its course of action, not
only in private consultations but also only in
public, so that Member States not currently
serving on the Council may have an opportunity
to give their Views. For myself, I stated my Views
on this matter very clearly on 12 September,
when I had the honour to address the General
Assembly. The Council may recall that on that
occasion I said that efforts to obtain Iraq's
compliance with the Council's resolutions must
continue. I appeal to all who might have
influence with Iraq's leaders to impress on them
the vital importance of accepting the weapons
inspections. I myself urged Iraq to comply with
its obligations, for the sake of its own people and
for the sake of world order. In his speech in the
general debate on the same day, the President of
the United States also insisted that Iraq must
comply with its obligations under the Council's
resolutions, and a large number of other States
joined in that appeal.

"Four days later, I received a letter from the
Iraqi Foreign Minister informing me of his
Government's decision 'to allow the return of the
United Nations weapons inspectors to Iraq
without conditions'. Since then, Mr. Hans Blix,
Executive Chairman of the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC) and the Director
General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), Mr. Mohammed ElBaradei, met
with an Iraqi delegation on 30 September and 1
October to discuss the practical arrangements for
the resumption of inspections. Iraq's decision to
readmit the inspectors without condition is an
important first step, but only a first step.

"Full compliance remains indispensable,
and it has not yet happened. Iraq has to comply. It
must implement the disarmament programme
required by the resolutions of the Council.
Weapons inspectors will be returning to Iraq after
a four-year absence, under a new structure and
new leadership, to verify the implementation of
that programme. The inspectors must have
unfettered access, and the Council will expect
nothing less. It may well choose to pass a new
resolution strengthening the inspectors' hands so
that there are no weaknesses or ambiguities. I
consider that such a step would be appropriate.
The new measures must be firm, effective,
credible and reasonable. If Iraq fails to make use
of this last chance, and if defiance continues, the
Council will have to face its responsibilities. It
my experience it always does so best and most
effectively when its members work in unison.

"Let me therefore conclude by urging the
President and his colleagues to make every effort
to retain their unity of purpose. If you allow
yourselves to be divided, the authority and
credibility of the Organization will undoubtedly
suffer; but if you act in unison, you will have
greater impact and a better chance of achieving
your objective, which must be a comprehensive
solution that includes the suspension and eventual
ending of the sanctions that are causing such
hardship for the Iraqi people, as well as the
timely implementation of other provisions of your
resolutions. If the Council succeeds in this, it will
strengthen the United Nations in a way that will
place future generations in its debt."

