Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): Since this is the
first meeting for me personally this month, let me also
congratulate you, Mr. President, and your team on
your presidency and to thank Bolivia for its very active
presidency last month.

During the conflict in Syria, we have witnessed the
repeated use of chemical weapons as well as numerous
other systematic and flagrant violations of international
law by the parties to the conflict. The Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism concluded that the
Syrian Arab Republic and the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant were responsible for using chemical
weapons. We condemn that in the strongest terms. It is a
serious violation of international law and it constitutes
a threat to international peace and security. Such use in
armed conflict amounts to a war crime.

The proliferation and use of chemical weapons must
end and those responsible for such crimes must be held
accountable. We have repeatedly stated in the Security
Council that impunity is not an option. As representatives
know, to that end, we have worked tirelessly, including
with the other elected members, to find an agreement
on a mechanism for accountability. That is also why we
joined the French-led International Partnership against
Impunity for the Use of Chemical Weapons and why
we supported the decision of the Conference of States
Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention at its
special session to put in place arrangements to identify
the perpetrators of the use of chemical weapons in
Syria. While a mechanism established by the Council
would have been and remains preferable, the issue is
too important to be allowed to be blocked indefinitely.
However, the decision of the Conference of States
Parties does not relieve the Council of its responsibility.
We now look forward to updates to the Council on the
implementation of that decision as part of the monthly
reporting under resolution 2118 (2013).

Let me make the following comments with regard
to the most recent report on the elimination of chemical
weapons in Syria by the Director-General of the OPCW
(S/2018/971, annex).

First, we note that the Declaration Assessment
Team of the OPCW is analysing the response by the
Syrian authorities to the questions regarding the
outstanding issues related to its chemical weapons
declaration. We emphasize that all open issues must
be closed as soon as possible. All remaining chemical
weapons must be declared and destroyed, in line with
resolution 2118 (2013). We urge the Syrian authorities
to cooperate fully and actively with the OPCW so that
the accuracy and completeness of its declaration can
ultimately be verified.

Secondly, we reiterate our full support for the
OPCW and our complete confidence in the independent,
impartial and professional work of its Fact-finding
Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic. We look forward
to the upcoming reports regarding a number of pending
investigations, including the final report on the alleged
attack in Douma.

Thirdly, we remain deeply concerned about
allegations that chemical weapons may be used again.
In that regard, we fully support and endorse the remarks
made by the Secretary-General in his letter transmitting
the monthly report where it states "that any further
possible use of chemical weapons in the Syrian Arab
Republic would be wholly unacceptable" (S/2018/971).
All parties must be reminded of the clear and absolute
prohibition on the use of chemical weapons under
any circumstances.

As co-penholder on humanitarian matters in Syria,
I would also like to take this opportunity to highlight
and welcome the delivery of humanitarian assistance
to Rukban, which took place this weekend. We want to
recognize the tremendous efforts by the United Nations
and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent to make that happen,
as well as the facilitation by Russia and the United
States. It is critically needed relief for the approximately
50,000 people who are stranded in the camp and who
have not received aid since January. However, we need
more positive examples like this as we continue to push
for safe, sustained and unimpeded humanitarian access
to all people in need throughout Syria.

In the same vein, let me also take this opportunity
to comment on the most recent developments on the
political track. The recent meetings in relevant formats
show that there is an international momentum that
now needs to be seized solution, aiming to have the
constitutional committee in place before the end of
the year. At this critical time the Council needs to take
a clear stand, show that we fully support the United
Nations-led political process and make sure that there
is some real progress in time for the Special Envoy's
briefing later this month.

