Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): First of all, let me
warmly congratulate you, Madam President, on
assuming the presidency of the Council for the month
of November. I also take this opportunity to convey our
highest appreciation to Ambassador Ryan of Ireland
and his team for the excellent job done during Ireland's
presidency in October.

We welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Liberia, Mr. Captan, to the Council to take part in our
discussion.

We are pleased to express appreciation to the
Chairman of the sanctions Committee on Liberia,
Ambassador Mahbubani, for his most comprehensive,
analytical and forward-looking introduction of the
report of the Panel of Experts established pursuant to
resolution 1343 (2001) concerning Liberia. We also
thank the Chairman of the Panel, Ambassador Ayafor,
for presenting the report to the Council. Our thanks
also go to the Director, Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, for presenting the Secretary-
General's report (S/2001/939).

We are pleased to see the members of the Panel
participating in today's debate. We commend the Panel
for producing a detailed, documented and thorough
analysis, which provides us with further understanding
of the complex illegal networks and operations in arms
and other economic activities that affect peace and
stability in West Africa. It also addresses important
aspects of the strengthening of the effectiveness of the
implementation of Security Council sanctions.

With regard to the activities of the Panel, my
delegation takes note with satisfaction of its attachment
to the provisions of paragraph 20 of resolution 1343
(2001), which provided for the submission of the
relevant information collected in the course of the
investigation to the attention of the Governments
concerned for their subsequent action. We consider that
principle to constitute the most productive method of
work for such monitoring bodies.

The report offers a number of worthy
recommendations aimed at strengthening the
effectiveness of the measures taken by the Council to
bring peace and stability to the countries of the region.
We believe that the recommendations contained in the
report constitute useful terms of reference for further
discussions in the Security Council and the sanctions
Committee.

I would also like to make brief comments on
some of those recommendations which, in our view,
may provide a good basis for ensuring effective
implementation of the sanctions imposed by the
Security Council.

My delegation supports in principle the
recommendations on the measures aimed at preventing
forged aircraft registrations, especially with respect to
the increased role of the International Civil Aviation
Organization and other civil aviation authorities. We
also support a number of the Panel's recommendations
on weapons, in particular those measures aimed at
curbing activities of the armed non-State actors in the
Mano River Union, which continue to be a
destabilizing factor in the subregion. We also think it
might be useful to discuss some specific
recommendations on the information exchange
mechanism on weapons procurement with the
Economic Community of West African States, which
has an established role to play in the area. The
recommendations on end-user certificates, in our view,
also merit close consideration, including within the
competence of other relevant forums.

We take note of the Panel's observation that the
travel ban has been the most effective sanction and at
the same time the source of the greatest number of
complaints from individuals affected by the sanctions
regime. We agree with the Panel's recommendation
that the travel-ban list should not be set in stone and,
for humanitarian reasons, should be appropriately
adjusted. My delegation looks forward to the Panel's
useful input in this regard to the work of the sanctions
Committee.

We read with great interest the Panel's
recommendation on the strengthening of the United
Nations internal capacity to monitor compliance with
resolution 1343 (2001), drawing on the experience of
the Angolan Monitoring Mechanism. However, we
believe that this recommendation might be further
extended to provide for the setting up within the United
Nations of a permanent body, an office or unit within
the Secretariat, which would conduct comprehensive
monitoring of the sanctions regime. We believe that the
establishment of such a mechanism could be an
important part of the general sanctions policy and
conflict prevention strategy of the Security Council.
In accordance with the mandate, the Panel
investigated specific areas of Liberian economic
activities and their roles in generating revenue for
illegal activities, in violation of Security Council
sanctions, and produced a number of recommendations
which require further close consideration by the
Council.

We have studied the Secretary-General's report
on the humanitarian consequences of the possible
future measures of the Council with regard to Liberia,
and take serious note of the conclusions contained in
paragraph 47 of the report. We believe that when this
issue is taken up more closely by the Council, the
analysis and conclusions of the Secretary-General
should be given priority consideration.

In a few days, the Council will embark on the
second review of the effectiveness of the existing
sanctions regime with regard to Liberia, in accordance
with paragraph 12 of resolution 1343 (2001). In this
connection, I wish to express my delegation's readiness
to engage in scrupulous work and careful analysis of
all the sources and factors involved to follow up the
recommendations of this report and other reports
presented to the Council, with a View to ensuring that
the course of action that the Council takes will be fully
justified and aimed at contributing in the most effective
manner to the restoration of peace and security in West
Africa.

