Ms. Louk (Estonia): We join others in offering our deepest condolences to the families of the victims of the recent attack on the Elite Hotel. We also join others in thanking the briefers for their insightful overviews. It is important that despite the multiple challenges, including the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, Somalia keep moving ahead with the long- term goals of State-building. We commend Somalia on the progress made thus far and encourage them to stay on course. Estonia warmly welcomes the resumption of dialogue between the Federal Government of Somalia and the federal member states, and strongly encourages all stakeholders to continue their talks to pursue national priorities, including the modalities of timely and peaceful elections. Given the high stakes of the upcoming elections, it is crucial that no unilateral actions be taken and that broad-based political agreements be reached. We hope that the stakeholders can agree on timely and inclusive elections, which represent progress beyond the 2016 model. We are concerned about the sexual-intercourse-related crimes bill proposed by the parliamentary committee and urge the Parliament not to pass any legislation that is in violation of international standards. We also call on the authorities to address the attacks on freedom of expression and to investigate attacks on journalists and media workers accordingly. Lastly, we call on the Federal Government to take steps towards establishing the national human rights commission, which has a key role in promoting and protecting human rights. Estonia welcomes the fact that the Working Group on Children in Armed Conflict has agreed its most recent conclusions on Somalia, and we are looking forward to their implementation. The security situation remains a major challenge. We condemn in the strongest terms the attacks by Al-Shabaab and offer condolences to the victims of the attacks. Despite the COVID-19 pandemic, all stakeholders must ensure that progress is also made on the security front. We further call on the Federal Government of Somalia to accelerate the updating of the transition plan. Clear timelines, clear tasks and a clear vision are crucial in order to achieve the end goal of Somalia taking full responsibility for its security. Finally, Estonia is deeply concerned about the current humanitarian situation, which has suffered the triple shock of the COVID-19 pandemic, a locust infestation and floods. We are concerned that the humanitarian response plan remains underfunded, with 3.5 million people facing severe food insecurity for the remainder of the year. We call on the international community to address the funding gap. I would like to conclude by expressing Estonia's gratitude and support to United Nations personnel in Somalia, the African Union Mission in Somalia and the Somali security forces for their efforts, commitment and sacrifices to bring peace and stability to Somalia.
