Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Special Adviser Benomar for his briefing
today. The Chinese delegation listened with great
interest to the statements made by Foreign Minister
Al-Qirbi and Secretary General A1 Zayani of the Gulf
Cooperation Council (GCC).

Since the launch of the National Dialogue last
March, thanks to the hard work of the Government
and people of Yemen and the broad support from the
international community, the political process in Yemen
has made steady progress. The National Dialogue
is making headway. The Supreme Commission for
Election and Referendum is making preparations for a
new constitution and general elections. The restricting
of the armed forces is forging ahead in an orderly
fashion. Active measures have been taken to implement
the priority plan for economic and social reconstruction.
China welcomes these developments.
At the same time, the economic situation of Yemen
remains bleak and the security situation volatile.
The political transition process is still facing some
challenges. National reconciliation remains a daunting
task. Given the current situation, we hope that all
stakeholders in Yemen and the nation as a whole will
move towards the long-term interests of the country,
preserve unity, effectively apply the GCC initiative
and its implementation mechanisms, resolve political
differences through dialogue and consultations, and
continuously promote the national political process and
national reconciliation.

China appreciates the good offices of the Gulf
Cooperation Council in Yemen and supports the efforts
of the Secretary-General and his Special Adviser,
Mr. Benomar, in assisting Yemen to press ahead with
the political process. At the ministerial meeting of
the Friends of Yemen group, held recently in New
York, a consensus was reached to continue to support
the Yemeni Government in its political, economic
and security sector reforms. China welcomes this
consensus and hopes that the international community
will take this opportunity to make full use ofthe United
Nations and the Friends of Yemen mechanism and
enhance coordination and synergy in order to promote
the political process in Yemen. During this transition
process, the international community must fully
respect the independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Yemen and the right of the people of Yemen
to choose their own path of national development.

Over the years, China has rendered continuous
support to the Yemeni Government in its efforts to
promote political and social reforms in the country
in order to help Yemen achieve economic and social
development and improve the country's humanitarian
situation. China has provided assistance within the
scope of its means, including a total of ¥325 million
in economic assistance and over ¥30 million in
humanitarian assistance. We will further scale up our
assistance to Yemen. We also call on the international
community to make good on its commitments and help
Yemen speed up the pace of economic recovery.

