Mr. Gillerman (Israel): At the outset, I would
like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
Presidency and express to you our appreciation for
your fair and very wise stewardship of the Council.

Today, the Jewish people and the people of Israel
commemorate Yom Hashoah, Holocaust Remembrance
Day. I know that all delegates will join with me in
commemorating the memory of the 6 million victims of
the Holocaust, innocent Jews who suffered
unspeakably at a time when there was no Jewish State
to defend them.

It is with great regret that the Council has been
compelled to convene again on this day, not to
condemn the murder of innocent civilians by
organizations such as Hamas but to denounce the
demise of a key architect of those massacres. As we
have said time and again, this pattern of activity does
no good to the prestige and reputation of the Council.

Just hours before the targeted counter-terrorist
operation against Mr. Rantisi, the organization he
headed claimed responsibility, together with the
Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade, for yet another suicide
attack - this time at the Erez Crossing, where
Palestinian workers enter Israel daily. The attack killed
20-year-old Kfir Ohayon of Eilat, a guard at the
crossing, and injured several others. It was perpetrated
by an individual who had been given a licence to work
in Israel by us, and against a person whose primary
task was to facilitate the entry of Palestinian workers to
their place of employment and allow them to make a
living. In recent days, there have also been repeated
and indiscriminate Qassam rocket fire at civilian
communities in Israel and continued attempts to
perpetrate acts of terrorism. On any fair and balanced
account, those acts of terror should be the focus of the
Council's special and specific attention, not the acts of
self-defence necessary to prevent them.

Were the current Palestinian leadership a genuine
partner in peace, defensive actions such as the one
Israel was recently compelled to undertake would not
have been necessary. The Palestinian obligation to
dismantle the terrorist infrastructure, arrest terrorists,
confiscate illegal weapons and stop incitement is as
obvious and fundamental a legal imperative as it is a
moral one. Under the road map, Security Council
resolutions, signed agreements and international law,
the Palestinian Authority is required to arrest
murderers like Rantisi - not give them protection and
safe haven. That is what the international community
demands in the global fight against terrorism.

If there is something extrajudicial here, it is
the total refusal of the Palestinian leadership - for
years - to act against terrorism, in violation of every
judicial standard.

I need not repeat the litany of cold-blooded
murder which Mr. Rantisi was responsible for and was
intent on continuing. He was a radical terrorist leader
that joyfully and publicly gloated and celebrated over
the murder of innocent men, women and children
whom he sent to be killed. He sought to destroy any
peace initiative and called for the destruction of Israel
by force of arms. He believed that violence was the
only option. He developed alliances with terrorist
groups operating around the world, supported by
regimes in Syria and Iran, and was committed to
fostering terrorism in Iraq and throughout the Western
world. A paediatrician by training, this doctor led the
campaign to mobilize women and children for use in
homicide bombings. He turned his craft from the
healing of children to the killing of children. He was
indeed the doctor of death.

Rantisi was a trader in death, a doctor of death,
and no one should be surprised that he paid the price
for it. For those who criticize his targeting as
extrajudicial, let me say that we are sensitive to those
concerns. Had it been possible to arrest Mr. Rantisi,
while minimizing harm to civilian life, Israel would
have done so, as is its usual practice. But in the
absence of any cooperation from the Palestinian
Authority and any viable means of arrest, Israel is
sometimes left no choice but to target those who plan,
orchestrate and execute the murder of our innocent
civilians.

We are engaged in an armed conflict against
terrorism of an unparalleled scale, magnitude and
brutality. It is not good enough to affirm in theory
Israel's right to defend itself in this conflict, but then in
practice seek to deny us the right to specifically target
those illegal combatants directly responsible, as well as
their command and control structure. We do so in a
manner that is both necessary and proportionate, and
when no other realistic option of detention or
prevention exists. In these circumstances, such actions
are wholly consistent with international law and we
have little doubt that nations similarly faced with such
a horrific choice would act accordingly and, indeed,
have done so - and are doing so - with the support
or acquiescence of the international community.

The targeting of Mr. Rantisi was not merely a
necessary defensive act to prevent ongoing and planned
attacks against innocent civilians. It is part of the
global struggle against terrorism that has been thrust
upon all of us. It sends a clear message that those who
deal in terrorism - those who have exported airplane
hijackings, kidnappings and suicide bombings to the
world - will have no immunity. The people who have
brought bloodshed to the streets of Israel, New York,
Bali, Manila and Madrid cannot expect to make their
own terrorist hornets' nests a sanctuary.

In line with Security Council resolutions 1368
(2001), 1373 (2001), 1377 (2001) and others, this
action makes clear that those who harbour or tolerate
terrorists, let alone those who forge alliances with
them, must be held accountable. The Palestinian
leadership and other regimes in our region cannot
brazenly violate international law by supporting
terrorists and then seek to deny Israel the right to
protect itself against them - a right guaranteed under
that very same law.

The entire world knows that Hamas is a terrorist
organization committed to the destruction of Israel and
of the hopes of peace by the deliberate massacre of
innocent civilians. The entire world, including the Arab
world, knows that Hamas is the enemy of peace and
stability in the region and that there is a clear
obligation to dismantle that terrorist organization.
Although politics and rhetoric may silence this, the
defensive targeting of Mr. Rantisi is no doubt a relief
for many innocent Palestinians whose life he
endangered by the strategy of terrorism and the
rejection of peace he so defiantly championed. It
should be greeted with great relief by the Palestinians
themselves that such a person is no longer among them,
endangering not just us, but them too.

The text that some have proposed today is yet
another example of misrepresentation and double
standards. It focuses yet again on the response to
terrorism rather than on the terrorism itself. It grossly
distorts reality and it seeks to bully the Council to
score political points. It is a document that any fair-
minded Council should be ashamed to adopt and that
any fair-minded delegation should be ashamed to
sponsor or even circulate.

As I have repeatedly said, there cannot be peace
and terror. There cannot be peace and Hamas. But as
the struggle against terrorism continues and at
considerable risk, Prime Minister Sharon has launched
a bold and unprecedented initiative to bring new hope
and opportunity to the peace process. The
disengagement plan, when approved, will lead to the
evacuation of settlements and military installations in
the Gaza Strip and parts of the West Bank. This move
is not required by the road map, but, as Mr. Sharon has
declared, it is an opportunity to restart the road map
process, to which Israel remains committed. Prime
Minister Sharon's bold initiative deserves the support
of the international community and of this Council, and
we are grateful for the many expressions of support we
have received. As the Secretary-General's Special
Coordinator recently announced before the Council, the
proposal is a step that should be welcomed by all.

In the absence of a peace partner, Israel has been
compelled to propose that unprecedented initiative
itself, but it hopes and plans to implement it in a
coordinated fashion that will ensure stability and
security for Israelis and Palestinians alike, provide a
sound humanitarian infrastructure and rekindle the
peace process.

The initiative is completely consistent with
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973). It can facilitate a two-State solution in the
context of the road map and, indeed, is also consistent
with previous peace proposals and President Bush's
vision. As Israel has declared, we remain committed to
a negotiated solution to all permanent status issues that
will guarantee peace, security, prosperity and stability
for both peoples, as well as secure and defensible
borders. As always, we recognize that no permanent
peace agreement can be imposed; it must be agreed by
negotiations between the parties. That is also set out
very clearly in the statements issued in connection with
the disengagement plan, for those who have taken the
care to read them.

For those who have sponsored and tolerated
terrorism and sought for decades to prejudge the
outcome of negotiations by pushing one-sided
resolutions through the United Nations, complaining of
a so-called unilateralist approach is the height of
hypocrisy that totally and, perhaps, deliberately
misunderstands this historic and courageous initiative.

This is a moment of opportunity, a chance for the
Palestinian side to prove finally that it is capable of a
new and responsible leadership that fights terror and
prefers the welfare of its people to the personal, corrupt
wealth of its leaders. The heart of the initiative is the
evacuation of settlements - something the Palestinian
side has long called for. And yet, so far the Palestinian
leadership and, as we have just heard, its representative
here have acted consistently with their long tradition of
never missing an opportunity to miss an opportunity.

As I have said before, the Palestinian leadership
has a choice and the international community and this
Council should encourage it finally to make the right
one. It need not be on the wrong side in the war against
terror. It can also choose a different path. It can prove
to the world that it is ready to assume responsibilities,
not just demand privileges. It can show that it is ready
to establish a democratic society that will respect the
rights of its people and the rights of its neighbours, and
not another terrorist dictatorship in the heart of the
Middle East.

Israel is ready, as always, to be a partner in peace
with such a leadership.

