The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Malanji for his briefing.

I now give the floor to Monseigneur Utembi.

Monseigneur Utembi (spoke in French): On behalf
of the Conference episcopale nationale du Congo
(CENCO) and in my personal capacity, we would like to
sincerely thank the Secretary-General and the members
of the Security Council for the special attention that
they pay daily to the situation in our country, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. At the beginning of
this new year of 2019, we would like to express our best
wishes to them. We are pleased to have this opportunity
to provide a general overview of the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, focusing on a
few points.

First, recalling the sociopolitical commitment ofthe
Church, since 2003, the Catholic Church has supported
the Congolese people through numerous actions,
in particular through civic and electoral education,
to promote the dignity of the human person and to
strengthen democracy in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. That commitment was also expressed
through mediation, which resulted in the comprehensive
and inclusive political agreement known as the Saint-
Sylvestre agreement, which essentially focused on the
electoral process to ensure the legitimacy of the elected
institutions. Through a pastoral approach, CENCO
enabled the parties involved in the electoral process to

resolve certain differences and to reach agreement, inter
alia, on the electoral register and on the use of voting
machines for the elections that have just taken place.

With regard to the electoral mission, CENCO
participated in observing the elections through its
Justice and Peace Commission in order to contribute to
the credibility of the electoral process in our country.
For the presidential, national and provincial legislative
elections of 30 December 2018, CENCO's electoral
observer mission trained 41,026 short-term and long-
term observers. It obtained the accreditation of 40,850
observers. One hundred and seventy-six candidates did
not receive accreditation. However, they assisted in
monitoring incidents outside the polling centres.

From the pool of accredited observers, at least one
was deployed to each of the 21,784 polling stations
throughout the entire country. That represents 100 per
cent comprehensive coverage of the polling stations,
as foreseen by the Commission electorale nationale
independante, with a ratio of one observer to every
one to two polling stations. Of the 40,850 observers,
959 were deployed to Beni, the cities of Beni and
Butembo, and Yumbi. Rather than the 40,000 short-
term observers who were initially planned for, only
39,824 were effectively deployed. Until the very
moment when text messaging services were cut off,
the CENCO observer mission had already received at
least 43 per cent of the data transmitted by its observers
in areas covered by mobile-phone networks, as well as
those who were in areas lacking such coverage but had
access to Thuraya satellite phones. It is worth noting
that our observer mission worked synergetically with
other accredited observers, in particular those of the
Church of Christ in the Congo and of the Synergie des
Missions d'Observation Citoyenne des Elections, but
it worked independently from all parties and political
platforms and received no financing from them.

With respect to methodology, in terms of the
collection and transmission ofdata, the CENCO observer
mission had a data collection and analysis hub with a
call centre staffed by 408 agents who were in contact
with observers on the ground. In order to enable data
to be transmitted back to the centre from areas lacking
cell-phone network coverage, during the period when
texting service was suspended, the CENCO observer
mission had the use of 600 Thuraya telephones, which
enabled the CENCO mission to collect data relating to
more than 13,110,999 of the 18,329,318 votes cast that
were reported by the Commission electorale nationale
independante, which translates into more than 71.53 per
cent of legitimately cast votes counted by CENCO.

In terms of analysis, in order to analyse the
number of votes received by the various candidates for
the presidency of the Republic, the CENCO election
observermission usedaparallel vote tabulation based on
a representative sample of 10.72 per cent of the polling
stations, applied proportionally to each of the electoral
wards of the provincial deputies, that is, territories in
rural areas and communes in urban areas, resulting
in a sample of 7,886 polling stations for parallel vote
tabulation. That sample was selected randomly and has
a strict margin of error of 1 per cent, with a confidence
level of 95 per cent. In addition, a further verification
measure was taken based on a representative sample
of 42.92 per cent of the votes legitimately cast that
confirmed the trends just mentioned. Lastly, voting
trends remained relatively similar following the
counting of 71.53 per cent ofthe legitimately cast votes.

Concerning the 30 December 2018 holding of
elections, voting took place throughout the entire
country, with the exception of a few areas, namely,
Beni territory and the cities of Beni and Butembo,
in North Kivu province, and Yumbi territory, in Mai
Ndombe province. Our observers noted a significant
level of voter participation, although some of them were
unable to participate effectively in the voting owing to
unforeseen circumstances.

The provisional results of the 30 December 2018
elections were made public by the Commission
electorale nationale independante on 10 January.
CENCO took note of the publication of the provisional
results, which make it possible, for the first time in
our country's recent history, to embark upon the path
leading to a peaceful transition of power at the highest
levels of the State. However, in its analysis of certain
elements that it has considered objectively, the CENCO
observer mission noted that the results ofthe presidential
election, as they appear in the publication issued by
the Commission electorale nationale independante,
do not correspond to the data collected by the mission
originating at the polling and counting stations.

We call for a recommendation to be made based
on the solidarity of the United Nations with the
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
call on the Security Council to ask the Commission
electorale nationale independante to publish, as soon
as possible, the records of the polling stations so as
to enable candidates to compare their data with that
of the Commission. That would dispel any doubts
regarding the number of votes among the people and
the candidates, and thereby put their minds at case. In
the case of any potential challenge to the outcome, the
Security Council could invite the relevant stakeholders
to prioritize the path of truth and peace, which would
go a long way towards maintaining peace and stability
in our country.

In conclusion, in reiterating CENCO's sincere
gratitude to the Security Council, we once again wish
members a happy 2019 and commend the Council to
God so that, through its constructive deliberations,
peace can be achieved in our country, the Democratic
Republic of Congo.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Monseigneur Utembi for his briefing.

I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.


