Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): I join other
Security Council members in welcoming once again
the Special Envoys, Mr. Jan Eliasson and Mr. Salim
Salim, to the Council. I wish to express my
delegation's gratitude to them for their service to peace
in Darfur.

The situation in Darfur today is dire, as the
Security Council witnessed for itself when visiting the
region earlier this month. It is indeed deeply troubling
that the Darfur conflict has intensified, that the
humanitarian situation has worsened and that the
political process has faltered. More than that, however,
it is disconcerting that all of this has taken place since
the adoption of resolution 1769 (2007) last July and the
initiation of the Sirte political process last October.

My delegation remains convinced that the
attainment of political reconciliation and agreement
has to be at the centre of the settlement of the Darfur

crisis by addressing the root causes of the conflict
rather than its symptoms. Peacekeeping operations,
humanitarian assistance, and courts of justice can and
must complement the political process and perhaps
even create the conditions for it, but they cannot be a
substitute for it.

We commend the sustained and untiring efforts
and hard work of the Special Envoys and the Joint
Mediation Support Team. The appointment of an
African Union/United Nations joint mediator after the
necessary consultations is essential.

My delegation believes that the Security Council,
for its part, needs to give greater focus and attention to
the political process and to take action as necessary to
support the process. The Security Council, together
with the Secretary-General, also needs to review the
United Nations strategy for Darfur and to identify
improvements that could be made. We believe that
members of the international community who could
prevail upon the rebels have the responsibility to do so.
We fully agree with an approach that involves putting
pressure on them, as others have mentioned. We also
appreciate the potential contribution that the
normalization of relations between the Sudan and Chad
can make in promoting agreement and reconciliation in
Darfur.

Ultimately, however, it is for the parties
themselves to come to the table and to achieve a
political agreement. They need to understand the
unique support of the international community in this
endeavour. It is not often that the international
community lends its support and helps rebel groups to
unify in negotiations with a Government. Therefore,
the international community needs to be assured that
this course of action remains the most viable one to
pursue.

The security situation is increasingly worrying
and increasingly compounding the humanitarian
situation. We are deeply concerned by reports of
humanitarian organizations reducing their operations as
a result of the security situation.

In spite of the less than ambitious political
process, the deployment of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) must
take place as scheduled, in order to help, among other
things, to strengthen security and protect civilians. The

Secretary-General noted in his latest report on
UNAMID (S/2008/400) that the security situation has

08-3959]
deteriorated throughout Darfur; that significant clashes
have continued between tribal groups, between rebel
movements and between rebel movements and the
Government and its affiliated forces; and that acts of
banditry have continued to increase, with attacks
against UNAMID and humanitarian personnel. In spite
of these difficulties, we need to do all we can to help
the people of Darfur.

It is clear that UNAMID's deployment needs to
be accelerated as much as possible. There are real
hurdles to overcome, not least those related to
infrastructure and logistics. In this regard, we urge
closer cooperation, coordination and consultation
between the Secretariat and UNAMID headquarters on
the one hand and the Sudanese authorities on the other.

A military solution is not possible in Darfur;
otherwise we would not be discussing the Darfur
situation today. All the parties should cease all
hostilities even though they have yet to exhaust their
energy. That energy should be directed to the
negotiating table rather than the battle front. Once
again, for us, the political process is key. The plight
and the future of the civilian population should be
reason enough to re-engage the political process.

