Mr. Barkin (United States of America): I thank the
briefers for their remarks today. The situation in the
Sahel demands that the international community focus
its efforts in an intelligent, deliberate and collaborative
way. Today's briefing is a step in that direction.

We are concerned that the Joint Force of the Group
ofFive for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) is struggling to become
fully operational, and we call on all donors to deliver on
their bilateral pledges to the Joint Force.

The United States is doing its part to strengthen
the Sahel. In fiscal year 2018, the State Department
provided $111 million in direct security assistance to
the G-5 Sahel Joint Force and another $200 million to
the national forces of the G-5 members. The United
States Agency for International Development provided
a total of $249 million in bilateral and regional
development funding as well as nearly $235 million in
humanitarian assistance.

But local and regional Governments of the Sahel must
also do their part to support efforts by the international
community. The Governments of the G-5 member
States should be leading this process. Regrettably, that
has not been the case in Mali, which is the epicentre
of instability in the region. We are disappointed at the
nearly total lack of progress by the Government of Mali
and the signatory armed groups in implementing the
substantive provisions of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali emanating from the Algiers
process. More must be done. We call for the signatories
and the Governments in the region to breathe new life
into the Algiers Agreement and to put the needs of the
people first.

Respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law are also critical components in
building the foundations for a stable Sahel. To this
end, the Joint Force must continue to strictly adhere
to the compliance framework to prevent, investigate,
address and report allegations of violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law. Government
forces, too, must abide by international humanitarian
law. We call on the Governments of Mali and Burkina
Faso to fully investigate reports that their security
forces committed human rights violations, including
allegations of extrajudicial killings, and to hold those
responsible accountable. United States Government
assistance efforts may be significantly restricted by
legislation if these critical human rights concerns are
not addressed.

Turning to the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), we thank President Kabore
for having convened the members of ECOWAS last
September to discuss terrorism. The summit united
the region and international partners, and ECOWAS's
$1 billion pledge to fight terrorism and address violent
extremism is an important step towards applying
regional solutions to the Sahel's security challenges.

We also welcome the joint French and German
initiative 4 the partnership for security and stability
in the Sahel - and the ongoing efforts by the European

Union to fill the gaps in its bilateral assistance. We look
forward to partnering together as the initiative develops.
Finally, we continue to hear calls to provide
additional United Nations direct assistance to the Joint
Force. We need to move past these requests and focus
on calling on the Joint Force to fully leverage already
existing mechanisms and to ask partners to honour the
pledges that they have made to the Joint Force, as well
as to support to the individual G-5-member militaries
that supply forces to the Joint Force.

The G-5 Sahel States must make progress
towards effective governance, respect for human
rights, accountability and inclusiveness, including the
meaningful participation of women, young people and
marginalized groups. Our collective efforts to stabilize
the region depend on this progress, and our combined
endeavours can achieve durable peace and stability and
unleash the potential of this vital region and its people.

