Mr. Binmubarak (Yemen) (spoke inArabic): Iwould
like at the outset to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
assuming the presidency of the Council for this month.
I wish you and the friendly delegation of Bolivia every
success. I also want to thank you for giving us the
opportunity to speak before the Council.

I would like as well to thank Mr. Mark Lowcock
for his briefing and for his efforts and those of his team
in Yemen.

The priority of the Security Council is to maintain
international peace and security by honouring United
Nations resolutions, standards and international laws,
not by imposing a reality on the Yemeni people, as
some are trying to do. The Security Council must
continue to play its role as a body concerned with
maintaining international peace and security, and work
on implementing its resolutions so that the Council
can preserve its credibility in addressing any threat to
international peace and security.

The Council has been present throughout the stages
of the political process in Yemen since 2011. Together
we have made great strides towards ending the Yemeni
crisis that has been killing our citizens. That progress
has been made in accordance with the agreed terms
of reference: the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative
and its implementation mechanism, the outcomes of
the national dialogue and relevant Security Council
resolutions, notably resolution 2216 (2015).

As members know, the delegation of the Houthi
militias chose not to attend the Geneva consultations.
However the Yemeni Government has supported and
continues to support the efforts of the Special Envoy
for Yemen, Mr. Martin Griffiths. We stand ready to
support his efforts in good faith - given the right
conditions - in any initial consultations that could
represent a true step forward in the Yemeni peace
process and attain a sustainable solution to the Yemeni
crisis. As we discuss the humanitarian situation in
Yemen, we must take into account the following points.

First, the humanitarian suffering of the Yemeni
people over the past three years is the result of a wanton
coup against the State. All Yemen's civil and military
institutions were hijacked by extremist ideological
militias that do not understand the meaning of human
rights, but instead only exploit human rights whenever
it suits their ideological and extremist ideas and serves
the interests of their rogue leaders working as regional
agents for Iran and Hizbullah.

Since 21 September 2014, my country has been
in a dark tunnel because of the Houthi militias. The
humanitarian situation has deteriorated in Yemen
although the political process had been moving
steadily forward, with the support of the countries of
the region and the international community, towards
achieving security and stability and building a civilian,
democratic, federal State where human rights are
respected, the dignity of women and youth is protected,
and the rights of the child and all vulnerable segments
of society are protected, and the principles of justice
and equality are honoured. However, the militias chose
to violate all humanitarian laws and values by launching
an aggression against the Yemeni people that spared
no one - not journalists, college professors, children,
women or even the Jewish and Baha'i communities,
which is unprecedented in our history.

Secondly, the Houthi militias perpetrated all forms
of killing, torture, forceful displacement of civilians
in all Yemeni cities occupied by force, including the
city of Taiz, whose citizens still suffer to this day, and
other Yemeni cities. Civilians are still suffering from
landmines planted by the Houthi militias, which have
claimed the lives of thousands, including women and
children. The number of landmines planted by the
militias is now some 2 million, and the number of
victims from June 2017 to June 2018 totalled 937 killed
and 2,013 injured.

Thirdly, as long as the conflict persists, the Yemeni
people will continue to suffer, and the militias will
continue to violate the rights of the Yemeni people.
They will continue to recruit children, force them to
drop out of school and send them to the battlefronts.
They will continue to exploit the difficult economic
situation of Yemeni families and use orphanages and
youth centres to recruit children to fight in their ranks.
The number of children soldiers now stands at 20,000,
with 1,316 casualties, including 552 were killed and 764
suffering from permanent disability.

Fourthly, the militias have not only perpetrated
those crimes, but also assaulted humanitarian and aid
workers according to reports from aid organizations.
They have detained and prevented the entry of 84 aid
vessels carrying food and oil. They have targeted seven
aid and commercial vessels in the Red Sea and looted
more than 696 trucks carrying aid. They are even selling

food items and humanitarian assistance on the black
market and giving them to the poor in exchange for
fighting in their ranks. They have detonated four trucks
and killed two drivers. Last September, those militias
broke into the silos of the World Food Programme in
Al-Hudaydah and kidnapped two workers. They burned
the silos and destroyed over 4,000 tonnes of food items.
They prevented the unloading of 11,979 tonnes of diesel
and 84,326 tonnes of petroleum in Al-Hudaydah seaport.

Everyone knows the grave violations of the Houthis
in the areas under their control. Last month, Human
Rights Watch documented a number of violations
against innocent civilians who were kidnapped and
taken hostage in an immoral and arbitrary way, in
grave violation of international law and international
humanitarian law. Since 2014, that organization has
documented dozens of cases of kidnapping, forced
detainment and disappearance, as well as torture, in
addition to hundreds of cases documented by Yemeni
human rights organizations. The Houthis are not only
perpetrating such blatant violations to silence their
political opponents and critics; they are also using
kidnapping and torture as blackmail to extract money
from innocent civilians in exchange for releasing their
loved ones.

Houthi militias have been torturing, beating,
hanging and removing the nails of detainees and
threatening to rape them or their families in order to
force innocent civilians and their families to pay a
ransom in exchange for their release. The detainees
have started to wish they were dead. Last month, those
militias detained 17 girls at Sana'a University. They
assaulted them for merely participating in a protest
against the policy of starvation adopted by the militias
against civilians in their areas of control. They also
assaulted their families when they called for their
release, in a manner not seen in Yemen prior to the
emergence of those outlaw militias.

The Yemeni Government reiterates its commitment

to international law, international humanitarian law and
human rights law. We ask that all those who violate such
laws be held to account. We underscore the importance
of working and coordinating with the relevant entities
and of opening offices for United Nations agencies
working to provide humanitarian assistance in the
temporary capital of Aden and other main cities, so
as to ensure the decentralization of humanitarian
work so that it is not affected by complicated military
operations. It would also ensure that militias do not
exploit silos and use them as a cover to perpetrate
military attacks in blatant violation of international
humanitarian law, or plant landmines that impede the
delivery of humanitarian assistance and endanger the
lives of civilians. Humanitarian assistance must be
provided to those in need.

We must also address the difficult economic
situation my country faces as a result of the war and
the fact that Houthi militias have taken control of my
country's resources, including its internal and external
reserves. That has a grave impact on the lives of the
citizens. The Government of the Republic of Yemen,
represented by His Excellency President Abdrabuh
Mansour Hadi Mansour, has therefore sought to restore
and revive Yemen's economy. We have taken a number
of essential and inevitable executive measures and
decisions in order to adapt to the exceptional situation.

The Central Bank took several measures to
meet the needs of primary goods importers, such as
implementing a fixed foreign exchange rate policy,
funded by a Saudi deposit, within a period not exceeding
15 days from the date of submission of the application.
We also took the decision to provide $100 million to the
Central Bank in order to cover the needs of small traders
whose applications amount to less than $200,000. We
provided $15 million to meet the needs of the Yemeni
oil company to help it restore market balance by selling
oil at suitable prices. We also took measures to limit the
impact of the black market created by Houthi militias,
organize requests for foreign currency and ensure the
stability of our national currency and prevent the rial
depreciation. That would enable us to provide primary
goods and their derivatives to our citizens.

Pertaining to the measures that Mr. Lowcock
addressed, our economic committee announced today
that it would postpone the implementation of the
executive mechanism related to credit-line measures on
importing commodities. We announced that we would
hold a workshop with Yemeni entrepreneurs and listen
to their views in a way that would facilitate the entry of
essential goods and commodities.

In that regard, we look forward to the vital role that
will be played by the United Nations and other donor
countries and institutions to ensure the stability of
Yemen's currency by providing assistance to Yemen in
foreign currency and transfers via the Central Bank,
similar to the action taken by the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia. On behalf of the Government and the people
of Yemen, we would like to thank the countries of the
Arab coalition, in particular the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia, other donors and the United Nations for
their efforts to alleviate the suffering of the Yemeni
people, the latest of which was a $70 million grant
from the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the United
Arab Emirates, in coordination with UNICEF, to pay
teacher salaries. I take this opportunity to call on all
donors to meet their obligations under the framework
of the 2018 humanitarian response plan for Yemen. The
humanitarian situation in Yemen should be enough to
turn the Council's words into action.

We appreciate all of the international community's
humanitarian efforts to alleviate the suffering of the
Yemeni people. However, we believe that the suffering
is man-made. There will be no sustainable solution
to the crisis unless we first address the root causes
of the problem in Yemen - that is, the coup d'etat
perpetrated by the Houthis - by finding a peaceful and
comprehensive political solution, based on the terms
of reference and on Council resolutions, particularly
resolution 2216 (2015).

We fear that these meetings of the Council will
become routine. At meetings, Council members
refer to statistics, numbers and victims, but, once
meetings adjourn, that information loses meaning.
As the Council is unable to exert pressure on militias
to compel them to submit to international will and
implement resolutions adopted under Chapter VII of
the Charter of the United Nations, it must send a clear
message to the Houthi militias that underscores that
the international community will not remain silent
while they perpetrate crimes and violations and cause
prolonged humanitarian suffering. They must opt for
either sustainable and genuine peace or face the Yemeni
people and the international community.

The meeting rose at 4.45 pm.
