Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Iwould like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your leadership of the Council this month, and to
thank you for convening this important meeting. I
would also like to thank the Chairs of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), the
Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1989 (2011), concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities, and the Counter-
Terrorism Committee for their efforts and their
briefings. I also thank the various Groups of Experts
for their work in the past few months.

Recent events have demonstrated the relevance
of maintaining a constant alertness, in this case the
appearance on Syrian territory of armed terrorist
groups, some of them linked to Al-Qaida, and most
of whom are transnational extremists or foreign
mercenaries fighting wars for others and targeting
Syria generally. Such factors hardly serve the interests
of the Syrian people, who, whether they are loyalists
or opponents, are proud and hope to maintain their
country's stability. Terrorism - the destruction of
hospitals, educational institutions, schools, universities,
mosques, churches, civil aircraft and diplomatic
missions, as well as the looting of factories, the
kidnapping of Muslim and Christian religious leaders,
the pillaging of archeological sites and cemeteries,
the abduction of peacekeepers working for the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force - how does
that serve the interests of Syria and the Syrian people?

Two months ago, my country's Government
submitted an official request for the Al-Nusra Front
organization, responsible for hundreds of terrorist
operations and suicide bombings in Syria, to be included
on the Al-Qaida Committee's consolidated list of
individuals and entities associated with Al-Qaida. We
are still waiting for the inclusion of that organization,
whose terrorist nature has moreover been recognized
by some Security Council members. It has admitted on
its website that it executed 600 people in Syria over the
past year - a single year.

We all know now that the spread of terrorism and
extremism in Syria is happening with the blessing,
and even the support, of some Council members, and
is welcomed and supported by Salafist, Wahhabi and
Taqfiri organizations. Some individuals claim to be
leaders of counter-terrorism efforts, and there have
even been nine attempts by some members of the
Council to issue press statements condemning terrorist
attacks that have resulted in hundreds of civilian
victims in Syria. It is bizarre that no mention has been
made of the fact that the Chair of the 1267 Committee,
His Excellency the Ambassador of Australia, neglected
to say anything in his briefing about the activities of
Al-Qaida in Syria - terrorist activities of which all of
us here are aware.

While over the past two years we have addressed
more than 160 letters to the Security Council on the
spread of terrorism in my country in order to notify
members of barbarous terrorist attacks and suicide
bombings in Syria - and in spite of statements and
reports from the United Nations, States and Western
research institutions, as well as prestigious media
organizations, which have all underscored the existence
of a spike in terrorist activities in Syria, and affirmed
that terrorists from around the world have been flowing
into Syria - to this day we have seen no practical
action from the Counter-Terrorism Committee aimed
at implementing measures to combat terrorism and the
necessity ofstemming its financing in Syria or to request
accountability from States that openly support such
individuals. It seems that today Syria is condemned to
be the only entity implementing resolution 1373 (2001)
in a first line of defence against terrorism.

The Group ofExperts ofthe 1373 (2001) Committee
underscores in its current programme of work that
it is seeking to attach greater importance to the
implementation by Member States of resolution 1624
(2005) and of strategies to counter incitement to terrorist
acts, wherever they may originate. In that respect, we
call on the Committee to enhance the effectiveness of
its work through the following measures.

First, it must put an end to the destructive role of
media, supported by the Governments of certain States,
in inciting to terrorism, spreading extremist ideology
and deepening the secular, religious and sectarian
divisions that may exacerbate the crisis in Syria and
other States of the region. Secondly, it must fight the
exploitation of the Internet and social networks to
incite terrorism and to mislead large numbers of young
people, including Americans. Thirdly, it must dry up
the sources of financing for terrorist groups.

The Council, in its presidential statement of
15 January 2013 (S/PRST/2013/1), reiterated the need
for Member States to refrain from providing any form
of direct or indirect support to entities or individuals
participating in or in any way linked to terrorist attacks,
by, for instance, preventing the recruitment of members
into terrorist groups and prohibiting the provision of
weapons to terrorists.

In that respect, I would refer to the final report of
the Panel of Experts established pursuant to resolution
1973 (2011), published as the annex to document
S/2013/99, on the participation of Arab and regional
States in transferring weapons and mercenaries from
Libya to Syria. I call on the Security Council to take
all necessary measures in that respect without delay.
States that arm, finance, train or facilitate the travel
of elements from armed terrorist groups to Syria
or provide them with safe haven are accomplices to
terrorist attacks and responsible for bloodshed in
Syria. Their actions not only fly in the face of Security
Council resolutions on counter-terrorism, but directly
negate resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012) and
the Geneva communique, which all affirm the need
to achieve a peaceful settlement to the Syrian crisis
through a Syrian-led political process.

Member States have always affirmed the need
to ensure that weapons of mass destruction do not
fall into the hands of terrorists, and have tasked the
1540 Committee with monitoring and coordinating
related efforts to ensure that States uphold the provisions
of the resolution by refraining from supporting
terrorists or possessing or producing weapons of mass
destruction.

It is striking that some Member States, including
permanent members of the Council and members of the
Committee, are attempting to hinder follow-up to the
Syrian Government's request to send a neutral technical
mission under the auspices of the Secretary-General
to investigate cases of the use by terrorist groups of
chemical substances against civilians and military in
the Khan al-Assal area of Syria. I would also like to
reiterate the Syrian Government's willingness to host
a technical commission of inquiry on the incident at
Khan al-Assal, pursuant to the memorandum conveyed
in the letter dated 3 April, addressed to the High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs.
Concerning the issue of Israel, on Sunday,
5 May, military and civilian positions were targeted in
Damascus in yet another demonstration of the direct
link existing between the terrorist policies of Israel and
the activity of terrorist groups and foreign mercenaries,
who targeted several military positions simultaneously
with the Israeli incursions. The statements issued by
several countries encouraged Israel to launch that
aggression. The Security Council must shoulder its
responsibility to condemn that incident and to ensure
that States that support terrorists are held accountable for
their attacks on Syria, cease their destructive practices
and uphold their agreements under international law
and the Charter of the United Nations.

I will provide the Council with the full text of my
statement.

