Mr. Grauls (Belgium) (spoke in French): Allow
me at the outset to thank you, Sir, for your words of
welcome and to express my pleasure at taking my place
at the Security Council table. You can rely on my full
support and that of my delegation.

I should also like to thank Mr. Moreno-Ocampo,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, for his
briefing. Belgium is particularly alarmed by the
information it contains, as conveyed to us by the
Prosecutor.

Belgium's position on the issue of Darfur is well
known. The search for a comprehensive solution
entails an approach comprised of four dimensions: the
political, the military, as represented by the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), the humanitarian and the legal. We view
the elements of that four-fold approach as being
complementary to one another.

The fight against impunity is undoubtedly an end
in and of itself, but it is not just that. The
condemnation of those responsible for the most serious
crimes - war crimes and crimes against humanity -
may contribute directly or indirectly by promoting
progress with respect to the other pillars of the
comprehensive approach. It can do so directly by
ensuring that no more harm can be done by those who,
for example, impede the distribution of humanitarian
assistance, the deployment of UNAMID or the political
process. It can do so indirectly through the deterrence
effect.
We must once again deplore not merely the lack
of cooperation from the Government of the Sudan but
even outright support for individuals who are the
subjects of arrest warrants, in particular Mr. Ahmad

Harun. I need hardly recall that resolution 1593 (2005),
by which the situation in Darfur was referred to the
International Criminal Court, was adopted under
Chapter VII of the Charter. On the basis of the
evidence presented by the Prosecutor, the Court
decided - in full independence and based on the
criteria set out in the Rome Statute - that the Sudan
had undertaken no proceedings with respect to
Mr. Harun or Mr. Kushayb in relation to crimes that are
the subject of proceedings under way at the
International Criminal Court.

The overall context in Darfur is of great concern.
The prospects for the political process remain
discouraging, and the recent escalation of violence,
both by the rebels and by Government forces with the
support of Janjaweed militias, targeting civilian
populations, is particularly disturbing. People are
undergoing unspeakable suffering, including
displacements, killings, rapes and other violence.

It is at this difficult juncture that, for the reasons I
have enumerated, the judicial path must be followed
with determination. Crimes must not be denied: they
must be identified through a rigorous, authorized
judicial process. The Prosecutor's conclusion that a
criminal plan, involving the entire State apparatus,
exists is particularly alarming. If the existence of such
a plan is established, those responsible must be brought
to justice.

My delegation has taken note of the Prosecutor's
intention to submit his evidence to the judges of the
International Criminal Court soon. My delegation urges
the Sudanese authorities to cooperate fully with the
Prosecutor and the Court, as they are obliged to do
under resolution 1593 (2005), by apprehending and
transferring to The Hague the two individuals who are
subjects of arrest warrants. More than a year after those
arrest warrants were issued, it is time for the Security
Council to remind the Sudanese Government of its
obligation, under resolution 1593 (2005), to cooperate
with the Court.

I recall too that this is also the position of the
entire European Union, which, in its 31 March 2008
declaration, called on the Government of the Sudan to
cooperate unconditionally with the Court. Belgium
thus fully supports the draft presidential statement
submitted by Costa Rica to that end.

The first indications from the Security Council
mission that is currently in the Sudan do not make it
possible to detect any change in the position of the
Sudanese authorities. Whatever the future decisions of
the Court, and without prejudging such decisions,
Belgium will continue to robustly urge the Security
Council, consistent with its own decisions, do
everything in its power to ensure that the decisions of
the Court are implemented.

