Mr. Jeremic' (Serbia): I thank you, Sir, for
convening this meeting of the Security Council on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), pursuant to resolution 1244 (1999).

At the outset, on behalf of the Republic of Serbia
I would like to offer my deepest condolences to all
those affected by Friday's terrorist attack on United
Nations House in the Nigerian capital of Abuja. We
share the revulsion and condemnation expressed by the
Secretary-General and other Member States. Serbia
will continue to play an active role in global efforts to
counter the scourge of terrorism in all its forms.

I thank the Acting Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for his remarks, and gratefully
acknowledge the unequivocal statement in the report
(S/2011/514) that UNMIK's mission priorities remain
unchanged. Serbia looks forward to the swift
appointment of a new Special Representative. We will
continue to be actively engaged in the consultations to
produce an acceptable nomination. This will help
ensure that UNMIK remains an indispensable pillar of
peace and stability in Kosovo.

I would like to once again reaffirm my
Government's position on Pristina's attempt at
unilateral secession from Serbia. We do not and we
shall not recognize it, explicitly or implicitly. This is
mandated by the democratic will of our people and
enshrined in our Constitution.

A substantial majority of United Nations Member
States - and of those seated in the Security Council -
continues to respect Serbia's sovereignty and territorial
integrity, in accordance with the basic principles of the
United Nations Charter and the Helsinki Final Act. On
behalf of Serbia, I would like to reiterate our deep
gratitude for their support and solidarity in the face of
tremendous pressure. We urge them to maintain their
principled stance, thus ensuring that unilateral moves
to impose outcomes on ethnic and territorial disputes
are not legitimized, and thereby preventing Kosovo's
unilateral declaration of independence (UDI) from
becoming a dangerous and destabilizing precedent for
the world.

A little over a month ago, the situation in our
region suddenly became much less secure, stable and
predictable. This was the direct consequence of the
calculated decision of the ethnic Albanian secessionist
leadership to order an unprovoked armed incursion into
northern Kosovo as part of a sinister plan to forcibly
impose an illegitimate and unquestionably unwanted
regime on the residents of that part of the province. I
urge the Security Council to send a clear message to
the perpetrators that their unilateralism is totally
unacceptable.

The crisis began on Monday 25 July, when
Pristina's special operations militia, the so-called
Regional Operational Support Units (ROSU), was
mobilized and equipped with full riot gear. Dozens of
armoured personnel carriers transported hundreds of

heavily armed men across the Ibar River. This blatantly
violated the long-standing agreement between Pristina
and the European Union Rule of Law Mission
(EULEX) that ROSU is not to be deployed in the North
without the latter's approval. The unsanctioned act of
sending ethnic Albanian paramilitaries from southern
Kosovo was perceived by the majority population of
northern Kosovo as an attempt to occupy the territory.

Serbia's reaction to the ROSU incursion was
swift but measured. Within hours, my Government sent
an official delegation to northern Kosovo to help ease
tensions. They began negotiations with the Kosovo
Force (KFOR) about restoring stability in the province.
By the morning of 26 July, the KFOR Commander,
Major General Erhard Biihler of the German Army, had
secured what we believed was an agreement with
Pristina for ROSU to withdraw from northern Kosovo.
After an initial pullback, however, some of the
paramilitaries turned around and started heading back.
This resulted in skirmishes with local Serbs, leading to
a number of casualties, including one fatality. Later
that day, the ROSU militants began to leave northern
Kosovo for good. At the time, it appeared that calm
and the status quo ante would be quickly restored
without further altercations.

On the morning of 27 July, however, attention
was drawn to a highly regrettable incident at one of the
checkpoints, where masked individuals set fire to the
buildings there. The Serbian Government strongly and
immediately condemned this act of extremism. We also
indicated our readiness to work with relevant
stakeholders to uncover the arsonists' identities and
motives and to determine whose instructions they were
following. A few days later, Belgrade and KFOR came
to an agreement on how to keep ROSU and the
so-called Kosovo Customs out of northern Kosovo. On
3 August, KFOR headquarters issued an official
communique outlining the parameters of the interim
agreement.

Ensuring peace and security in Kosovo is the
responsibility of the Security Council, as per resolution
1244 (1999). To understand what happened and to
determine who is responsible for the dramatic drop in
stability throughout the territory, we asked to address
the Council as events continued to escalate. An
emergency meeting did in fact take place; regrettably,
our voice was not allowed to be heard on that day.
From the outset of this crisis, our position has
remained the same, as I made clear in my letter to the

Secretary-General, the text of which has been
designated an official document of the Council
(S/20ll/482). I repeat it today - the status quo ante
must be reinstated. Those who destabilized northern
Kosovo through the actions of ROSU must be brought
to account. Whoever gave the order to cross the Ibar
River violated an agreement with EULEX and must
suffer the consequences.

Today, in this Council meeting, we respectfully
ask for answers to some very pointed questions. Who
ordered the unilateral action of the ROSU militants on
25 July? Did anyone from the international community
know that the operation was about to be put into
effect? Why did EULEX disappear from northern
Kosovo in the wake of the ROSU incursion, leaving
Serbs with no international police protection
whatsoever? Why did EULEX not exercise its broad
executive power - clearly defined in the relevant
European Union (EU) joint action - to reverse the
unilateral decision of Pristina as soon as it had begun?
Should attempts to create a new reality on the ground
through the use of force be allowed to stand, especially
when dialogue between the parties was producing
results? What if Serbs had been the unilateralists,
instead of ethnic Albanians?

25 July was not the first time that Pristina has
purposely created instability. We have seen this
scenario before - a provocation followed by violence
and, finally, an attempt to blame the victim. Last
summer, for instance, an emergency meeting of the
Council was held in response to a forcible attempt to
establish a so-called Kosovo Government office in the
Serbian town of North Mitrovica.

Time and again, the international community has
unfortunately failed to confront Pristina's
unilateralism. Consider the March 2004 pogrom that
resulted in the destruction of 35 Orthodox churches
and monasteries in a three-day orchestrated campaign
of cultural cleansing. Instead of making sure that the
guilty were brought to justice, the international
community abandoned its standards-before-status
approach. The brutal attack on the foundation of our
national and religious identity was de facto rewarded,
and the unilateral declaration of independence was the
result. Pristina got away with it back in 2004, and had
few reasons to believe it would not do so again on
25 July.

Such behaviour cannot possibly contribute to
security in the Balkans and must be rejected and
condemned in the clearest possible terms. Silence
today would be interpreted in Pristina as acquiescence,
dramatically increasing the likelihood of further
unilateral actions in the North, such as attempting to
occupy the Valac electricity substation or the North
Mitrovica courthouse.

Several dangerous misconceptions have
circulated publicly over the past month or so. The
record must be set straight. One erroneous belief is that
the round of talks between Belgrade and Pristina that
was scheduled for 20 July was postponed by Serbia.
This is simply incorrect. We can bear no responsibility
for the last-minute decision made by the dialogue
facilitator to impose a hiatus on the process, which is
thankfully scheduled to resume in a few days' time.

A second misconception involves the misleading
term "parallel structures" to designate the Serbian
institutions in North Kosovo. Not only are they
legitimized by the fact that the overwhelming majority
of the population supports them, but in the North, no
alternative that passes the test of democracy exists.
They are the only ones that can function without
constant armed protection. The truly parallel structures
that operate in the territory are those created on the
basis of UDI and the so-called Constitution of the
Republic of Kosovo, a document that has never been
approved by UNMIK or this Council.

Finally, I should like to address the basis upon
which KFOR and EULEX operate in Kosovo. The only
accepted standard - both within NATO and the EU, as
well as in this Council - is resolution 1244 (1999) and
the status-neutral framework of the United Nations.
With regard to KFOR, I refer to paragraphs 5, 6, 7, 9
and 19 of the resolution, as well as to point 3 in annex
l and paragraphs 3 and 4 of annex 2. I also refer to
paragraph 5 of NATO'S 2010 Lisbon Summit
Declaration, which reads, in part: "KFOR remains in
Kosovo on the basis of United Nations Security
Council resolution 1244."

With regard to EULEX, I refer to paragraph 50 of
the Secretary-General's November 2008 report, which
was welcomed by the Council in a presidential
statement (S/PRST/2008/44). It reads:

"EULEX will fully respect Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999) and operate under the
overall authority and within the status-neutral
framework of the United Nations." (S/2008/692, para. 50)

I also underline the fact that the EU's own joint action
establishing EULEX begins with a direct reference to
paragraph 19 of resolution 1244 (1999).

I now turn to the current situation in Kosovo,
separate from the developments that I just addressed.
The Secretary-General's report underscores a number
of disturbing developments concerning the Serbian
community in the province. It says:

"Criminal incidents affecting minority
communities nearly doubled during the past three
months compared to the same period the previous
year" (S/2011/514, para. 31).

It also refers to figures from the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees that identify
a nearly record-low number of Kosovo Serb returnees:
95. That is less than half the number of those who
came back during the comparable period last year. That
is a deeply worrisome trend.

Unfortunately, the report underemphasizes
several alarming incidents that contributed to the
overall escalation of fear and uncertainty among
Kosovo Serbs. For instance, the report states that some
Serbian religious sites and Orthodox graveyards were
damaged and focuses on attacks by ethnic Albanian
extremists on two medieval holy sites - one against
the monastery of Zociste, near the ethnic Serb ghetto of
Velika Hoca, the other against the church of Kyriake in
the centre of the ancient Serbian capital of Prizren.

However, it fails to mention the most atrocious
example of this type of hate crime, despite the fact that
the Kosovo Mission of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe reported it to UNMIK at the
beginning of May and again at the beginning of June.
According to the Mission, the thirteenth-century
Church of St. John the Baptist in village of Samodreza
has been "frequently used as a toilet and a waste
disposal site by the pupils from the nearby [Kosovo
Albanian] elementary school for more than a decade."
Earlier this year, measures were finally taken to protect
the shrine, including the installation of metal doors at
its entrance. During the reporting period, unfortunately,
the doors were taken down, and the church again began
to be frequently desecrated. Let me underline how
important this holy site is for the Serbian people, as it
was built on the foundations of the church in which the
martyrs of the Battle of Kosovo took communion in
1389, before they went to face the Ottoman invaders.

The overall atmosphere during the reporting
period must be characterized as deteriorating. This has
been the case for some time now, for the roots of
democracy have failed to take hold in the province.
The United Nations Development Programme's most
recent democratization index for Kosovo concludes
that "democratic processes in Kosovo do not fulfil the
standards". That is consistent with the results of
Freedom House's 2011 Nations in Transit report,
published in June. It concluded that Kosovo's overall
democracy score declined more than any other in the
European region, especially in the areas of electoral
process, independent media, judicial framework and
national democratic governance. Also during the
reporting period, Europol released its biannual
Organized Crime Threat Assessment. It identified
Kosovo as a major European organized crime hub and
stated that ethnic Albanian groups "remain the most
prominent in trafficking heroin to and within the EU".

On the economic front, consider the Doing
Business 201] report jointly issued a few months ago
by the World Bank and the International Finance
Corporation. It compares business regulation in 183
economies around the world. Kosovo ranked overall
last in Europe, slipping below its already dismal results
for 2010. In addition, the Secretary-General's report
indicates that Kosovo lost preferential trade treatment
by the European Union, which means that products
originating from the province are again subject to EU
customs duties. The report also indicates that on 1
June, the International Monetary Fund (IMF)
announced the interruption of the l8-month stand-by
arrangement with Kosovo, which had violated its
budgetary and fiscal commitments to the IMF. Pristina
does not presently qualify to keep accessing IMF
funds. According to the report, this means that a
considerable amount of EU and World Bank funds will
not materialize either, as they are linked to clear
assurances on a sound macroeconomic framework.

On the political front, the murder trials of some
of so-called Prime Minister Hashim Thaci's close
associates were beginning to reveal awkward
connections between public figures and organized
crime. Based in part on the sobering testimony of
Nazim Bllaca, a confessed assassin and torturer for a
quasi-official security service controlled by Hashim
Thaci, senior lieutenants such as Fahredin Gashi and

Hysni Rama, could be convicted of war crimes, as
mentioned in annex l of the report.

In addition, a number of seemingly authentic,
publicly available videos show Mr. Bllaca negotiating
for contract killings with Azem Syla, a former
commander in the Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA) and
currently a deputy leader of Mr. Hashim Thaci's
political party. On the record, Mr. Bllaca has accused
Hashim Thaci of responsibility for 450 murders of
political opponents and witnesses to war crimes. Mr.
Bllaca claims he acquired this first-hand knowledge
while working in the special unit for executions of
Hashim Thaci's security service. He has said that he
reported directly to Azem Syla, identified by the
Council of Europe as a leading organized crime figure
in Kosovo, together with Fatmir Limaj. Limaj is a
former minister in Hashim Thaci's cabinet and a senior
KLA official who stands indicted for corruption and
war crimes by EULEX.

A key opposition leader and former KLA
commander as well as former prime minister, Ramush
Haradinaj, is being retried before The Hague Tribunal.
The indictment alleges that Haradinaj committed
crimes against humanity and violations of the laws or
customs of war between March and September 1998.
He is accused of directly participating in the murder of
a number of ethnic Serbs, non-KLA ethnic Albanians
and Roma civilians in order to exert control over
territory. He is also accused of being subsequently
involved in an orchestrated campaign of witness
tampering.

For the third Council meeting in a row, I have
taken up the serious allegations contained in a deeply
disturbing report released close to 10 months ago -
and overwhelmingly approved by the Council of
Europe Parliamentary Assembly on 25 January -
entitled "Inhuman treatment of people and illicit
trafficking in human organs in Kosovo". I believe that
it is our most solemn responsibility to come together in
the service of justice and to see that it gets done
through a comprehensive, independent investigation
accountable to the whole world.
I believe we have no right to settle for anything
less, for in each previous instance involving war crimes
and crimes against humanity in the Balkans, whichever
side the perpetrators belonged to and irrespective of
their political roles, the Security Council has given a
mandate to investigate. Serbia welcomes the EULEX

contribution to uncovering what occurred inside
Kosovo itself. But the harvesting and smuggling of
organs of innocent Serbian civilians took place beyond
that territory, as the relevant allegations appear to
encompass various United Nations Member States in
Europe, Asia and Africa. Only the kidnapping took
place within the contours of the province. And as we
all know, EULEX cannot operate at full capacity
anywhere outside Kosovo.

However significant the contribution of what
EULEX has called its task force might ultimately
become, it is an unassailable fact that the EU's law and
order mission in Kosovo currently has neither the
mandate nor the temporal and territorial jurisdiction to
carry out an investigation that would be comprehensive
in scope. On its own, the way it is, it has no ability to
ensure the cooperation of the world. Only a mechanism
created by the Security Council can do that.

We do not expect the discussion on this topic to
be concluded today. We are aware of the fact that
consultations are ongoing, and we appreciate the
efforts to reach a consensus in the Council on how to
decisively address these monstrous contentions. We
will continue to insist, however, that this body must
take action so that the full truth concerning these
unprecedented war crimes can be uncovered. Come
what may, Serbia will not forsake its duty to make sure
the Victims' families receive the justice they deserve.

The chasm of discord between the stakeholders
has been widened by Pristina's unprovoked
unilateralism. Its actions have been all the more
disappointing given the fact that we had believed the
dialogue was taking place in an atmosphere of good
faith, conducive to achieving compromise solutions to
all outstanding issues.

We were making progress. In the past few
months, agreements in principle were concluded on
aspects of the civil registry and on academic diplomas
issues, as well as on elements of freedom of
movement, including Kosovo Serb license plates. Yet
when Pristina felt it had hit the first bump in the road,
it struck out, unilaterally, turning to the instruments of
compulsion and violence.

My Government chose not to respond in kind. We
believe the only way to build bridges across the divide
is through dialogue. As one of the twentieth century's
most respected moral authorities once exclaimed, we
are tied together in a single garment of destiny, caught
in an inescapable network of mutuality. And whatever
affects one directly, he said, affects the other just as
much. This is the truth we live in.

Now is the time for each one of us to make a
decision about how to move forward. Our guiding
framework can be either the use of force, or dialogue.
The former is the choice of despair, the latter of hope.
One cannot have it both ways.

Unilateralism is incompatible with efforts to
reach a mutually acceptable solution to the problem of
Kosovo. Everyone must choose which road to take. No
equivocation is possible. Serbia reiterates its strong
preference for peace and will keep working
unrelentingly in its pursuit, despite the terrible setback
caused by Pristina's unilateralism. In the Balkans of
the twenty-first century, the unsanctioned use of force
should not produce an advantage for the party that
resorted to it, for that would be tantamount to an
encouragement to do it again.

I call on this Council to commit to ensuring that
when we meet next time, the only changes to the
reality on the ground are those that are the product of
agreement between the parties to the dialogue. Serbia
remains committed to the dialogue.

