Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): I, too, would
like to congratulate you, Madam President, on your
country's accession to the presidency of the Security
Council for this month and, at the same time, to express
my gratitude for inviting me to take part in the debate
on the human cost of the illicit transfer, destabilizing
accumulation and misuse of small arms and light
weapons, a topic that is of paramount importance to my
country, Benin.

My delegation welcomes the maintenance of the
small arms issue on the agenda of the Council. Like the
Conferences on the Humanitarian Impact of Nuclear
Weapons, the theme of today's debate will increase
international public awareness of the devastating
consequences of the accumulation and illicit circulation
of small arms and light weapons, as well as of the urgent
need to work in a coordinated and integrated manner to
end them.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2015/289), of which my delegation has taken
note. I would also like to express my great appreciation
to Prince Zeid Ra'ad Al Hussein, United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, for his contribution
to the debate, and to welcome Mr. Karamoko Diakite,
President of the Cote d'Ivoire chapter of the West Africa
Action Network on Small Arms.

Trafficking in small arms and light weapons in
Africa in general, and in the West Africa subregion
in particular, constitutes a major challenge to peace
and security. Such an uncontrolled epidemic carries a
significant human cost. Some 90 per cent of victims
of the hundreds of millions of light weapons and small
arms circulating in West Africa consist of able-bodied
people, women and children, all of whom indisputably
constitute human factors of development.

According to data collected by the UNICEF,
the use of small arms and light weapons in conflicts
maims and traumatizes whole generations of children,
both physically and psychologically. Long after peace
agreements are concluded, the number of small arms
and light weapons that remain in post-conflict societies
helps perpetuate a culture of violence. Some veterans
also consider their weapon a means of economic
survival. Women and children are exposed to the
dangers of those weapons, sometimes even within
their households, creating a vicious cycle of crime and
violence.

According to recent studies, over half a billion
small arms are in circulation worldwide, and l in
12 people carries a generally inexpensive light weapon.
Research has shown that in some places around the
world, an AK-47 or Kalashnikov assault rifle costs less
than a bag of corn or rice, facilitating their acquisition
by criminal networks and drug traffickers and thus
fomenting internal conflicts, crime, violence, assaults
of all kinds, burglaries, robberies and rapes.

The international community must intensify efforts
to stem the flow of weapons and destroy illicit stocks.
In that regard, I welcome the mechanisms and ongoing
programmes aimed at developing national, subregional
and regional expertise and capacity in order to limit the
availability of such weapons and to improve transfer
controls. The Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat
and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects, the International Tracing
Instrument, the Firearms Protocol and the United
Nations Register of Conventional Arms are essential
tools for enhancing regional and international security,
which have recently been strengthened by the adoption
of the Arms Trade Treaty. We welcome its entry into
force.
A major challenge in the immediate future will be
establishing a system designed to harmonize the Arms
Trade Treaty with various projects and programmes
relating to existing mechanisms, particularly the
Programme of Action and the International Tracing
Instrument. The reality is that very few States in
West Africa, including Benin, have mastered what the
Tracing Instrument involves, including weapons tracing
techniques, not to mention simply maintaining the
registry. We should focus more on active cooperation
and effective help with building national capacity
and competence in using the International Tracing
Instrument, the Programme of Action and the Arms
Trade Treaty. To achieve that, our View is that the
various forthcoming international conferences, such
as the second Open-ended Meeting of Governmental
Experts, the Biennial Meeting of States to Consider
Implementation of the Programme of Action and the
first Conference of States Parties to the Arms Trade
Treaty, should be utilized to make a comprehensive
assessment of current international approaches on
small arms and light weapons.

There should be special emphasis on cooperation
and assistance to developing countries in the areas
of registration, keeping records of weapons and
ammunition, border control, arms and ammunition
transfers, tracing techniques and stockpile management,
since ineffective and poor management are at the heart
of the illicit proliferation of small arms and light
weapons. In Benin's View, given the scale, impact and
devastating human cost of this phenomenon, only a
global approach founded on the shared responsibility
of importers, exporters and arms manufacturers,
supported by international cooperation and assistance
and effective exchanges of information, will enable us
to put an end to the problem and respond decisively
while respecting the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.

