Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): I would like to
join other colleagues in welcoming High
Representative Valentin Inzko to the Security Council,
and in thanking him for his comprehensive briefing. I
would also like to place on record our appreciation for
the Secretary-General's report on the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina (see S/2011/682).

It is a matter of satisfaction that, during the
period covered by the report, the Presidency of Bosnia
and Herzegovina functioned with improved
cooperation compared to its previous composition, and

that a number of foreign-policy decisions were taken. It
is also commendable that the Federation Government
functioned well during the reporting period. We have
noted that, in September, the leaders of the six main
parties began negotiations on forming a new
Government at the State level and adopting reforms
aimed at progressing towards Euro-Atlantic
integration. We hope that these negotiations will
succeed in resolving the continuing political stalemate
that has existed since the elections in October 2010,
and pave the way for the formation of a new
Government.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is a novel experiment in
building a new nation from the rubble of the civil war
that the people of the former Yugoslavia had to endure
in the 1990s. It is never easy to build a multi-ethnic,
multilingual, multicultural and multireligious country.
The problems mentioned in the Secretary-General's
report and by the High Representative in his briefing
today are bound to be encountered on the path to
building a nation inhabited by people of different
faiths, ethnicities and languages. Our own experience
over the past six decades has convinced us that
although the path of building such a nation is long and
arduous, the fruits are well worth the effort.

Solving the problems facing the Bosnian people
therefore calls for patience, determination and mutual
accommodation. Unilateral actions, mutual suspicion,
rhetorical statements and violations of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace will only vitiate the
political and social atmosphere and delay achievement
of the required goals. We would therefore urge the
leadership of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as the
international community, to persevere in spite of the
occasional problems that may be encountered.

Through its continued presence in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the European Union Force in Bosnia and
Herzegovina has played an important role in assuring
the country's citizens safety and security even when
the political situation has sometimes been tense. We
therefore support the extension of its mandate.

In conclusion, I commend the work being done
by the High Representative, Mr. Inzko, in assisting the
people and leadership of Bosnia and Herzegovina in
their nation-building endeavours. We fully support his
efforts.

