Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation would like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Le Roy for his briefing on the latest
developments in the Sudan and the progress made in
the deployment of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). We also
welcome the presence of Mr. Mikhail Margelov,
Special Representative of the President of the Russian
Federation on the Sudan.

We are very pleased to note that, in his report
(S/2009/352) to the Security Council, the Secretary-
General states that progress in UNAMID's deployment
has recently accelerated and that it is likely that the
goal of completing 92 per cent of its deployment will
be reached. We would like to express our great
appreciation for the efforts made by the Secretariat, the
African Union (AU) and the Government of the Sudan
in that regard.
Events have proved that the Tripartite Mechanism
is successful and effective and has played a very key
role in UNAMID's deployment. The Mechanism will
also serve as a very important guarantee for the future
successful implementation of the UNAMID
peacekeeping functions. The parties should value this
hard-won and very effective Mechanism for
cooperation. We are convinced that, so long as the
three parties maintain their will to cooperate and the
current positive momentum, any new problems and
situations that might emerge in the peacekeeping
process in Darfur can be resolved.

Compared to the gratifying progress in the
deployment of the peace Operation, the political
process in Darfur has obviously encountered some
major obstacles. However, without sincere and serious
political negotiations among the parties, UNAMID will
continue to face the problem of whether there will be
peace for it to keep. Unfortunately, as a result of the
exorbitant demands made by some armed rebel groups
and their obstinate resistance to negotiation, the future
of the political process in Darfur is very difficult to
predict. Joint Chief Mediator Djibrill Bassole has
travelled far and wide and actively used his good
offices to promote the Doha process. The AU, the
League of Arab States and many countries have also
made unrelenting efforts to that end. Those efforts are
generally in conformity with the policy goals of the
Security Council on the question of Darfur. They
should therefore be given the support and cooperation
of the Council.

We demand that all armed rebel groups show
more political will to participate in the Doha process.
We also call on the relevant members of the Security
Council with influence on the armed rebels to take
steps to ensure that those groups participate in the
political process in Darfur.

China has always closely followed developments
in the humanitarian situation in Darfur. We appreciate
the contributions made by the United Nations, the
Sudanese Government and the non-governmental
organizations that have been providing assistance in
Darfur to improve the humanitarian situation there. It
is our hope that the parties will continue to strengthen
their cooperation on the basis of mutual respect and
consultation on an equal footing so that humanitarian
relief efforts can be smoothly carried out in Darfur.
China has already provided massive humanitarian and
development assistance to Darfur. We will continue to
work with the rest of the international community in
helping the Sudanese Government to continuously
improve the living conditions of the people of Darfur.

The AU is a very important strategic partner of
the United Nations in resolving the Darfur issue, and
its opinions and concerns deserve the close attention of
the Security Council. China welcomes the efforts of the
African Union High-Level Panel on Darfur, under the
leadership of the former President of South Africa, to
study in depth the situation in Darfur. We look forward
to seeing the useful recommendations of the Panel on
appropriate ways to resolve such issues as impunity,
peaceful reconciliation and healing the wounds of war.

The warrant signed by the International Criminal
Court for the arrest of the President of the Sudan has
had negative effects on the political process, the
deployment of the peacekeeping Operation and
humanitarian assistance. Not long ago, the AU summit
reiterated its clear opposition to the action of the Court.
We hope that all the parties will fully respect the AU's
position and strive to cooperate with its efforts to
safeguard the overall objective of peace in the Sudan.

UNAMID's mandate will soon expire. We believe
that the deployment of the peacekeeping Operation in
Darfur has been carried out in very difficult
circumstances and that its achievements to date have
been hard won. That is due not only to the genuine
cooperation of the Tripartite Mechanism, but also to
the sincere and pragmatic support of the Security
Council. We hope that, this time, the draft resolution
renewing UNAMID's mandate will be focused and not
revisit controversial issues so as not to undermine
cooperation among the parties. In order to resolve
those issues, the role of the Tripartite Mechanism
should be brought fully into play. That would both
assist the Security Council in smoothly implementing
its task of peacekeeping in Darfur and serve the long-
term interests of Council members in Darfur.

To that end, The Chinese delegation will
participate actively in the consultations on the draft
resolution renewing UNAMID's mandate. We hope that
the Security Council can adopt it as soon as possible.

