Mr. Fischer (Germany): I would like to
congratulate His Excellency the Foreign Minister of
Guinea on his assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council, and I thank him for the kind words
addressed to me and to the German presidency of last
month.

I would also like to thank Mr. Blix and Mr.
ElBaradei for their briefings on the quarterly report.
Both can count on Germany's full support.

The aim of the international community remains
the complete disarmament- and only the
disarmament- of Iraq to finally eliminate the
international threat posed by Iraqi weapons of mass
destruction. That is what all the relevant Security
Council resolutions state.

What is at stake now is the unity of the
international community. We have taken a forceful
stance in our common fight against international
terrorism. We fight together against the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. We stand united in our
condemnation of the Iraqi regime. Where we have
different views is on our strategy of how to achieve the
effective and total disarmament of Iraq. The Security
Council must not spare any effort to find a joint
approach to attain our common goal.

The briefings by Mr. Blix and Mr. ElB aradei have
made clear once more that Iraq's cooperation with the
United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC) and the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) does not yet fully meet
United Nations demands. Baghdad could have taken
many of its recent steps earlier and more willingly. In
recent days, cooperation has, nevertheless, notably
improved. That is a positive development, which
makes it all the less comprehensible why that
development should now be abandoned.

There is real progress to be noted on the
implementation of relevant Security Council
resolutions in all fields. In the sphere of missile
technology, there has been clear progress. Thus, Iraq
informed the inspectors of its Al Samoud missiles.
After examination by UNMOVIC, it was established
that their range was too long. After Mr. Blix had set for
the regime in Baghdad a deadline for their destruction,
Iraq began to destroy the missiles within the prescribed
time frame. That is important progress. It shows that
peaceful disarmament is possible and that there is a
real alternative to war. That positive development also
shows that Hans Blix's approach of giving the regime
in Baghdad concrete time frames is successful. This
method also ought to be used for other unresolved
problems.

As far as Iraq's nuclear potential is concerned, we
can note great progress. Mr. ElBaradei has just
confirmed that. The accounts presented by Iraq are
plausible and verifiable. Cooperation on inspections is
good. The IAEA is confident about reaching final
conclusions soon.

Turning to biological weapons, there has also
been progress in individual spheres; for example, in the
excavation of many R-400 aerial bombs which are now
being assessed by UNMOVIC. Baghdad has announced
the presentation of a comprehensive report on open
questions in the field of biological and chemical
weapons. The interviews with Iraqi scientists are now
taking place without monitoring or recording.
Preparations are being made to conduct interviews
abroad.

France, Russia and Germany presented a
memorandum to the Security Council on 24 February
proposing a tough regime of intensive inspections
(S/2003/214, annex). On the basis of those proposals,
the inspections should be stepped up and accelerated.
For that to happen, each remaining problem has to be
specified and priorities have to be set. A time frame
should thereby be prescribed for every single problem.

Therefore, Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei should
present us with a detailed, comprehensive working
programme that clarifies how they and their teams
intend to tackle the complete disarmament of Iraq, as
called for by the United Nations. It is very important
that that working programme be presented to the
Security Council without delay. We would like to hear
today a statement by the inspectors on the remaining
key disarmament issues in the cluster report that has
been drawn up.

The inspections cannot go on forever. The aim of
disarming Iraq has to be pursued energetically and
systematically. The Iraqi Government has to fully
cooperate with the inspectors. But given the current
situation and the ongoing progress, we see no need for
a second resolution. Why should we leave the path that
we have embarked on now that the inspections, on the
basis of resolution 1441 (2002), are showing viable
results?
The Security Council is now meeting for the third
time within a month at ministerial level to discuss the
Iraq crisis. This shows the urgency we attach to the
disarmament of Iraq and to the threat of war. The crisis
in Iraq troubles our Governments. It troubles the
people in our countries. It troubles the entire region of
the Near and Middle East. Precisely because the
situation is so dramatic, we have to keep firmly
reminding ourselves what a war would mean, what the
endless suffering it would bring to countless innocent
people and what catastrophic humanitarian
consequences it would entail. Are we really in a
situation that absolutely necessitates the nltima ratio,
the very last resort? I think not, because peaceful
means are far from having been exhausted.

The Security Council faces- in fact, we all
face- an important decision, probably a historic
turning point. The alternatives are clear: the
disarmament of Iraq by war or its disarmament by
exhausting all peaceful means. The risks of a military
option are evident to us all. There is good reason to
believe that the region would not become more stable,
but rather more unstable, through a war, and, what is
more, that in the long term international terrorism
would be strengthened, not weakened, and that our
joint efforts to resolve the Middle East conflict would
be hindered.

Then there is the alternative. If we succeed in
implementing the effective and complete disarmament
of Iraq with peaceful means, we will improve the
framework conditions for a regional process of
stability, security and cooperation, based on the
renunciation of the use of force, on arms control and on
a cooperative system of confidence-building measures.

Resolutions 1441 (2002) and 1284 (1999) point a
clear way forward for the Security Council. They have
to remain the basis of our action. The progress of the
last few days has shown that we have efficient
alternatives to war in Iraq. By taking this path, we will
strengthen the relevance of the United Nations and the
Security Council.

