Ms. Mushikiwabo (Rwanda): I wish to begin
by congratulating you, Madam President, on your
recent appointment as Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Australia. I personally look forward to working with
you. Also, thank you, Madam President, for choosing
the topic of small arms and light weapons for this
high-level meeting of your presidency. We are all fully
aware that the last time this threat was considered
by the Security Council (see S/PV.5881) makes this
meeting long overdue. I would also like to express
my sincere gratitude to the Secretary-General and the
Vice-President of the International Committee of the
Red Cross.

As we contemplate the danger caused by arms
and weapons in the wrong hands, I would also like to
express my sympathy and solidarity with the people
of Kenya, neighbours of Rwanda, many of whom only
days ago experienced a heinous crime made possible,
in great part, by the accessibility of the weapons we
are talking about today. As the Secretary-General says
in his report (S/2013/503), it is an indisputable fact that
the excessive, cruel and uncontrolled spread of small
arms and light weapons poses a substantial threat to
international peace and security, human rights and
social development in many countries, including on our
own continent, Africa.

It is a reality that the African continent, particularly
the Great Lakes region, where Rwanda is located,
continues to be engulfed by internal armed conflicts
facilitated by such easily accessible weapons. We know
from experience that small arms and light weapons
have neither a small nor a light impact on communities
devastated by conflict, and we should therefore not be
fooled by those adjectives. It is in recognition of the
grave harm caused by the illicit manufacture, transfer,
circulation, excessive accumulation and uncontrolled
spread of small arms and light weapons that we
emphasize the importance of regional and subregional
cooperation, in regard to which Rwanda has subscribed
to and ratified the Nairobi Protocol for the Prevention,
Control and Reduction of Small Arms and Light
Weapons in the Great Lakes Region and the Horn of
Africa. Rwanda has also been party to a number of
initiatives, taken at international, regional and local
levels, that have culminated in lifesaving commitments.
Rwanda has established and implemented a policy
on firearms and ammunition that provides for measures
regulating the import, transfer, brokering, marking and
licensing of firearms, ammunition and munitions. As
a result, so far 42,266 arms and 52 tons of unexploded
ordinance have been destroyed in the last several years.
Reports to the Regional Centre on Small Arms have
shown that Rwanda is ahead in the subregion in the
management of stockpiles of arms and ammunition.
We take this opportunity to applaud United Nations
States Members that have signed the Arms Trade
Treaty, adopted by the General Assembly on 2 April.
My country was among the many that signed the
Treaty when it was first opened for signature here at
Headquarters. We are proud to be associated with the
Treaty, which includes small arms in its scope and backs
up prevailing international and regional instruments for
the control and regulation of conventional small arms
and light weapons.

We would like to recognize the efforts of the
Regional Centre on Small Arms based in Nairobi
and the East African community's small arms and
light weapons programmes, as well as other regional
organizations, in their work in combating the illicit
use and transfer of small arms and light weapons. We
remain convinced that such regional efforts will help to
ensure cooperation in addressing the illicit transfer and
destabilizing accumulation and misuse of such arms
and weapons.

In conclusion, Rwanda would like to call on all
members of the Security Council to work closely
and support regional initiatives in a true spirit of
partnership, remembering that we have not just an
individual but a collective obligation and responsibility
to avert and combat the destabilizing accumulation and
illicit manufacture, trade and circulation of small arms
and light weapons.

