Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation would like
to thank Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, for his briefing.

As some of our colleagues have already said, the
conflict in Syria has lasted for more than seven years,
and according to the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, more than 500,000 people
have lost their lives and approximately 13 million
people are in need, of whom 5.3 million are children.
Nonetheless, the Syrian people continue to hope
for peace in their country and for a return to normal
everyday life, which at the moment seems a long
way off. We deplore the fact that non-State armed
opposition groups and Security Council-designated
terrorist groups are still perpetrating attacks that result
in the death or displacement of innocent civilians. In
spite of that, however, we want to remind the Council
that all counter-terrorism-related initiatives should take
international law into consideration.

Bolivia voted in favour of today's resolution
because we believe that humanitarian assistance for
the Syrian people is urgent, particularly those in hard-
to-reach areas, as well as the most vulnerable who are
in need of protection and psychosocial support. We
thank the delegations of Kuwait and Sweden for their
commitment during the negotiations on the text for
today's adoption of resolution 2449 (2018).

There have been numerous meetings on this issue
since Bolivia's election as a member of the Council. We
have witnessed the pressing need of the Syrian people
for humanitarian assistance, but we have also seen
major progress made in stabilizing and in de-escalating
the violence of previous years, which in the past few
months has brought about a palpable change in the
conflict on the ground, owing primarily to the opening
up of dialogue between the parties involved. We
highlight the Astana agreements, which have enabled
the establishment of important de-escalation zones, and
which we see as one of the initiatives that will help to
reduce the level of violence in order to facilitate peace
and stability in Syria. We also want to highlight the
agreement brokered by Russia and Turkey establishing
a demilitarized zone to facilitate the delivery of
humanitarian aid and emergency medical evacuation,
as well as the surrender of heavy weaponry by some
members of terrorist groups. We encourage the parties
to replicate those agreements, as well as that made
in Istanbul on 27 October between Turkey, Russia,
Germany and France. Such commitments have a major
impact on people when they enable humanitarian
assistance and medical attention to reach them quickly.

We also commend the most recent compromise
between the United Nations and the Governments of
Syria, Jordan, Russia and the United States enabling a
convoy with humanitarian aid for 50,000 people to enter
Rukban camp, and we call for the continuation of efforts
to bring in humanitarian aid and cross-border convoys
within a framework of respect for the sovereignty of
Syria, which has reclaimed much of its territory.

I would once again like to pay special tribute to
the personnel of the various humanitarian agencies
and organizations who risk their own safety and
lives to do their work. Within the framework of
international humanitarian law, we call on the parties
to guarantee unconditional and unhindered access
to aid personnel, keeping them safe and secure and
ensuring that humanitarian convoys and personnel,
medical centres and schools do not become military
targets, regardless of the circumstances. We encourage
the parties involved to continue their efforts to enable
emergency medical evacuations and the establishment
of humanitarian corridors that allow civilians to move
around voluntarily, as well as ensuring the dignified
and safe return of internally displaced persons and
refugees to their places of origin. Clearing those areas
of unexploded ordnance, explosive remnants of war
and landmines is an essential task, as is re-establishing
water and sanitation services, schools and hospitals.

Bolivia rejects any attempts to fragment Syria or
sow sectarianism in that country. We also reject the
presence in Syria of foreign military forces without
the authorization of the Syrian Government. Those
forces must be withdrawn within the framework of
international law and the principles of the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of the Syrian
Arab Republic. We also ask Mr. Lowcock to include in
his next briefing the impact of the unilateral sanctions
on the humanitarian situation in Syria. Those sanctions
are illegal under international law and there is no doubt
that they have an impact on the delivery of humanitarian
aid. In addition, we reiterate our call for humanitarian
aid to not be selective; furthermore, we call for the
depoliticization of humanitarian aid. Finally, we
reiterate, as the representative of Ethiopia pointed out,
there is no military solution to the situation in Syria.
The only solution is to be found in an inclusive, Syrian-
led process that meets the legitimate aspirations of the
Syrian people, in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and
as part of the Geneva process under the auspices of the
United Nations.

