Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): At the outset,

I would like to thank your country, Sir, for having
organized today's meeting and to welcome the presence
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Yemen and of
the Secretary General of the Gulf Cooperation Council.
Their presence here today demonstrates the importance
they attach to the future of Yemen. I also wish to thank
them for their statements. I would also link to thank the
Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on Yemen for
his strident and informative briefing on the situation in

the country.

This public debate is taking place at a time when the
situation in Yemen gives us grounds for hope - hope
based on the continuation of the work of the National
Dialogue Conference - but also remains a cause for
concern, with regard to the security, humanitarian and
other situations.

With regard to the National Dialogue, we commend
the Yemeni authorities, civil society organizations and
other political actors for their perseverance in staying the
course of constructive dialogue aimed at reconciliation
and rebuilding a new, united Yemen, resolutely focused
on development. We have been encouraged by President
Mansour's frequent assurances that great leaps forward
have been made towards a new Yemen, in whichjustice,
order and freedom will reign.

We welcome the genuine progress that has been
made thanks to the sustained efforts of the Secretary-
General and his Special Adviser on Yemen, which have
brought a great number of Yemenis into the dialogue
process. That allowed for inclusive and constructive
discussions to be held during the second session of the
National Dialogue Conference in June.

We note that the Dialogue has dealt with 90 per cent
of its agenda and already has a number of agreements
under its belt, which was no easy task given the
upheaval that the country has recently experienced.
We hope that the numerous issues that have emerged
and the proposed solutions will be taken into account
in the new Constitution, the adoption of which should
lead to the holding of elections, planned, in principle,
for February 2014.

We welcome in particular the fact that one of the
crucial issues of the Dialogue - what form the State
should take - has been resolved with the choice of a
unified, federal and democratic Yemen. It is crucial for
the Yemenis to deal with the unresolved issues in the
same spirit of reconciliation in order to complete the
process they have begun.

On the security front, Yemen continues to face
the threats of terrorism. Armed groups are creating a
permanent climate of insecurity, with a genuine resolve
to sabotage the reconciliation process and plunge
the country back into chaos. The numerous terrorist
attacks against the military forces and security forces
in the South over recent months are part of this deadly
destabilization strategy.

Togo firmly condemns those terrorist attacks and
other acts of aggression against the population and
oil, electricity and gas infrastructure. We are sure that
the determination of Yemenis who so long for peace
will allow them to overcome these forces of evil. In
that regard, we call on all parts of Yemeni society, in
particular the civilian, military, religious and secular
sectors, to set aside their differences so as to bring
the national reconciliation process to a harmonious
conclusion.

We would like to commend President Mansour in
particular for the various efforts he has undertaken
in implementation of the Gulf Cooperation Council
initiative and its Implementation Mechanism, in
keeping with resolution 2014 (2011). The restructuring
of the military hierarchy and the reintegration of retired
military officers and personnel have made a positive
contribution to keeping the social and political peace.

On the humanitarian front, calls have been made
regarding the deterioration of the humanitarian
situation in Yemen by the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and a number of United
Nations agencies. It is therefore not unfounded
to fear that any deterioration of the humanitarian
situation would destabilize the country and seriously
compromise the progress that has been made in the area
of political stability. It is therefore a matter of urgency
for the international community to do more to help
humanitarian agencies to meet the needs of refugees
and the Yemeni population.

We would like to commend various countries
and organizations, including the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the World
Food Programme and the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, for their support to Yemen.
We hope that the friends of Yemen will take further
initiatives as they did in March 2013 in London to help
the Yemeni population in difficulty.

