The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Congo and representative of the
presidency of the African Union.

On behalf of the current Chairman of the African
Union, Mr. Denis Sassou-Nguesso, and on behalf of the
Congolese delegation, I wish warmly to thank the
Government of the United States of America for its
felicitous initiative in calling for this meeting. This is
an exceptional opportunity for the Security Council
and, through it, the international community to
welcome the agreement concluded on 5 May at Abuja
in the framework of the inter-Sudanese peace talks
organized under the aegis of the African Union.

We wish here to thank and pay tribute to all
countries, particularly the United States and the United
Kingdom, as well as all regional organizations that
spared no effort, right up to the last moment, to achieve
this encouraging result. The agreement represents an
important phase that the African Union undertakes to
consolidate by pursuing its efforts vis-a-vis the other
political and military forces of the Sudan in Darfur,
which we invite to join in the process.

I cannot conceal our profound concerns, however,
concerning the challenges that we must urgently
address in order to prevent any worsening of the
security and humanitarian situations. In that regard, I
pay a well-deserved tribute to the memory of the
employee of the African force who was killed during
Mr. Egeland's visit to a Darfur refugee camp.

It is essential to strengthen the operational and
financial capacities of the African Union's operation in
Darfur and substantially to increase humanitarian
assistance. It is also vital to organize the donors
conference as soon as possible.

As regards the management of this complex
situation, it is essential to work to preserve the
partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union, particularly in the context of the
preparation of the transition, heralded in the press
release of the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union on 10 March. The Peace and Security
Council will be meeting at the ministerial level in
Addis Ababa on 15 May in order to endorse the Abuja
agreement and to identify the modalities of the
transition. Immediately thereafter, the African Union
will come here to present the conclusions of its work to
the Security Council.

We therefore intend to rely on the United
Nations, our partners and the entire international
community to engage in activities that will be
consistently concerted, harmonized and coherent. Such
cooperation will ensure the success of the tremendous
undertaking to which we are collectively committed.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I call on the Secretary of State for Foreign and
Commonwealth Affairs of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Her Excellency the
Right Honourable Margaret Beckett.

