Mr. Musambachime (Zambia): I wish once again
to salute you, Mr. President, for convening this
important meeting, which provides yet another
opportunity for Member States to express their views
on how the United Nations can best provide leadership
in the search for peace and stability in the world. I
recall that this is the second open meeting since your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of October. Given your immense
diplomatic skill, I am confident that you will steer the
deliberations of the Council on this item to a fruitful
conclusion. Like your predecessor, my good friend the
Permanent Representative of Bulgaria, Mr. Stefan
Tafrov, you are committed to maintaining dialogue
with Member States in order to enhance transparency
and democracy in the work of the Security Council.
This method should be maintained.

I also wish to commend you, Mr. President, for
your selection of the topic under discussion. The issue
of small arms requires the urgent attention of the
United Nations, as these weapons are used in many of
the conflicts around the world and are a cause of a very
high loss of life, especially of women and children.

My delegation welcomes the report of the Secretary-
General presented by the Under-Secretary-General for
Disarmament Affairs this morning. We welcome his
recommendations, which are well founded and
instructive and which merit implementation as quickly
as possible.

My delegation would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his report on the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons in all its aspects,
document A/57/ 160, which we found to contain useful
information, assumptions and conclusions.

In July 2001 the United Nations Conference on
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects adopted a high-profile Programme of
Action that helped to galvanize international efforts to
curb this scourge during the past year.

As part of the efforts to implement the
Programme of Action, my country has taken a number
of important steps at the national and regional levels.
One such effort is the "guns for money" programme, in
which the Zambia Police Service offers up to an
equivalent of $55 to all voluntary hand-overs of
illegally held arms. The response to this programme
has been overwhelming. A large number of illicitly
acquired arms have been recovered.

At the regional level, Zambia has continued to be
active in the Southern Africa Development Community
programme on small arms and light weapons within the
framework of the Southern African Regional Police
Chief Cooperation Council. This effort, which started
in 1995 in response to growing illicit trade and
trafficking in small arms and their ammunition, is
assisting Governments to coordinate their efforts at the
regional level. The continuation of the programme,
however, depends on the availability of funds. Zambia
would welcome any financial and technical support
from the cooperating partners in order to strengthen
these efforts.

As you are aware, demobilization and
disarmament efforts are currently taking place in
Angola, the Democratic Republic of Congo and
Rwanda. For this process to succeed, the disarmament
component should have an effective and attractive arms
recovery programme that can prevent combatants from
trading their small arms for necessities and encourage
them instead to hand them over to the authorized
authorities for money. My delegation would like to see
increased support to the buy-back and other arms
recovery programmes in order to motivate the
combatants to surrender to the authorities more of their
arms, thus enhancing demobilization and disarmament
of the former combatants and their reintegration into
social life.

Zambia believes that, as a follow-up to the United
Conference on Small Arms and Light Weapons, the
adoption of an international instrument to trace illegal
trade is imperative. In this regard, Zambia calls for the
early conclusion of the work of the Group of
Governmental Experts on the issue which met in
Geneva last July, under the auspices of the United
Nations. It is my Government's hope that the
recommendations of the Group will help speed efforts
to develop an international instrument that could
provide a legal framework to trace the illicit trade
around the world in the small arms and light weapons
that fuel conflicts in Africa and other developing
regions.

Zambia supports all efforts at the regional and
subregional levels to ensure strong momentum in the
follow-up to the Programme of Action as we prepare
for the biennial meeting of States on small arms and
light weapons, the first of which is scheduled in 2003.
So that many delegations will be able to attend that
event, Zambia requests that it be held in New York,
where many of the countries affected by the problem of
small arms are represented. In addition, my country
wishes to appeal to those countries that made pledges
to implement the Programme of Action to make good
on their commitments to provide financial and
technical assistance and support to the Secretariat in
order to facilitate the participation of the least
developed countries, many of which are among the
hardest hit by the negative impact of small arms and
light weapons.

The course and the conduct of inter-State and
intra-State wars in Africa clearly indicate that small
arms and light weapons are a major cause of political
instability. My delegation is concerned that all the
global efforts to curb such weapons may not be
successful unless the current trend to concentrate
attention on officially held arms is checked. There is a
need to establish a mechanism that will control private
illicit transfers, which account for the bulk of the illicit
trade. Such a move would be an effective way of
preventing the supply of small arms to non-State
actors.

Regional and international initiatives must be
encouraged if the fight against small arms is to be
successful. My Government is committed to working
with the rest of the international community at the
regional and international levels. One of the most
effective and practical methods of dealing with the
problem of the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons is to destroy recovered weapons. Zambia
hopes that all Member States can adopt that method
because of its demonstrated effective impact on
society.

International cooperation can also be encouraged
at the level of South-South cooperation. Developing
countries can pool their resources and coordinate
regional efforts; we should not always look to the
North for resources. South-South cooperation driven by
common threats and objectives could be very
instrumental in curbing the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons in all its aspects. In Africa, the effort
should be extended to the relevant bodies of civil
society in each country, including non-governmental
organizations, which could spearhead awareness
campaigns. The United Nations, through the
Department for Disarmament Affairs and its regional
centres, should remain at the forefront of that particular
effort. The success of the 2001 Programme of Action
depends on multilateral efforts strengthened through
greater coordination and cooperation.

