Mr. Cardi (Italy): As it has relevance to working
methods, allow me to briefly outline the agreement we
reached on 28 June with the Netherlands to split the 2017-
2018 term on the Security Council, with Italy serving
the first year and the Kingdom of the Netherlands to
serve in 2018, pending by-elections. I am happy to
mention this issue also on behalf of the Netherlands.

We are currently defining our cooperation
around shared goals and values in the firm belief
that this agreement sends a positive political message
of cooperation to tackle common challenges and
contribute to improving the work of the Council. In
this regard, Italy and the Netherlands will be guided by
such principles as safeguarding the effectiveness of the
Council and the action of its elected members, ensuring
as much continuity as possible; avoiding duplication,
and using every opportunity before January to prepare
our term, in the spirit ofthejoint paragraph. In addition,
allow me to make a few other specific remarks.

My first remark is on the link between the
transparency, openness and inclusiveness of the
Council and its own effectiveness. The former are a
means to achieve more of the latter, of course. Having
served in New York in the 1990s, I can testify that much
has been achieved in terms of the greater transparency
and openness of this organ.

Further specific improvements can be sought,
such as more frequent informal, Toledo-style wrap-
up sessions, which allow greater interaction with the
membership on the work of the month. The attendance
and interaction achieved in these meetings are a sign
of their popularity and usefulness to non-Council
members. We should make more effective use of open
meetings, such as informal interactive dialogues and
Arria Formula meetings, and continue to increase the
focus and interactivity of open debates, involving,
as appropriate, non-governmental actors, especially
from civil society. We must increase coordination,
cooperation and interaction with the other principal
organs, in particular the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), and expand, as appropriate,
interaction with troop- and police-contributing
countries during the course ofthe mandate ofa mission.
We should also expand consultation and cooperation
with regional and subregional organizations, including
by inviting relevant organizations to participate in the
Council's private and public meetings, as appropriate.

My second remark concerns the preventive action
of the Council, a specific tool at the disposal of this
organ under section XI of note S/2010/507, concerning
Council missions. We take positive note of their
increased number and underline their value - and that
ofthe missions ofthe PBC country configurations - for
understanding and assessing particular situations on
the agenda of the Council.

My third remark refers to section XIII of the
aforementioned note, concerning newly elected
members. Italy welcomes the fact that the Council is
taking full advantage of the elections being moved
forward to June by also adequately moving forward the
invitation to newly elected members to attend meetings
of the Council. In this regard, Italy welcomes the
Council's commitment to agreeing provisionally on the
appointment of Chairs of the subsidiary organs no later
than 1 October. In light of the arrangement to split the
mandate with the Netherlands, the adoption of the note
by the President S/2016/619 will certainly help new
members to be effective on the Council from day one.

We look forward to an updated and improved note
on the Council's working methods as a useful guide for
our future action in this organ.

