Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his briefing on the latest
developments along the Blue Line.

I would like to begin by acknowledging the
outstanding work of the personnel of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), who have
shown exceptional capacity to respond in recent days
and made it possible to maintain calm along the Blue
Line. That is a fact and must be said.

First, I would like to express our serious concerns
about the discovery by the Israeli Defense Forces of
tunnels entering Israeli territory, which were dug by
Hizbullah from Lebanon and confirmed by UNIFIL.
We have said it unequivocally and we repeat it - those
tunnels constitute a clear violation of resolution 1701
(2006), which calls for the cessation of hostilities along
the Blue Line between Lebanon and Israel. Those
activities must stop.

We have expressed our concern to the Lebanese
authorities and call on all parties to exercise the utmost
caution and restraint. That is imperative, especially in a
context where the risk is high ofescalation resulting from
misunderstandings, misinterpretations, miscalculation
and anticipation errors. Maintaining calm along the Blue
Line, for which UNIFIL works daily, remains essential
for the entire region. It is therefore crucial that both
parties respect all the terms of resolution 1701 (2006)
and refrain from any provocation. President Aoun
announced that the Lebanese authorities had taken on
board the gravity of the situation and were ready to
respond appropriately. We encourage them to continue
in that direction and to ensure that the Lebanese Armed
Forces are able to take action on two key counts: first,
in conducting appropriate investigations together with
UNIFIL, following the discovery of the tunnels; and,
secondly, to maintain calm and avoid any escalation
along the Blue Line.

Moving on to my second point, I would like to
come back to address the responsiveness of, and
efforts undertaken by, UNIFIL since 4 December to
independently shed light on this matter. The Force
mobilized immediately following the Israeli revelations.
It carried out its own independent verification of the
situation, making it impossible to call into question its
declarations on proven violations of resolution 1701
(2006) and confirming the credibility of those claims.
In that regard, I wish to commend the professionalism
of the Head of Mission, Major General Stefano Del Col,
who was able to fulfil his duties while maintaining the
trust of all parties.

UNIFIL has put in place follow-up measures to
formally establish the trajectory of the tunnels, and
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix has once again informed us
that the Force is ready to use all of the prerogatives at its
disposal, while fully respecting its mandate, of course.
We call on the Lebanese and Israeli authorities to
continue their close cooperation with the Force, as well
as their dialogue, particularly within the framework of
tripartite meetings, which play a vital role in preventing
any escalation of the situation on the ground. It is also
important, as I have said, that the Lebanese army have
access to the site, with the support of UNIFIL.

In that context, and this is my final point, the swift
establishment of a Lebanese Government of balanced
national unity remains essential within a deteriorated
regional context in order to revitalize the country's
institutions, carry out the necessary reforms and ensure
the strengthening of the Lebanese State. Recent events
highlight that imperative need.

In that context, we welcome the efforts undertaken
by the Prime Minister of Lebanon, Mr. Saad Hariri,
in carrying out those tasks and we encourage all
Lebanese parties to work in a spirit of compromise. We
reiterate France's commitment to supporting the future
Government of Lebanon and the commitments made by
the Lebanese authorities with a view to implementing
resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006), as well as
the policy of dissociation. Lebanon's disassociation
from regional conflicts and non-interference in the
internal affairs of other countries are essential to its
stability. We also encourage Lebanon to relaunch its
national defence strategy, in line with President Aoun's
statements. Finally, it is important that the Government
devote itself to the reforms that Lebanon needs and that
the Lebanese people expect, especially with regard to
its economy.

We will continue to support the Lebanese Armed
Forces through our contingent in UNIFIL and within
the framework of the announcements made at the Rome
11 conference. We also remain fully committed to
supporting Lebanon's stability through our economic
support, following the CEDRE conference, held on
6 April.

In order to confront this situation, our response
should be twofold: in the immediate future, we must
ensure calm and shed light on the tunnels that have been
uncovered, by cooperating with the Lebanese authorities
and UNIFIL in order to continue the investigative
work; and in the longer term, we must continue to
provide support, along with our international partners,
to the Lebanese Armed Forces and the Lebanese State
in order to enable them to meet the critical challenge of
controlling the entire Lebanese territory and stabilizing
the Blue Line. It is essential that the Council remain
united in order to contribute to those two objectives.
The Council can count on France's full commitment to
that end.

