Mr. Pujalte (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): First,
on behalf of my delegation, I warmly welcome you,
Sir, to the Chamber. It is an honour for my country to
take part in a Security Council meeting presided over
by you. I also thank Under-Secretary-General
Guehenno for his briefing and for the information he
has just given the Council on the situation in Kosovo.

Without doubt, the document on standards for
Kosovo presented last week constitutes a great
opportunity for the future of Kosovo. But it also sets
out a number of challenges. Among those challenges
are the expectations surely generated by the very
mention of a tentative date for a broad assessment of
the degree of compliance with those standards.

As has been rightly indicated, the document is a
critical road map that should be followed by the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government and
Kosovo society as a whole in the next 18 months,
before the subject of status can be discussed. The
implementation plan for the policy of "standards before
status", to be presented in the near future by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Kosovo, Mr. Harri Holkeri, will surely be a useful
supplement to that document.

The document on standards describes a society
that little resembles the current reality in Kosovo.
Therefore, the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government and Kosovo society as a whole will have
to make great efforts to achieve the eight established
standards.

Although in the past two years we have witnessed
some significant progress in the process of normalizing
life in Kosovo, a series of factors persist that are
hindering its transformation into a multi-ethnic,
tolerant, democratic and prosperous society in which
the rule of law prevails. The transfer of non-reserved
responsibilities to the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government has proceeded very swiftly, as has
legislative work. However, there is a certain tendency
among public officials and deputies to issue statements
or to take decisions that exceed their sphere of
competence, in contradiction to Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999) and the Constitutional
Framework itself. The most recent example was the
Assembly's decision to revoke all laws promulgated by
Belgrade after 22 March 1989 concerning Kosovo. It is
important that the process of building the
administrative structure and political institutions take
place in conformity with the resolution and the
Constitutional Framework.

With regard to relations with Belgrade, the
beginning of direct dialogue on practical issues in
October 2003 was a step in the right direction. It is
essential that that dialogue continue and be intensified.

As we have previously indicated, the parallel
structures continue to be a significant obstacle to the
normalization of life in Kosovo. It has not escaped our
notice that that is one of the points addressed in the
document "Standards for Kosovo". It is important that
Belgrade stop supporting the existence of those
structures. But, at the same time, conditions need to be
created so that the Serbian minority will trust the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government and the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK).

The return of refugees and internally displaced
persons belonging to minority groups, particularly
Serbs, is an essential condition for Kosovo's
development. Obviously, the number of displaced
persons who have chosen to return to their places of
origin continues to be quite limited compared with that
of those who remain abroad. One cannot speak of a
process of sustainable return to Kosovo unless the
security situation and freedom of movement improves
for the general population, but also - and in
particular - for minorities. The situation of the
economy and the work force is also an essential
condition for the return of displaced persons, but even
that will depend to a great extent on whether those who
choose to return feel that they can travel to any part of
Kosovo in conditions of security.

The establishment of the rule of law is also
essential for Kosovo's future. In that context, it is
important that those responsible for a series of
unsolved crimes - particularly those committed solely
for ethnic reasons - be investigated, found and
punished. In that connection, the suspension of the 12
members of the Kosovo Protection Corps - to whom
the Under-Secretary-General referred - while they are
being investigated for possible responsibility for the
attack against a railway bridge last April and for other
reasons, is a correct decision. We hope that it will bear
fruit.

Just as the Albanian majority and their leaders
have the principal responsibility to build a tolerant
society, the Serbian minority and their leaders must
participate more in Kosovo's public and political life.
Incidents such as the one that occurred in northern
Mitrovica on 6 December, in which a mob attacked a
World Bank delegation shortly after Prime Minister
Bajram Rexhepi had visited the place where the
delegation was, do not benefit the Serbian minority; on
the contrary, they jeopardize it.

Finally, as this is the last time that my delegation
will participate as a member of the Security Council in
a meeting on Kosovo, I wish to reaffirm my
Government's support Mr. Holkeri and the members of
UNMIK for the work they are doing.

