Mr. Amin (Bangladesh): My delegation
appreciated the briefing given by the Assistant
Secretary-General, Mr. Hedi Annabi, which provided
the background for our deliberations this morning.

Significant developments have taken place since
the most recent meeting of the Council on this subject,
in which Ambassador Morjane participated, took place
on 24 July. The most important and positive note has
come from Gaborone. My delegation pays tribute to
Sir Ketumile Masire for the successful holding of the
preparatory conference for the inter-Congolese
dialogue for national reconciliation. He has secured
substantive agreement on issues relating to the
dialogue; such progress also strengthens the peace
process in general.

We have noted the optimism expressed by
Foreign Minister Leonard She Okitundu; we, too,
would like to see an effective and final end to the war
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We have also
noted the statement of the leader of the Rassemblement
congolais pour la democratie (RCD), Ruberwa, that the
guns have fallen silent and that none of the parties will
take up arms again. Word of this spirit must be heard
throughout the Congo and the Great Lakes region. This
optimism, which might seem exuberant at this point in
time, must be made a reality.

We have, of course, also taken note of the
demands of the rebel movements with regard to the
disarming of the so-called negative forces. This is also
a demand of the Security Council. It is also an
important provision of the Lusaka Agreement. This
requirement must be met without any further delay.
The Lusaka Agreement and Council resolutions do not
provide for any quid pro quo. There is a sequence,
however. During our last meeting, Bangladesh joined
other members of the Council in reminding the RCD of
its obligation to withdraw from Kisangani and its
environs in compliance with resolution 1304 (2000).
We also called for similar cooperation by the Front de
liberation du Congo and the Mouvement pour la
liberation du Congo (FLC/MLC). We join Council
members in reiterating these demands once again
today.

We are pleased to note that the preparatory
conference agreed to start the inter-Congolese dialogue
on 15 October in Addis Ababa. It is essential that the
momentum created in Gaborone is carried forward to
the meeting in Addis Ababa. The intervening period of
about one and a half months should be fully utilized by
the Congolese parties. It will also be the collective
responsibility of the international community to extend
all possible assistance and support for the dialogue.

At our most recent meeting on this subject, we
stressed that the dialogue must be open, representative,
inclusive and free from any outside interference.
Bangladesh also underlined the need to allow for the
full participation of Congolese civil society. In this
regard, I would like to recall the message sent to this
Council by Sir Ketumile Masire on the question of the
representation of women in the inter-Congolese
dialogue. The Council responded positively to his
letter, conveying to him the fact that we shared his
concerns and his views on the question. We urge the
Government and other Congolese parties to give
specific attention to this issue as they prepare for the
dialogue.

We have always stressed that the dialogue should
be owned by the people of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. In this regard, it is encouraging to note -
we learned about this from the press - the allocation
of $1 million to the fund for the dialogue by the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
as well as pledges by armed opposition parties. This is
a positive gesture, which deserves to be complemented;
the international community should continue to provide
support.

We look forward, of course, to a more in-depth
briefing from Sir Ketumile Masire himself when the
Council holds a meeting with him next week, possibly
on 5 September. It is encouraging to note that all the
parties to the conflict that gathered in Gaborone called
for an immediate withdrawal of foreign forces from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Their call for the
release of political prisoners should receive the priority
attention of the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

Another positive signal from the region comes
from the cooperation extended to the Panel of Experts
on the illegal exploitation of natural resources. We
appreciate the constructive attitude being shown to the
Panel by the leadership in the region.

Turning into the United Nations mission, we have
noted the progress in the deployment of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC), as reported to us by
the Assistant Secretary-General. As we said earlier, the
size of MONUC does not correspond to the demands of
the situation. In his seventh report, the Secretary-
General said that at that stage he was not asking for the
enlargement of MONUC beyond the authorized
strength. During the new stage - which we hope will
soon be set up as the parties make progress in
disengagement and withdrawal - we shall have to
consider the expansion of MONUC. We are in full
agreement with France on this question.

The success of the preparatory meeting of the
inter-Congolese dialogue paves the way for progress in
these areas. It is time the United Nations prepared for
what it will be required to do in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We have consistently argued
that the Council must make a clear commitment to
consider expanding the size of MONUC, so that the
mission can carry out the tasks assigned to it, as well as
the additional tasks it should assume. There is a
practical need for the Council to demonstrate a credible
presence, determination and commitment in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We must not allow
any pretext for delaying the withdrawal or return of
foreign forces, thus unravelling the peace process.

Finally, the visit of Ms. Carol Bellamy to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo was a timely and
appropriate initiative. Her visit brought an area of
pressing humanitarian concern into the limelight. The
children of the Democratic Republic of the Congo are
among the most severely affected by the protracted
conflict. When we speak of the Congo, we speak of 16
million war-affected individuals, the most suffering
among them being the children. The Democratic
Republic of the Congo is also the country in which 2.5
million people were killed in approximately three years
of war, according to an estimate presented by the
International Rescue Committee. The Secretary-
General wrote in his eighth report that "among the
most disturbing findings is the disproportionate effect
of the war on young children" (S/2001, 5 72, para. 61).

In two of the districts surveyed, Moba and
Kalemie, the Secretary-General reported, an estimated
75 per cent of children born during the conflict died or
were expected to die before their second birthday. For
the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), the
mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
the current situation and in post-conflict Congo will be
a major undertaking. We hope the organization is
mobilizing its resources for that challenging task.

While the United Nations remains committed to
supporting the implementation of the Lusaka
Agreement, it is incumbent on the Congolese parties,
including the armed groups, whether signatories of
Lusaka or not, to show respect for the United Nations
and its personnel. We condemn in the strongest terms
the attacks on a MONUC helicopter near Uvira, and
ask for an urgent inquest. We demand an end to the
harassment of MONUC personnel. The RCD leadership
must stop such acts and ensure cooperation with the
United Nations Mission.

Finally, as always we attach great importance to
the role of the Secretary-General. The Secretary-
General has all our support for his coming visit to the
region. We are confident that his visit will give impetus
to advancing the peace process and to preparing for the
possible high-level meeting in early October, as we
deliberate on the next phase of MONUC.

