Mr. Zerihoun: I am pleased to introduce the
annual report of the Secretary-General on piracy off the
coast of Somalia (S/2011/662), as well as his report on
the natural resources and waters of Somalia
(8/2011/661).

Let me begin with the report on piracy off the
coast of Somalia. The Secretary-General stresses in the
report that piracy and armed robbery continue to
adversely affect not only regional economies in East
Africa but also the global economy. The international
community has responded with an unprecedented effort
to counter piracy, including through a naval presence
off the coast of Somalia that has resulted in a reduction
in the incidence of piracy at sea in the region. More
and more pirates are being arrested and prosecuted.
Information-sharing and coordination have also
improved.

The Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of
Somalia continues to play a key role in this regard. A
new and promising initiative is the tracking of financial
2

flows and targeting of leaders and masterminds of
piracy. The efforts being made to establish a
framework to regulate the use of private armed guards
on board vessels transiting off the coast of Somalia are
noteworthy, and have underscored the importance of
and need for close monitoring of the issue to ensure
appropriate regulation and accountability.

The international naval presence has allowed the
delivery of much-needed humanitarian assistance.
Since the international escort system for ships carrying
World Food Programme (WFP) food began in
November 2007, not a single WFP-chartered vessel has
been attacked, although there have been two
unsuccessful attempts on vessels carrying supplies for
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). The
sea-based transport routes for humanitarian and
peacekeeping assistance are crucial to maintaining a
vital lifeline for Somalia. In that regard, the European
Union, NATO and Member States have played a
commendable role in participating in the protection at
sea of World Food Programme shipments and
deliveries contracted by the United Nations Support
Office for AMISOM.

Despite these unprecedented efforts, attempts to
suppress pirate attacks off the Horn of Africa remain
insufficient. Somali pirates have expanded their
operations well into the Indian Ocean. According to the
International Maritime Organization, 316 people and
15 vessels were being held hostage as of early October.
The pirates' technical capacities have increased, and
they have become more violent. Many young Somalis
continue to be willing to take the risk of becoming
criminals at sea.

Another cause for concern is reports of links
between pirates and Al-Shabaab. The law-enforcement
measures commendably taken by some regional
authorities in Somalia have had the unintended
consequence of pushing pirate dens, with their
lucrative business model, further south, including into
areas that are under Al-Shabaab's influence. While it is
still unclear who is behind the kidnappings in Kenya,
the increasing links between Al-Shabaab and pirates
indicate that the problem of piracy may be mutating.
Somali piracy could also be inspiring attacks elsewhere
on the world's shipping lanes, particularly in the Gulf
of Guinea.

It is important, as the Secretary-General stresses
in his report and has reiterated on several occasions,
11-57156
that Member States and international actors solve the
piracy problem in the context of the overall solution in
Somalia. The fight against piracy off the coast of
Somalia can only be won through an integrated
strategy that tackles deterrence, security, the rule of
law and development. Counter-piracy efforts should be
an integral element of the Somali peace process. The
inclusion of counter-piracy benchmarks in the recently
agreed road map to end the transition in Somalia is a
positive development. The Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Somalia is playing a key role
in helping to integrate these efforts, including those
related to counter-piracy.

Key targets in the road map to be achieved during
the transition period include the appointment of a
single minister to coordinate the Transitional Federal
Government's (TFG) counter-piracy efforts; the
development of a counter-piracy strategy in common
with other regions and administrations; the drafting and
adoption of a counter-piracy law; and the proclamation
of a Somali exclusive economic zone. That last
measure will contribute to addressing potential illegal
fishing and dumping of waste. It will also help clarify
the legal basis for the protection of Somalia's
sovereign rights with respect to natural resources and
its jurisdiction over the maritime environment. The
declaration of an exclusive economic zone is one of the
recommendations in the Secretary-General's report on
the natural resources and waters of Somalia, to which I
will return a little later.

The number of States undertaking prosecution of
those suspected of acts of piracy is increasing, as is the
number of prosecutions. The Secretary-General
applauds the countries currently shouldering that
burden. However, as noted in the Secretary-General's
report, a large number of individuals suspected of acts
of piracy are still not prosecuted for a variety of legal,
practical and political reasons.

Further efforts are needed to ensure that
suspected pirates can be prosecuted when sufficient
evidence is available. The Trust Fund to Support
Initiatives of States Countering Piracy off the Coast of
Somalia has proven to be a useful instrument for
prosecution-related initiatives. The Secretary-General
encourages Member States and the maritime industry
to contribute generously to that Trust Fund.

Contributing Member States and multinational
organizations may also consider how their efforts could
11-57156
further address the root causes of piracy, including
through the development of land-based initiatives to
strengthen Somali and regional maritime and law
enforcement capacities. This must be linked to the
broader efforts to develop Somalia's justice and
security sectors. While we should not lose sight of the
overall goal, it may also be worth looking at interim
objectives. They include developing Somali capacity to
deal with piracy on land and in close inshore waters
through the establishment of coast guard capacity in
the region.

The Somali people, especially the youth, need
greater incentives not to succumb to the lure of piracy.
Economic rehabilitation and the creation of alternative
livelihoods, especially the development and
rehabilitation of coastal fisheries, must be at the centre
of efforts to fight piracy. But as long as piracy is
lucrative, alternative livelihood options will be a hard
sell. The payment of ransoms is putting more lives at
risk, and the money that flows into the Somali
economy through that channel is making the overall
goal to find a solution in the country more and more
difficult to achieve.

With respect to Somalia's natural resources and
waters, the Secretary-General states in his report that
the overall evidence of illegal fishing and toxic waste
dumping, as well as their alleged links to piracy
activities, require further investigation. At the same
time, it is important to use every opportunity to draw
attention to the need to protect Somalia's natural
resources and prevent their illegal and unregulated
exploitation.

The road map to end the transition period in
Somalia outlines important measures that would
address some of those challenges, including the
declaration by the Transitional Federal Government of
an exclusive economic zone. Somalia is urged to
accede to the international legal framework under the
purview of the International Maritime Organization. It
also needs to adopt the appropriate legal framework to
address all aspects of maritime law enforcement and to
develop a fishing industry. However, it is equally
important that efforts continue in support of the Somali
Government with a view to reforming its security
sector in order to expand and strengthen its capacity to
implement international agreements on environmental
issues. It will also be important for Member States to
investigate allegations of illegal fishing and dumping,
and to prosecute perpetrators when such offences are
3
committed by persons or entities under their
jurisdiction.

The Secretary-General states in his report that the
United Nations will do its utmost to assist the
Transitional Federal Government and the regional
authorities of Puntland, Somaliland and Galmudug, as
requested, in order to address those challenges. It is
important that the issue of Somalia's natural resources
be addressed simultaneously at the national and
regional levels. The Kampala Process dialogue forum
should be used by Somalis for such collaboration. The
report stresses the need for a strategic environmental
assessment of Somalia, which would be carried out by
the United Nations in partnership with the Government
and in collaboration with the relevant organizations.
Finally, the Secretary-General stresses that the
fate of the hundreds of kidnapped victims who are still
in the hands of pirate criminals, most often in difficult
and inhumane conditions, should remain an issue of
priority concern. In that regard, he notes that it is
encouraging that the effort to secure the release of
hostages is broad-based and includes Somali
authorities, Governments, industry and the United
Nations.

