Ms. Enge (Norway): I thank you, Mr. President,
for this opportunity to speak, and I thank His
Excellency the Foreign Minister of Somalia, Special
Representative Ould Abdallah and African Union
Commissioner Lamamra for their briefings earlier.

The past few months have brought about
remarkable changes in Somalia. We have seen broad-
based reconciliation emerge from the Djibouti process.
We have seen a peaceful leadership transition by
constitutional means. And we have not seen the
instability and increased violence that many feared
would erupt after the Ethiopian troops pulled out.
Violence has diminished, Mogadishu is more peaceful,
the new leadership is back in the capital and people
have started, tentatively, to return to their homes.

This is a commendable achievement by the
Somali people and their leaders, and we are
encouraged by their progress. We would also like to
recognize the efforts of Special Representative Ould
Abdallah and his staff at the United Nations Political
Office for Somalia, a steady source of inspiration in
finding compromises to push the process forward.

We are encouraged, but we know there is still a
long way to go. The new Somali leaders are facing
tremendous challenges. The security situation is still
tenuous. Humanitarian needs are overwhelming.
Human rights and impunity are major concerns, and the
reconciliation process must continue to move forward.
The list of achievements has grown, but so have
people's expectations. Somalis at home and abroad are
eager to see a peace that will bring not only protection,
but also a more prosperous future.

We know that there are still groups and elements
in the country that are prepared to use violent means to
overturn the achievements that have been made. This
includes attacks on African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) peacekeepers. Such attacks can only be
condemned in the strongest terms. We pay tribute to
the peacekeepers from Burundi and Uganda, who stay
on in spite of extremely difficult circumstances.

The international community must stand together
in supporting the new Somali leadership against the
elements that try to destroy the peace process. Norway
supports the Security Council decision to establish a
trust fund for support to AMISOM. We agree on the
need for a donors conference to solicit contributions
for the fund and for the capacity-building of Somali
institutions, including the Joint Security Force and the
Somali Police Force.

But peacebuilding requires more than
establishing the instruments to deal with immediate
threats to security. The new leadership must continue
its efforts to reach out to those groups that are still not
part of the peace and reconciliation process.

It is also of utmost importance that the leadership
be able to respond to the people's needs for basic
services by providing safe access for humanitarian
assistance and by focusing on recovery and
reconstruction. For the past few years, Norway has
committed approximately $35 million annually to
Somalia. As co-founders of the International Contact
Group on Somalia and chair of the friends of Somalia
group, we will continue to be actively engaged in
responding to the needs of the people of Somalia.

Off the coast of Somalia, we are pleased to see
that the international community has stepped up its
efforts to safeguard the sea lanes. In the Council, in
December, Norway pledged to contribute to these naval
operations (S/PV.6046). I can confirm that Norway will
send one of its new frigates to participate in the
European Union Operation Atalanta. The preparation
for the deployment of the vessel in August this year is
well under way.

Norway participates actively in the international
Contact Group on Piracy Off the Coast of Somalia, and
we commend the United States for its initiative to
establish that Group. We look forward to the continued
discussions in the Group on key issues such as
enhanced coordination and close cooperation in order
to bring to justice those who commit acts of piracy and
armed robbery at sea.

A sustainable solution to the piracy problem can
only be found through a comprehensive approach in
which the Somali authorities, including the regional
government in Puntland, have to play a key role. For
this reason, it might be useful to establish closer
cooperation and coordination between the current
operations at sea and the authorities on land, especially
with regard to coastal surveillance.

The new President and his Government should
know that the international community is ready to fully
cooperate with the new leadership. But we know that
the challenges during the remaining two years of the
transition period will be enormous. We will follow
developments in the coming months closely, and we
stand ready to offer our advice and support whenever
needed.

