Mr. Gayama (Congo) (spoke in F rench): My
delegation listened closely to the presentation of the
quarterly reports by the Chairmen of the three counter-
terrorism Committees: the Ambassadors of Argentina,
Denmark and Slovakia. We wish to warmly commend
them for the quality of their work.

The relevance of the reports submitted for our
consideration enlightens us about the work
programmes that they have established, the various
approaches that they have adopted and the results -
somewhat mixed - in the fight against terrorism,
which is a long-term struggle.

We note with satisfaction the adoption by the
General Assembly, on 8 September 2006, of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy (resolution 60/288). It sends a clear message by stating that this
scourge is unacceptable, committed by whomever and
for whatever purposes - and, I would add, regardless
of the semantic definition one might give for terrorism.
Under the terms of this Global Strategy, Member States
declare their resolve to refrain from organizing,
instigating, facilitating, participating in, financing,
encouraging or tolerating terrorist activities and to take
appropriate practical measures to ensure that their
respective territories are not used for terrorist
installations or training camps, or for the preparation or
organization of terrorist acts intended to be committed
against other States or their citizens. That seems to be
very clear.

The difficulty begins in the implementation of the
Strategy. The report of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001)
concerned the implementation of resolution 1624
(2005), which prohibits and prevents incitement to
commit terrorist acts. We wish to welcome the
Committee's efforts in that regard. Indeed, as of
7 September, 69 States have submitted reports, and 22
of them have announced that they have included in
their criminal codes a ban on committing acts of
terrorism.

Those results do not necessarily indicate a lack of
political will on the part of some States to implement
the resolution; rather, we believe, they reflect States'
differing perceptions as to the measures to be taken to
implement it. Some say that there are enough
provisions in their domestic legislation to enable them
to implement the provisions requested of them.

Concerning the denial of refuge, we point out and
understand what the majority of States have stated in
their reports, that immigration and border control laws
can serve as the basis for refusing admission to an
individual guilty of inciting terrorist acts. Whether or
not that is enough remains to be proved.

In any case, we believe that strengthening
international border security is one of the major aspects
of resolution 1624 (2005), particularly paragraph 2,
where the Security Council calls upon all States to
cooperate in combating fraudulent travel documents
and in enhancing terrorist screening procedures.

It is interesting to note that most States have
informed the Committee that measures along those
lines had been announced. Also, Member States have
adopted measures to encourage international exchanges
aimed at promoting dialogue and better understanding
among civilizations both at the level of the United
Nations international system and at the level of
national institutions. All of that must be encouraged.

In addition, my delegation views as positive the
measures taken by some States to implement the
resolution in accordance with the obligations arising
from international law, including in the areas of human
rights, refugees and humanitarian law.

With regard to the activities of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution

1540 (2004), we welcome its report, which cites the
progress made in implementing that resolution -
particularly in relation to its work programme, whose
main objectives include raising States' awareness about
the implementation of resolutions 1540 (2004) and
1673 (2006) and promoting dialogue, assistance and
cooperation with Member States.

As regards the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999), my delegation wishes to thank
the Committee's members for their work. The
proposals to restructure de-listing procedures drew our
attention. We welcome those efforts, especially with
regard to the quality of the lists submitted to Member
States and the constant improvements in the website,
which is a valuable guide for States in implementing
the resolution.

In general, we can be pleased about the
innovations made in the three Committees' working
methods, including the sending of joint missions -
which are increasingly bringing together a number of
other international organizations such as Interpol, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
the International Maritime Organization and the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees - and the holding of regional seminars.

While it is perhaps premature to talk about the
effectiveness of these new policies, which are still in
the experimental stage, we are convinced that we are
on the right track. Indeed, regional seminars are
already beginning to attract not only States and
international organizations, but also representatives of
non-governmental organizations. We must welcome
and encourage the multifaceted assistance that a
number of States and international organizations
provide to the three Committees in that regard, in the
context of implementing their activity programmes.

We believe that greater technical assistance
should be given to impoverished States or regions so as
to raise their awareness about the need to truly commit
themselves to helping other States to combat terrorism,
which remains an ongoing threat.

The seminar on implementing resolution 1540
(2004) to be held in Accra, on 9 and 10 November is an
initiative that we welcome. We hope that that type of
initiative will take place on all continents.
Among the countries that have not cooperated
sufficiently with the Committee, there are perhaps a
large number of African countries. We have already
discussed that in the African regional group, and it
does not seem to be a question of indifference or a lack
of interest. It was stated that there are often technical
reasons and perhaps a problem in determining
priorities for countries with limited means, whether
human or material resources, leading them to give
priority to other issues rather than combating terrorism.
That does not mean that terrorism is incapable of
striking those countries, wherever they are or at any
time. This has already been the case in several African
countries or regions, where Africans were either
victims or involved, unfortunately, in reprehensible
activities.

It does mean that there are still too many
vulnerable people in our countries susceptible of being
seduced by ideologies and by behaviour and incitement
to terrorism. The international community must adopt a
more comprehensive approach that includes preventive
measures related to development, education and
promotion of awareness among the active sectors,
especially youth, which is the sector most often
seduced by this sort of activities. Thus, it would be
expected that the symptoms be given attention or
treatment at least equal to the results expected.

Among non-proliferation and the trivialization of
delivery systems and other weapons used by terrorists,
there is an effort towards, if not general disarmament,
at least towards the non-dissemination of light arms or
other weapons that are the source of profit for some
armament industries. Where terrorists operate they
could, paradoxically, obtain delivery systems or
technologies from the countries that are at the forefront
of the fight against terrorism. That must be considered
and taken into account by the Security Council and the
international community in combating the scourge of
terrorism.

With these comments, we encourage the work of
the three counter-terrorism committees. In general,
their activities concern all countries, all areas of the
world, and no one is exempt from joining in and
cooperating in the work of survival for the
international community.

