Mr. Naanda (Namibia): I wish to congratulate
you, Sir, on your country's election to serve on the
Security Council for the period 2014 to 2015, and upon
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
the month of January 2014. Equally, I wish to thank
you for having organized this first open debate of
2014 on the Middle East, which affords the wider
membership an opportunity to participate in these
important deliberations. As 2014 has been declared the
International Year of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People, we look forward to participating in similar
forums aiming to resolve the fragile security situation in
the Middle East, in particular the question of Palestine.

At the same time, I wish to congratulate the newly
elected members of the Security Council and to extend
my delegation's support to them during their tenure on
this body.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to
be delivered by the Permanent Representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

We remain convinced that the main political
problem in the Middle East is the systematic aggression
by Israel against Palestine. That continues to pose
a threat to peace and security in the region. Namibia
remains concerned about the critical situation and
the continued illegal Israeli settlement campaign in
the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, which continues to gravely undermine the
integrity of the State of Palestine and threatens to make
impossible the achievement of the two-State solution
for peace on the basis of the pre-l967 borders.

Of great concern to my delegation is the increasing
number of Israeli settlements, which is based on
an illegal colonizing policy that has resulted in the
blockade of the Gaza Strip, restricted access for much-
needed goods, humanitarian aid, medical supplies and
fuel. The sustained Israeli occupation severely affects
the socioeconomic well-being of the Palestinians, which
is a flagrant denial of their right to self-determination
and of their exercise of their fundamental human rights
as enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.

Namibia believes that Israel's continuing flagrant
contempt for international law demands urgent attention
and responsible action by the international community,
with a view to compelling the occupying Power to end
all such grave breaches and salvaging the prospects for
a peaceful solution in the Middle East region.

As a country that experienced similar illegal
occupation by the South African apartheid regime,
Namibia continues to persistently extend its steadfast
support for the Palestinian people in pursuit of their
inalienable right to self-determination, independence
and freedom. We will remain committed to that
noble course. In that context, Namibia welcomes the
proclamation by the General Assembly of the year
2014 as the International Year of Solidarity with the
Palestinian People, in accordance with resolution
68/12 of 26 November 2013. We are hopeful that the
observance of this year as the International Year of
Solidarity with the Palestinian People will help bring an
end to the illegal occupation of Palestinian territories
and the achievement of the independence of the State
of Palestine, with full sovereignty and East Jerusalem
as its capital.

We wish to remind the Council of its obligations
to furthering the just cause of the People of Palestine
by adopting practical measures to end Israeli abuses
and illegal policies against the Palestinian people. It is
incomprehensible that the question of Palestine remains
a permanent agenda item on the Council's programme
of work, considering that the General Assembly, the
most representative organ of the United Nations,
adopted a historic decision in 2012 by according
Palestine non-member observer State status in the
United Nations. We remain hopeful that this decision
will constitute an important step towards the eventual
accession of Palestine to the United Nations as a full
Member State. It is therefore important for the Council
to respect the wish of the international community by
considering and approving, without further delay, the
request made by Palestine for recognition as a full-
fledged Member State, taking its rightful place among
the community of nations.

Namibia continues to believe that a real and lasting
solution leading to the freedom of Palestine can be
realized only through the implementation of all relevant
resolutions ofthe United Nations regarding the peaceful
settlement of the question of Palestine, and that peace
in the Middle East can be achieved only by addressing
the illegal occupation of the Palestinian territories by
Israel, the creation of the Palestinian State, ending all
conflicts and bringing lasting peace and security to
Palestinians and Israelis alike and to the wider region.

Let me reiterate Namibia's strong support for the
ongoing peace process and our appeal to both parties to
commit themselves to and embrace this opportunity by
abiding by their previous agreements and obligations
concerning lasting peace between the Israelis and the
Palestinians, living side by side.

Let me conclude by further reiterating Namibia's

unwavering support for and solidarity with the people of
Palestine in theirjust cause for freedom, independence
and social justice, and Namibia's steadfast support for
the full membership of Palestine in the United Nations
and its specialized agencies.

