Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I, too, wish to thank the Chef de Cabinet
of the Executive Office of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, for her briefing on the
situation in the Middle East. We listened attentively to
the statements delivered by our colleagues. In addition
to you, Mr. President, we wish to welcome the presence
of the United States Secretary of State, Mr. Michael
Pompeo, and the State Secretary of the Federal Foreign
Office of Germany, Mr. Andreas Michaelis.

It is no secret that the Middle East is currently
enduring serious crises that are of an existential nature
for a number of States. In order to attempt to arrive at
solutions to such crises, it is important to look not only
forward but also back, so as to understand the mistakes
that were made and try to avoid making them in future.

In our view, the most meaningful conclusion that
we should draw from the experience of the past two
decades is as follows.

No unilateral action of any kind can bring us
closer to the resolution of either the protracted or new
problems plaguing the region. The situation becomes
all the more devastating when certain States Members
of the United Nations attempt to delegitimize other
Member States. The resulting policies, aimed at
destabilizing and overthrowing regimes that certain
capitals deem undesirable, have not only failed to lead
to the settlement of the problems in the region but have
also created new, exceedingly dangerous problems for
the region, leading to greater bloodshed. It is clear to
us, as it is to most of our partners, that the only way to
extricate ourselves from this situation is ensure that the
United Nations and its Security Council play a central
role in coordinating international and regional efforts
in this respect. It is indeed in this Chamber that we
must reaffirm that this premise needs to be the point of
departure for all relevant efforts and initiatives.

Geopolitical engineering, interference in the
internal affairs of others and the imposition of military
solutions have led to the collapse of entire States, tragic
situations and the deaths of hundreds of thousands of
people in the region. It would be no exaggeration to
say that many countries have consequently been taken
hostage by the opportunistic goals of external players
and been forced to wage proxy wars that have proved
detrimental to their national interests.

We listened attentively to the statement delivered
by Mr. Pompeo. I even asked my colleagues to analyse
it word for word, as so much hinges on it. As it turns
out, he used many words with negative connotations,
including "challenges", "deterrence", "conflict",
"regime", "limitations", "counteraction" and "threat".
Only once did he use the word "cooperation", and that
was in the context of building a coalition against Iran.
Not once, however, did he use the word "dialogue". In
our view, the two latter terms must underpin any and all

diplomatic efforts.

We also noted that he spoke at length in emotionally
charged terms about the Persian Gulf. We, too, are
extremely concerned about the situation in the region.
The only difference is that from the outset his goal
has been to build a coalition against Iran, portraying
that country as the main and virtually sole source of
problems - a kind of evil empire. We believe that the
recent tensions in the Persian Gulf have largely been
artificially fomented and stoked. Against the backdrop
of the ongoing exchange of accusations, we are seeing
an increased military presence, including on the part of
extraregional States, which increases the risk of armed
conflict. Any incident could potentially spark a conflict
with devastating consequences.
We urge all parties to exercise restraint, work
towards de-escalation and settle problems politically
and diplomatically. First and foremost, that translates
into refraining from the imposition of ultimatums,
sanctions or threats. Given the need to develop a stable
collective security mechanism in the region that is
based on equitable dialogue, the Russian Federation
has proposed and presented, inter alia within the
United Nations, a blueprint for collective security in
the Persian Gulf region aimed at resolving conflict
situations and developing confidence-building and
oversight measures.

We believe that the security system in the Persian
Gulf must be inclusive, universal and comprehensive.
All States in the region should be involved in it on
an equal footing, and the appropriate organizational
structures should be established. Such a system would
serve as a prelude to building a shared post-crisis
architecture for the Middle East region. The exclusion
of any party is unacceptable. As experience has
shown, situations involving the creation of improvised
temporary coalitions, based on mutual interests, can
have only unfortunate consequences.

Such unilateral initiatives include the ministerial
conference held in Warsaw in February, which was
mentioned today. We repeatedly and publicly stated our
stance vis-a-vis that event during the preparation stage.
We noted that decisions on the format and agenda of the
conference had been taken hastily and covertly in the
absence of serious consultations with the United Nations
and key regional and extraregional stakeholders. We
pointed out that such an approach was contrary to the
declared goal of developing a collective strategy for the
Middle East. We explicitly stated that we considered
this to be yet another attempt to impose a unilateral
solution on the international community with the goal
of advancing parochial geopolitical agendas. The
outcome of that event fullyjustified those assessments.
Frankly, we see no added value in the efforts made in
the Warsaw format.

We believe that the Russian proposals can and
should be complemented and elaborated. They should
be perceived as a call for a constructive dialogue on
ways to achieve long-term stabilization in the Persian
Gulf region. We stand ready to engage closely with all
stakeholders through both official channels and social,
political and expert circles. In particular, I would note
that in order to step up expert dialogue on this issue,
an international expert round table has been scheduled
for 18 and 19 September in Moscow at the Institute of
Oriental Studies of the Russian Academy of Sciences.

We have always firmly believed that negotiations
are possible in every situation, provided that the parties
concerned are willing to embark upon them a spirit of
mutual respect, based on the principles of international
law, diplomatic practices and civility. Like the vast
majority of States in the region, we therefore cannot
accept a situation whereby calls for Iran to come
to the negotiating table are interspersed with direct
provocations and harsh sanctions. Given such an
approach, one could hardly expect the Iranian side
to respond.

Frankly, we see no logic in the fact that our United
States colleagues, who are in breach of resolution 2231
(2015), are now calling on Iran to begin negotiations
without any preconditions. We cannot accept the
fact that 80 per cent of Iranian trade is subject to the
illegal unilateral sanctions of the United States, which,
moreover, are extra-territorial in nature, aimed at forcing
all parties to bow to the will of Washington, DC.

In that regard, it is fitting to recall here that by
trampling on the norms of international law, the United
States is essentially attempting to punish those countries
that are complying in good faith with the provisions
of resolution 2231 (2015). Nevertheless, I assure the
Council that even in such difficult circumstances, we
will continue to seek to persuade both our Iranian and
American colleagues to move back from the edge of
this precipice and begin resolving their differences
through civilized dialogue, which entails the end of
policies based on ultimatums, sanctions and blackmail.

As was already the case many decades ago, the
settlement of the Middle East issue lies at the heart of
the region's problems. The status of Middle East peace
process remains unsatisfactory. The situation in the
West Bank and East Jerusalem is not improving. In East
Jerusalem, Israel is continuing its settlement activities
and the demolition of Palestinian structures. Those
actions are not only illegal under international law
but also constitute one of the major obstacles to a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace in the Middle East.

At the same time, persistent attempts are being
made to unilaterally impose alternative settlement
schemes that would undermine the long-standing and
internationally recognized parameters for resolving the
Palestinian problem. We believe that the intention to
drag out the efforts at finding a lasting comprehensive
solution to this issue is counterproductive. In the
absence of encouraging political horizons, no economic
surrogates can create the conditions necessary for
the full realization of the national aspirations of the
Palestinian people. The basic principle of the two-
State solution remains the cornerstone of a stable and
peaceful future for Palestinians and Israelis both.

We urge all parties to be guided not by narrow
political interests but by the universally recognized
legal framework for a settlement in the Middle East,
including the relevant Security Council resolutions, the
Madrid principles and the Arab Peace Initiative. For
our part, we are committed to coordinating our actions
with our Palestinian and Israeli partners, States in the
Middle East and North Africa and the members of the
Middle East Quartet of international mediators.

Alongside the Palestinian issue there exists a new
generation, ifI may put it that way, of regional crises.
The counter-terrorism operation conducted by the
Russian Aerospace Forces in Syria has led to progress
in the fight against terrorism. The eradication of the
terrorist hotbed in Syria aligns with the interests not
only ofthe countries ofthe Middle East and North Africa
but also those of Europe, as it will reduce the terrorist
threat in that area and the flow of migrants therefrom.
I would like to underscore that we have never agreed
that terrorists could remain in Syria or be comfortable
in that country. We therefore call for collective efforts
and the abandonment of double standards in the fight
against terrorism. I will be frank: we continue to
advocate a wide-ranging counter-terrorism front.

We are continuing to strive to bring about a political
settlement in Syria, in cooperation with the United
Nations under the Astana format.

We advocate the unification of regional efforts. It is
important now to address without preconditions issues
related to the socioeconomic recovery of the Syrian
Arab Republic and to the issues faced by refugees and
to cast aside the practice of their forced detention in
third countries.

The focus of our attention needs to be on the
situation in Libya. We are of the View that the only
way to help the Libyans emerge from the crisis is
to consolidate the positions of international actors.
Developments make clear the consequences of foreign
military interventions. In Libya, such intervention has
led to the total collapse of its statehood. We call upon
all Libyan stakeholders to cooperate with the United
Nations and not to advance unilateral agendas. That
approach is also necessary in Yemen, where all parties
must act on the unifying basis of the United Nations to
restore its statehood, combat terrorism and transition to
building good-neighbourly relations.

In conclusion, I would like to stress that it is no
exaggeration to say that the alarming trends I have just
described have created an impasse in the Middle East,
compounded by a propaganda war in the spirit of the
grimmest chapter of the Cold War. The number of fake
news reports circulated by various non-governmental
organizations, which receive financing from a number
of Western capitals, is astoundingly high. Regrettably,
unilateral decisions are being taken on the basis of such
false and highly contentious information, which not
only undermines efforts to resolve conflicts but also
weakens the entire system of international relations.
Such decisions are employed as pretexts for identifying
enemies. At the same time, genuine threats, which
require collective efforts, are ignored. That is an
approach that will not get us very far. The sooner our
Western partners understand that concept, the sooner
we can finally address the problems plaguing the
area - outstanding and new issues alike - based on
the aspirations of the peoples of the region. I assure the
Council that we stand ready to do so under any format
of multilateral or bilateral cooperation or dialogue,
under the auspices of the Security Council, on the basis
of a positive agenda, without any double standards or
hidden goals and with, of course, unconditional respect
for the sovereignty of the States of the Middle East and
the rights and aspirations of their peoples.

