Mr. MacKay (New Zealand): At the outset, let
me congratulate you, Mr. President, on your initiative
in the Council's role in relation to the issue of small
arms and light weapons, particularly following the
important achievement of the Programme of Action at
the small arms Conference last month here in New
York.

The Programme of Action underscored the
multifaceted nature of the small arms issue and the real
and immediate threat that these weapons pose to the
security of nations and individuals. While the final
outcome was not all that we might have hoped for, it is
the first time the international community has agreed
on measures to tackle the illicit trade in these weapons.
At this stage, may I acknowledge the pivotal role that
was played by Colombia, and in particular by
Ambassador Reyes, in ensuring that the Conference
had a successful outcome.

The Security Council's powers under Chapter VII
of the Charter to take measures considered necessary to
deal with threats to or breaches of the peace include, in
appropriate circumstances, the imposition of arms
embargoes to prevent the proliferation of small arms in
a particular environment. We consider that, with
careful thought, such measures can be helpful in

achieving the core objective of restoring peace and
security.
We recognize that it may be argued in some
circumstances that imposing embargoes where the size
of opposing arsenals is already skewed may do little
more than freeze the existing balance of power. But, on
the other hand, the Council's overriding concern should
be to defuse the conflict situation as much as possible.
The importation of more arms only adds fuel to the
fire. It also might place additional lives at risk,
including lives of personnel of operations mandated by
the Council.

While the Council should continue to use these
powers where necessary, it must also be sure that the
effect of such measures will both halt the proliferation
of small arms and make the prospect of an end to
conflict more likely. The cooperation of all States is
needed to ensure that domestic systems are in place to
comply with such measures.

In our view, consideration should also be given to
strengthening the capacity of the Secretariat so that it is
able to provide further support for monitoring by the
Council, to ensure that any embargo is not
circumvented by illicit trade.

Recent conflicts in Sierra Leone and Angola have
shown, however, that embargoes on weapons alone
might often prove insufficient. In situations where
conflicts are fuelled by the uncontrolled exploitation
and smuggling of natural resources, measures should
also be taken by the Security Council to address these
factors. Further work must be undertaken on refining
United Nations sanctions, including arms embargoes,
so as to ensure that they are effectively targeted
towards achieving sustainable peace with a greater
certainty of success.

The Council also has an important role to play in
ensuring that the widespread and uncontrolled presence
of small arms and light weapons in areas of recent
conflict does not disrupt nations' peace-building
efforts. This requires the more frequent inclusion of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
elements in post-conflict United Nations peace-
building operations, as recommended in last year's
Brahimi report on United Nations peace operations. I
note that a number of those who have spoken before
me have also placed considerable emphasis on this
aspect.

Recent experience in Sierra Leone and Kosovo
has certainly shown that such measures are by no
means easy, but they are absolutely essential. If
stability is to be achieved, the law of the gun must not
be allowed to reign freely. It is the role of the Security
Council to recognize when such elements are required
in missions and to include appropriate provisions in
mission mandates.

We have seen this ourselves in our own region,
the South Pacific, where small arms have exacerbated
recent unrest and conflict. We have also seen it further
afield in our peacekeeping and peace-building work
with the United Nations. Countries of our region find
external support to be vital as they try to resolve
conflict. While the supporters come mainly from
regional partners, the international community also has
an important part to play, as the United Nations
continues to do, for example, in Bougainville, Papua
New Guinea.

Mr. President, we fully endorse your objective in
seeking to formulate a set of practical and workable
recommendations as an outcome of this meeting, and
we look forward to the final product.

