Mr. Al-Jarman (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in Arabic): As Chair of the Arab Group for this month, I
would like to thank Mr. Pascoe for his update.

The monthly briefings that the Secretariat
provides to the Security Council on the latest
developments in the Palestinian and Arab territories
under occupation since 1967 reflect, in one way or
another, the gravity of the legal, humanitarian and
political Violations committed by Israel, the occupying
Power, against the Palestinian people. They include its
continued and systemic expansion of illegal settlement
activities deep in the West Bank and East Jerusalem
and surroundings areas, the expulsion of the Arab
population from their homes and the continuing
confiscation of private and public land and property, all
of which undermine the elements of the Palestinian
State and its National Authority.

The Arab Group reiterates its condemnation of all
those grave actions and practices by Israel, which are
the direct cause of the failure of every regional and
international effort made to date to resume peace
negotiations, and which have also fomented anger,
tension and instability in the region as a whole. The
Arab Group is deeply concerned at the international
community's continuing inability to end such
violations and aggressive measures on Israel's part.
This has encouraged Israel to continue its provocative
policies concerning the establishment of new
settlements and the expansion of existing ones as part
of its efforts to consolidate its occupation of
Palestinian land, in particular in East Jerusalem, with
the aim of drastically changing that city's
demographic, historical and religious nature and Arab
character ahead of the results of the negotiations.

The Arab Group regards such Israeli practices as
null and void and contrary to the principles of the
Charter and the provisions of international law, the
relevant international resolutions and the road map.
Today, we therefore demand that the international
community in general, and the Security Council in
particular, assume its full responsibility for the task of
forcing Israel to immediately cease its dangerous
policies, through, among other acts, immediate
cancellation of all illegal decisions and unilateral
measures it has taken in this regard.

We also call on Israel to immediately halt all its
settlement activities, with a view to laying the
groundwork for urgent and unconditional peace
negotiations designed to reach a just and lasting
resolution of the Palestinian question based on a two-
State solution and in accordance with the Arab Peace
Initiative and the road map.

We are deeply concerned at the continuing dire
humanitarian and economic situation of the Palestinian
people as a result of the Israeli occupation and
blockades. We call on Israel to immediately lift its
closure of the Gaza crossings, in compliance with
resolution 1860 (2009), as well as to remove all

military barriers in Palestinian towns and villages,
which limit trade and the movement of Palestinian
citizens. By the same token, we demand that Israel end
its repeated attempts to withhold customs and tariff
revenues due to the Palestinian Authority.

We hope that the international community will
increase its economic, financial and humanitarian
assistance to the Palestinian people, and we urge donor
countries to fulfil their share of the commitments to
contribute $1 billion to the annual budget of the
Palestinian Authority for 2012, based on the
calculations made by the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
for the Coordination of the International Assistance to
Palestinians at its March meeting in Brussels, in order
to enable the Palestinian Authority to bring its growing
fiscal deficit under control and fulfil its responsibilities
to the Palestinian people.

On the humanitarian front, we call on Israel to
immediately and unconditionally release all Palestinian
prisoners living in difficult and illegal conditions in
Israel's prisons and detention centres.

We reiterate our total condemnation and rejection
of the continued Israeli occupation of the Syrian Golan.
We consider all measures taken by its occupiers, which
should be ended, to be null and void.

We also deplore Israel's relentless violations of
Lebanese sovereignty by land, sea and air, and ask that
the international community compel Israel to abide by
its obligations as set out in resolution 1701 (2006), in
particular with regard to implementing its military
withdrawal from the Lebanese territory it still
occupies.

With regard to the crisis in Syria, the Arab Group
supports resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012), as
well as the efforts of Joint Special Envoy Kofi Annan
to resolve the crisis peacefully, in accordance with his
mandate and the relevant decisions of the Arab League,
which include a political road map for the Syrian crisis
based on the Arab Peace Initiative.

In that regard, we reiterate our support for the
resolutions adopted at the recent summit of the League
of Arab States in Baghdad, which condemned the
Syrian Government's serious violations of Syrian
civilians' human rights and called on it to immediately
end all killing and acts of violence; to protect civilians;
to ensure their freedom to demonstrate peacefully; to
immediately release all those detained during such
events; to withdraw its military forces and other armed
presence from all cities and villages and to allow
immediate access to Arab and international relief
organizations.

We hope that the parties concerned in Syria will
assume their national responsibilities and comply
strictly and transparently with their commitments and
pledges, as set out in the Joint Special Envoy's six-
point plan to resolve the situation, with a view to
ending the bloodshed of the Syrian people, allowing
them to achieve their legitimate aspirations, and
restoring security and stability throughout the country.
12-30484
In conclusion, we hope that the Security Council,
as part of its responsibilities in this area, will adopt the
critical measures required to revive the efforts needed
to achieve comprehensive, just and lasting peace and
security in the Middle East.

