Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I shall delay beginning my statement so that
certain hypocrites can exit the Chamber. The exit of
the representatives of certain States who have shed
crocodile tears over the humanitarian situation in
Aleppo reveals their hypocrisy and mendacity. They
have put on this theatrical show on several occasions,
but their behaviour confirms our suspicions of their
complete lack of objectivity in their national policies
towards my country.

I was compelled to request the floor after I listened
to the misguided statements made by a number of
Security Council members and the representative of
the Secretariat, seeking as usual to distort the strenuous
efforts of the Syrian Government to provide necessary
services and support to those in need, and to vilify the
efforts of my country's Government against organized
terrorism being supported by the same States that deny
my Government's constitutional and legal rights under
international law to defend its people against terrorism
represented by the organizations of Da'esh and Jabhat
al-Nusra and associated terrorist, who are relics of
ignorant times and Wahabi in nature.

As a Government, we will not allow any discussion
about something called western Aleppo and eastern
Aleppo. We will not allow for a repetition of the sad old
scenario in which we used to talk about eastern Beirut
and western Beirut. There is one Aleppo and there is
one Syria. No one who plots against our country and our
territories will achieve anything with us. The blockade
is imposed on all of Syria, notjust on eastern Aleppo or
on Aleppo per se. An unjust blockade is imposed on the
entirety of my nation. We have reiterated this thousands
of times and shall say it again and again, whether
anyone understands or not, and whether anyone refuses
to understand or not.

Some States that feigned tears today over Aleppo in
a theatrical fashion, as they have done before over the
towns of Darayya and the neighbourhood of Al-Waer
and other areas, have deliberately ignored the following
facts.

First, the representatives of these States ignored
the geopolitical landscape of the region, which reflects
the violation of the most basic norms of international
law by certain States, such as Turkey, which dreams
of restoring its Ottoman glory - which faded and will
not return -and repeatedly violates the sovereignty
of Syria and Iraq. Another example is Saudi Arabia,
which supports terrorism in the region and throughout
the world in the name of a religion that is innocent of
such claims, including by issuing Wahabi jihadi fatwas
legitimizing the bloodshed of Libyans, Yemenis and
others.

Similarly, the United States, Britain and France
have invaded and destroyed Libya, and before that the
United States and Britain invaded and destroyed Iraq
and killed millions of its people. The same goes for
Qatar, which uses its oil funds to supply terrorists with
all sorts of lethal weapons, and Israel, which is forming
an alliance with Jabhat al-Nusra in the occupied Syrian
Golan area. None of this has bothered Mr. O'Brien,
Mr. Ladsous, Mr. Feltman or the Secretary-General.
None of these violations of international law have
angered anyone at all. It is just business as usual.

Secondly, the representatives who have just exited
the Chamber, shirking their responsibilities, have
ignored the main reason for the painful deterioration
of the situation in Syria in general, and in Aleppo in
particular, and how Aleppo has been turned from the
economic capital of Syria, whose residents enjoyed a
decent standard of living with all services, into a city
whose residents suffer in terms of security, health,
education and livelihood. What happened in this
martyr city is to be blamed on the acts committed by
terrorist armed groups and foreign terrorist combatants
brought from all over the world - from New Zealand
to Canada - into Syria through Turkish territories,
facilitated by the Erdogan regime and with funding
from the Saudi and Qatari regimes.

As for the Governments of the United States,
France, Britain and other States, they ensured them a
supply of lethal weapons of all kinds. I bring with me
images of the new weapons, including American-made
rockets that have been sent to the moderate opposition
in eastern Aleppo. These moderate terrorists, who have
been genetically modified, are preparing to attack
western Aleppo. This is an image of one of the rockets
that have been dropped on a Church in western Aleppo;
we have thousands of images for anyone who wants to
see more.

Thirdly, the representatives who exited the
Chamber, shirking their responsibilities to maintain
international peace and security, have also ignored the
fact that terrorists in eastern Aleppo are using civilians
as human shields, as do Da'esh terrorists against the
innocent residents of Mosul in Iraq. The terrorists in
Mosul are the same as those in eastern Aleppo. They
continue to shower the neighbourhoods of western
Aleppo with dozens ofbombs on a daily basis, claiming
thousands of martyrs and wounded, and are met with
a dubious international silence, especially from the
States whose representatives have left the Chamber.
It is deplorable that these States continue to call these
terrorists the "moderate arned opposition", in a stark
provocation to the provisions of the international law.

Fourthly, the representatives who have left the
Chamber, shirking their responsibilities to maintain
international peace and security, ignored the reason
why the United States-Russia agreement on Aleppo of
9 September did not stand. The Syrian Arab Republic
Government committed to the cessation of hostilities,
which was exploited by terrorist armed groups to regroup
and summon fighters and military equipment from the
States that generously shed crocodile tears over the
suffering of our people in Aleppo in order to confront
the Syrian Government. These States disregarded the
fact that armed terrorist groups are responsible for
undermining and violating the agreement by rejecting
it in the first place. Immediately after the signing of
the agreement, 27 terrorist factions declared that they
would not honour it - this did not reach the ears of
Mr. O'Brien - and were targeting the humanitarian
convoy in Oram Al-Kubra.

These States also ignore the fact that the main reason
for the collapse of the agreement was the failure of the
United States to commit to separating the so-called
moderate opposition from the terrorist organizations and
its targeting ofa military site of the Syrian army in Deir
ez-Zor on 17 September. The incident of 17 September
allowed the Da'esh terrorists to consolidate their control
over 300,000 civilians in Deir ez-Zor.

Fifthly, the representatives who have left the
Chamber, shirking their responsibilities to maintain
international peace and security, have ignored the
agreement reached in the context of the coordinated
Syrian-Russian effort for the cessation of hostilities
in eastern Aleppo, unilaterally for humanitarian
reasons, including the evacuation of the wounded, sick
and elderly from eastern Aleppo and the facilitation
of access to a team from the United Nations entities
working in Damascus, led by the United Nations
Resident Coordinator and the International Red Cross
and the Arab Syrian Red Crescent, in order to follow up
the evacuation operation and set up six humanitarian
corridors to allow civilians to exit, and two checkpoints
for armed militants, who were invited to normalize their
situation so as to be granted amnesty or to leave the
city. However, the terrorist groups that were using the
population as human shields undermined that operation.
Eight corridors were opened, six for humanitarian exit
and two for the armed groups' exit, contrary to what has
been said by the American and British representatives.

Sixthly, the representatives who left the Chamber,
shirking their responsibilities to maintain international
peace and security, avoided identifying the persons
responsible for the suffering of the population of Aleppo
due to the lack of water, medicine, food and electricity,
in particular given the fact that the terrorists cut off the
water and power supplies to the city. The water plant is
controlled by the terrorists in Aleppo. Everyone should
pay attention to this detail. They are the ones who cut
off the water supply and who loot food and medicine
supplies intended for civilians in Aleppo. They are also
responsible, along with the air strikes by the so-called
international coalition, for the destruction of the power
station in the Suleiman Al-Halabi neighbourhood and
elsewhere, as well as other electricity and desalination
plants. Therefore, it is the terrorists and the international
coalition who are cutting off water and electricity
supplies to the residents of Aleppo.

My Government rejects the selective approach of
these States concerning the situation in eastern Aleppo
and other specific areas in Syria. All of Syria, including
Aleppo and the eastern, western, northern and southern
areas, suffer from Wahabi terrorism, supported by the
regimes of well-known Governments - Saudi Arabia,
Turkey, Qatar and Israel foremost among them. It also
suffers from the attacks of the allies of these States as
part of the so-called international coalition, and from
the American unilateral and arbitrary sanctions.

My country's Government reiterates its firm
position that the only solution to the crisis is political
solution based on an inter-Syrian dialogue, under Syrian
leadership, without foreign intervention and without
preconditions, be they American, British, French or
other. My Government affirms that the political track
must go hand in hand with the counter-terrorism track,
which will continue unabated until all terrorist armed
groups active in Syria have been eliminated. In that
context, my Government reiterates the importance
of the mission of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General.

How can some of the delegations in this Chamber,
representing countries that sponsor terrorism, claim
to be fighting terrorism while parroting misleading
lies about ongoing military operations carried out by
the Syrian Army in Syria and the Russian ally? How
can they fight terrorism if they depend on terrorists as
sources of information? Is there a relationship between
those Governments and the terrorists?

To conclude, the battle for the liberation of Mosul
and all territories in Iraq is the battle of the Syrian
Government and its army, too. It is an absolute right of
the Iraqi Government to liberate Mosul from terrorism,
just as it is the right ofthe Syrian Government to liberate
Aleppo from that same terrorism. Iraq and Syria are
fighting the same terrorism in Mosul and in Aleppo.
The resemblance between the two ongoing military
operations in Aleppo and those in Mosul is significant.
Why is there support for the military operation in
Iraq, while the military operation in Aleppo faces
obstruction? Why are humanitarian corridors being
opened in order to push Da'esh terrorists out of Mosul
towards the Syrian town of Raqqa? And why are those
groups leaving Mosul for Raqqa being bombed by the
so-called coalition bombers? Why reject the Russian-
Syrian proposal to open the same corridors to allow the
same terrorists to leave eastern Aleppo? It is as if the
States supporting these terrorist groups were saying
that the terrorists in Syria are angels, while the same
terrorists in other places are devils.

I would have liked to ask the United States
representative why her Government did not open a
humanitarian corridor for the terrorist who attacked
the night club in Florida. Why was he not supplied
with food and medicine so that he could continue his
terrorist activities, for humanitarian purposes known
to Mr. O'Brien? Why were the terrorists who attacked
the Bataclan theatre in Paris not supplied by the
French Government with food and humanitarian aid
and offered a humanitarian corridor to leave Paris for
humanitarian reasons as well, known to Mr. O'Biren?
The same applies to Britain and elsewhere. I say to
those before me: enough hypocrisy. My country's
people are the ones paying the price. This theatrical
farce must end. All members of the Council must fulfil
their responsibility to maintain international peace and
security, rather than settle scores between one another
to the detriment of our people in Syria.

