Mr. Azwai (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (interpretation from Arabic): I would like at the outset to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I am confident that your wide
experience and your wisdom will enable you to steer the
Council towards shouldering its important responsibilities
for maintaining international peace and security.

Nor can I fail to express my deep thanks and
appreciation to your predecessor, Ambassador Kovanda,
Permanent Representative of the Czech Republic, for his
wise leadership of the Security Council last month.

The Security Council is meeting to consider an
important issue which has repeatedly been placed before it
in the past: the violation by the Israelis of resolutions of the
Security Council and the General Assembly, in this instance
by confiscating 53 hectares of Palestinian Arab land in East
Jerusalem in order to build more Israeli settlements, as a
part of their continued attempts to Judaize the Holy City
and to alter its demographic composition. By taking this
step, the Israelis have proved once again that they do not
respect international legality, and never comply with any
United Nations resolutions.

The international community on more than one
occasion has opposed measures taken by the Israelis to
annex the Holy City of Al-Quds and to change its legal
status, geographic features and demographic composition.
The Council itself has adopted several resolutions on this
question, perhaps the most important among them being
resolution 478 (1980), in which the Security Council
expressed its concern over the enactment of the "basic law"
which proclaimed changes in the characteristics and status
of the Holy City, and in the strongest possible terms
censured that law and the refusal by the Israelis to comply
with relevant Security Council resolutions.

In resolution 478 (1980) the Security Council
affirmed that the "basic law" was a violation of
international law, and determined that all the legislative
and administrative measures and actions taken by the
Israeli occupying Power were null and void and should be
rescinded forthwith, because such measures and actions
constituted a serious obstruction to achieving a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle East.
The Security Council also called on all States that had
established diplomatic missions in Al-Quds to withdraw
them.

What happened following the adoption of that
resolution? The Israelis continued their defiance of
Security Council resolutions and persisted in their actions
aimed at the Judaization of the Holy City. They also
continued their excavations designed to undermine the
Al-Aqsa mosque, having failed to burn it down in 1969.
They also persisted in placing obstacles in the way of
Palestinian Arabs living in Al-Quds Al-Sharif, to force
them to leave the city - sometimes by sealing it off from
the rest of the cities of Palestine, and at other times by
inciting fanatic settlers to perpetrate repeated attacks
against Palestinian Arabs.

Even the recent developments, the so-called Peace
Agreements between the Israelis and the Palestinians,
have not prevented the Israelis from continuing their
violations of Security Council resolutions and encroaching
upon the rights of the Palestinian people - rights which
have been confirmed and supported by international
legality. And here we have to ask: Until what point will
the Israelis continue to refuse to implement the
resolutions of the Security Council and the international
community? And do the Israelis really want peace?

The question being considered by the Security
Council today is an extremely important and serious one,
because Al-Quds Al-Sharif is the key to war and peace
now as it was in the past and as it will be in the future.
The question, this time, does not concern only Arab
Governments that Israel's allies could exert pressure on
and contain. It is a matter that goes beyond Arab
Governments and touches the very sensibilities of all the
peoples of the Arab nation, from the Ocean to the Gulf.
It also is a matter of concern for the peoples of the
Islamic nation as a whole. No attempt to contain the
reaction of angry peoples will ever succeed. Moreover,
this development will fuel more extremism in the region,
the very extremism whose original motivation was the
actions of the Israelis and their allies.
 

The patience of the Arab people and the peoples of the
Islamic nation is running out, as they witness every day
Israeli arrogance and Israeli persistence in humiliating the
Arabs and Muslims, in defiance of all the resolutions of the
Security Council, because the Israelis are exempt from
implementing those resolutions thanks to the biased position
of the United States of America. This even encourages the
Israelis to continue to perpetrate their violations and their
expansion, by force, at the expense of their neighbours.

The Israelis are exempt from being subjected to
Chapter VII of the Charter, notwithstanding the fact that all
their terrorist actions against the Palestinian people fall
under Chapter VII of the Charter. Arabs and Muslims ask:
Why has the Security Council been unable to force the
Israelis to comply with its numerous resolutions? And why
does the Security Council avoid the application of Chapter
VII to the Israelis? Furthermore, why does the Security
Council turn a blind eye to the atrocious Israeli massacres
of Palestinian Arabs and then turn around and raise hell
when a Jewish settler in Palestine is slightly injured? Arabs
and Muslims also ask: Why does a super-Power, a
permanent member of the Security Council, encourage and
even incite the Israelis to refuse to abide by the resolutions
of the Security Council? Does this not show a stark
contradiction between its responsibilities as a permanent
member of the Security Council and its actions when it
comes to the Israelis? Would not such a position give
several countries justification for not complying with
Security Council resolutions - including my own country,
which is being subjected to unjust sanctions imposed by the
Security Council, under Chapter VII, on the mere suspicion
of the involvement of two Libyan citizens in the explosion
of an American aircraft? Worse still, it is the United States
that is impeding any settlement of a legal dispute which
should have never been put before the Security Council in
the first place, because it does not constitute any threat to
international peace and security.

The policy of humiliation and double standards in
international issues is very regrettable, because it is being
applied by the Security Council and by a super-Power that
is a permanent member of the Council. This cannot go on;
it cannot be condoned indefinitely because it agitates
peoples and drives them to seek every means possible to rid
themselves of the injustice. It might even drive them to
reconsider the very usefulness of a United Nations that has
lost its credibility in the field of protecting peoples and
their rights and sovereignty.

Today, the Security Council has before it an extremely
sensitive question. The Arab world and the Islamic world
and all peoples dedicated to the prevalence of peace and
security in the Middle East are looking to the Council. So
either it can adopt a decisive resolution that would put an
end to illegal Israeli actions which undermine faith in a
lasting, just and comprehensive peace in the region, or it
can push the peoples of the area to choose the road of
confrontation and extremism, which might well draw the
region once again into a bloody conflict that would
threaten international peace and security.

Everything will depend on the decisions and
practical measures the Security Council takes regarding
Israeli policies designed to nibble at and ultimately
Judaize Al-Quds Al-Sharif.

