Mr. Sharmarke (Somalia): There has been
political change in Somalia in recent months, as Special
Representative Kay and Ambassador Sidikou informed
the Security Council. There has been some tangible
progress, and the Federal Republic of Somalia has put
forth the Gullwade (Victory) Plan designed to rapidly
enhance the capacity of the Somali national army to
fight Al-Shabaab alongside the African Union Mission
in Somalia, in order to respond to the call to make the
Somali national army more effective in joint operations.
I urge our partners to support this plan so as to enable
the army to then assume more responsibility to secure
the country.

A crucial component of the plan and the delivery
of Somalia's defence sector is the process of integrating
regional militias into the Somali army. With the
beginning of the operation of the National Integration
Commission, under the auspices of the Ministry of
Defence, on 12 May, we will now begin to see some
real momentum and tangible progress in this priority
area. The agreed allocation of regional Mission forces
to be transferred to the Somali national army indicates
a clear and strong commitment on the part of regional
organizations to embrace the federalization of our
armed forces. This is related to the integration of 2,880
from Jubbaland, where Al-Shabaab still maintains
several strongholds. As I speak, the Defence Minister
is in Jubbaland to kick-tart the integration process.

Another pressing priority is the integration of
3,000 militia personnel allocated from Puntland. The
Puntland forces are already fighting Al-Shabaab, which
has established another stronghold in the Galgala
Mountains, following the pressure of the military
campaign in south-west Somalia last year. Puntland
is expected to be the ultimate theatre of fighting
against Al-Shabaab due to the difficult terrain, which
provides shelter for the group shelter. We need to defeat
Al-Shabaab and to prevent it from consolidating and
spreading its presence in Puntland, before the situation
becomes too serious to handle.

The Al-Shabaab threat in Puntland is heightened
by the events unfolding in Yemen. If extremist
elements come and take root in Puntland together with
Al-Shabaab, it will be very difficult to dislodge and
defeat them in future. We have a window to address
this situation now. I therefore appeal to the Security
Council to authorize the United Nations Support Office
for the African Union Mission in Somalia to extend
a non-lethal support package to the additional 3,000
personnel from Puntland, earmarked for the integration
of the Somali national army. That would bring the total
number of army troops benefiting from the United
Nations support package to 13,900.

Looking ahead, it is also vital that we incorporate
into this process the integration of regional police
forces. That will play a central role in accelerating the
transition to policing piracy, at the federal and regional
levels alike, which we all know is essential to long-term
stability in Somalia.

On the political front, Vision 2016 remains the
policy framework that encapsulates our political
objectives. There has been progress in moving ahead
with the process in the central regions, and the federal
structures are taking shape quite rapidly. The last
remaining state, Hiiraan state, is about to be kick-
started in the next week or so.

The Federal Government is also continuing to
engage regional leaders. At our last meeting in Garoowe,
progress was made in the constitutional review process,
including the security sector, power- and work-sharing
and the issue of force integration. Federal and state
leaders agreed to establish a committee to review
work-sharing arrangements and to move forward on the
constitutional review process.

Progress under the New Deal Compact has
been quite positive. On 2 April, and a concessional
facility approved in principle six joint projects to be
implemented by the Federal Government of Somalia
and six organizations with the support channelled
through the United Nations or through partner transfers.
This is a crucial step towards unlocking resources and
accelerating the delivery of tangible results.

In May 2015, the Council of Ministers nominated
members of the National Independent Electoral
Commission, the Judicial Service Commission and
the Boundary Commission. The operationalization of
these Commissions is a top priority for the Federal
Government, and we expect the Federal Parliament to
endorse them very soon.

Efforts to establish new structures in the regions

are progressing. A reconciliation conference is ongoing.
Planning has begun for the organization process towards
cooperation of federal states in the last remaining state.

The establishment of the Jubbaland Parliament
was a welcome development. However, there have been
some issues that arose from the process. The Federal
Government is working closely with the Internal
Jubba Organization and opposition leaders to find
compromise and accommodations to solve the crisis
over the formation of the Jubbaland regional assembly.

Last but not least, the Federal Government is
working very closely on repatriation with Kenya so as to
have an orderly return of our refugees from the Dadaab
camp. We are also working with authorities in Yemen to
assist the swift process of refugee returns to Somalia.
We are faced with a situation that is of great concern to
the United Nations and all parties in the region: that of
dealing with the human cost of the violence in Yemen.
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees expects 100,000 refugees from Yemen in
Somalia over the coming six months. Somalia is already
home to approximately 1 million internally displaced
persons. We do not have the internal resources or the
capacity to absorb additional refugees. We therefore
appeal to the Council to mobilize the United Nations
system and donors so as to develop a contingency plan
on the ground for the refugees fleeing from Yemen.

I thank the Council for this opportunity to address
it and I hope that it will consider our appeals.

