Mr. Klein (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Zarif for his briefing. I would
also like to thank Foreign Minister Dacie and Foreign
Minister Hoxhaj for their remarks today.

The United States welcomes Kosovo's continuing
steps towards full integration within the international
community. We commend the Governments of the
Solomon Islands and Togo for their recognition of
Kosovo as a sovereign, independent state. We are
also very pleased about Kosovo's acceptance into the
Venice Commission of the Council of Europe as its
sixtieth member State. Those steps further cement
Kosovo's place within the international community,
strengthening Kosovo, the region and international
cooperation.

The United States praises both Serbia and Kosovo
for their continued dedication to the European
Union-facilitated Kosovo-Serbia dialogue and the
implementation of the First Agreement of Principles
Governing the Normalization of Relations of
19 April 2013. While the next high-level meetings
await Government formation in Kosovo, we are
encouraged that working-level discussions continue,
including a planned meeting on 4 September to carry
forward the work on integrated border management.
Both Governments have made difficult but necessary
decisions to advance the dialogue, which remains
integral to a stable, peaceful and prosperous region. We
are further heartened by the recent public statements by
Serbian officials reaffirming that stability is Belgrade's
key interest in Kosovo.

The process of Government formation in Kosovo
is under way following successful parliamentary
elections in June. We are encouraged by the positive
reports from local and international observers on the
smooth and orderly conduct of the election and broad
participation throughout Kosovo. As Kosovo's political
and party leaders work to form the next government, it is
important that the process proceed in line with Kosovo's
laws and Constitution; the 1 July and 26 August rulings
by Kosovo's Constitutional Court should serve as
guidelines in that regard. We urge the leaders, parties
and Kosovo Assembly members to move lawfully and
quickly towards formation of the new government,
so that the important work of strengthening Kosovo's
multiethnic democracy can continue. We also welcome
the formation of municipal assemblies and the Kosovo
Ministry of Local Government Administration's
certification in May of municipal statutes for the four
municipalities in the Serb-majority north.

The United States supports freedom of expression
and universal human rights, and we denounce those
who would turn to violence to sow discord and unrest
within their communities. We condemn the violence
that occurred during the South Mitrovica demonstration
on 22 June regarding barriers on the Austerlitz Bridge.
The security services, including the Kosovo police,
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX) and the Kosovo Force (KFOR), merit
praise for their swift and appropriate response, which
prevented further escalation. The violence and tensions
over the Mitrovica bridge underscore the enduring
sensitivity of these issues and the need for continued,
constructive dialogue to resolve differences.

In a broader context, stability and security - both
regionally and globally - benefit from rule of law and
strong democratic institutions in Kosovo. Mr. Zarif
mentioned interconnectedness. We commend Kosovo
authorities for their efforts to address the problems of
violent extremism and the initiative of the Kosovo police
and judiciary in apprehending suspected foreign fighters
and their supporters in June and August. President
Jahjaga has publicly reinforced that Kosovo will not
become a terrorist haven and that Kosovo institutions
will not permit terrorists to endanger peace, stability
and constitutional order. We welcome the initiative
of several countries in the region, including Kosovo
and Serbia, to put in place legislation penalizing the
recruitment and participation of its citizens in foreign
armed conflicts. We call on all States in the region
to cooperate more closely on countering the common
threat of violent extremism.

Finally, we are pleased with the agreement between
the European Union and Kosovo to extend the mandate
of the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
until June 2016. EULEX and KFOR continue to make
essential contributions to the international community's
work in Kosovo.

