The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Plurinational State of Bolivia.

First of all, I thank Mr. Mladenov for his briefing
today. I also thank Mr. El-Ad, and, on behalf of the
Security Council, apologize to him for the ill-treatment
received by him today. I initially wanted to return to
what happened to make a clarification concerning
the human rights record of the Plurinational State of
Bolivia, of which we are very proud, but that would
show a lack of respect to the State and the people of
Palestine. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss the
human rights of the Palestinians, which continue to
be violated by the Israeli occupation, and not those of
the Bolivians.
Accordingly, I will begin my statement by
expressing Bolivia's firm rejection of the extreme
violence with which the Israeli Defence Forces have
been repressing the Palestinian civilian population.
Such actions, which are unjustified no matter where
they occur, only undermine the achievement of a long-
sought, just and lasting peace for the Palestinian people,
who have been living under the Israeli siege for more
than 70 years. The illegal actions of the Government
of Israel, including its settlement policies in the
occupied Palestinian territories, constitute an obstacle
and a threat to stability in the region, and, as members
of the Security Council, we bear the unavoidable
responsibility to act in order to prevent Israel from
continuing to enjoy impunity as a State.

In that order of priorities, we categorically reject
the clear intention of the Israeli Government to alter
the demographic composition and territorial character
of the State of Palestine, including East Jerusalem,
which has been under occupation since 1967. All such
actions are illegal and constitute a violation of the
basic principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
including the inadmissibility of the acquisition of
territory by force, as reaffirmed in resolution 2334
(2016), on the legal invalidity of Israeli settlements
in occupied Palestinian territories, which constitute a
flagrant violation of international law.

Bolivia expresses its unequivocal rejection of
Israel's expansionist and annexationist policy. One such
example of that policy is illustrated by Israel's plan
to demolish the Bedouin-Palestinian village of Khan
Al-Ahmar, located in Area C to the north-east of East
Jerusalem in the West Bank, where the Israeli Defence
Forces forcibly entered with heavy equipment to
demolish the homes of almost 200 Palestinian civilians,
who will be relocated by force and compelled to
abandon their homes, their daily lives and their history.
We therefore call on the international community,
including the Security Council, not to recognize any
change whatsoever to the 1967 borders. The Gaza Strip
and the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, constitute
a single territory.

We also demand that the Government of Israel
end the blockade of the Gaza Strip, which has been
living under a regime of collective punishment for 11
years, which deprives Palestinians of access to water
and sanitation, infringes on their human right to health
care and restricts their access to decent employment
and the freedom of movement, together with a long list
of violations that everyone in this Chamber has been
witness to month after month and year after year.

As it has on previous occasions, Bolivia expresses
its firm commitment to all international efforts leading
to a peaceful solution to the occupation of Palestine. In
that regard, we join in supporting initiatives, such as
the Quartet road map, the Madrid principles, the Arab
Peace Initiative and others, that would ensure ajust and
lasting peace in which both peoples could live within
recognized and secure borders.

1 also sincerely commend the humanitarian work
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East, benefiting more
than 5 million Palestinian refugees in the West Bank,
East Jerusalem, Gaza, Jordan, Lebanon and Syria.
We call on the States Members of the Organization
to continue making their valuable contributions to
the Agency so that it can finally overcome its current
crisis, which is only resulting in the deterioration of the
quality of life of all Palestinian refugees.

Bolivia believes that the only option for a long-term
solution to the occupation is the two-State solution,
whereby a free, sovereign and independent Palestinian
State within the pre-1967 internationally recognized
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, can finally
be established, pursuant to the relevant Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions.

1 now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate the texts in writing and to deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.

I also wish to inform all concerned that, with the
consent of the members of the Security Council, I will
suspend this meeting between 1.20 pm. and 3 pm.

I now give the floor to the representative of Lebanon.

