Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, we congratulate you, Madam President, for
having assumed the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of September. You can count on our
delegation's support for a successful mandate. We also
wish to congratulate Ambassador Karen Pierce and the
delegation of the United Kingdom on their successful
presidency during the month of August. And we
welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Nicaragua.

We also welcome the holding of this meeting and
the briefing on the situation in Nicaragua, as presented
by Mr. Gonzalo Koncke, from the Organization of
American States (OAS), and Mr. Felix Maradiaga, civil
society leader in Nicaragua.

My delegation finds the holding of this meeting
relevant under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations, which, among other things, provides
that the Council must be kept fully informed of the
activities undertaken by regional organizations for the
maintenance of international peace and security.

Peru looks on with great concern at the situation
in Nicaragua, which is being monitored by the OAS.
We reiterate our emphatic condemnation of the
grave violence that has led to the regrettable loss of
hundreds of human lives, thousands injured and an
indeterminate number of missing persons. Our concern
and condemnation applies to all repressive acts and
violations of human rights committed by police and
paramilitary groups, which, as has been noted, include
extrajudicial executions, forced disappearances, cases
of torture and sexual violence in detention centres, as
well as attacks against the clergy and the press.

We underline that such acts have been duly
documented by the Inter-American Commission on
Human Rights and, more recently, by the United Nations
Office of the High Commissioner for Refugees, among
other independent specialized agencies. We highlight
that the majority of anti-Government citizen protests
have been peaceful. Nevertheless, we also regret that
attacks against Government employees - Government
party members and security force personnel - have
been carried out.

Peru and the OAS Permanent Council have
demanded the immediate cessation of violence and
intimidation, including selective prosecution and
arbitrary detention. We also call for the dismantling
of paramilitary groups and for those responsible for
human rights violations to be held accountable through
fair trials. The OAS, pursuant to its founding Charter,
as well as the American Convention on Human Rights
and the Inter-American Democratic Charter - binding
instruments to which Nicaragua is a signatory
party - has urged Nicaragua and all parties to engage
in dialogue with a view to generating peaceful and
sustainable solutions, thereby strengthening democracy.

In order to contribute to that effort, the OAS has
created a working group for Nicaragua, in which
Peru is an active participant, alongside elevn other
member States. The group has repeatedly expressed its
willingness to engage in constructive dialogue with the
Government of Nicaragua. Regrettably, that offer has
thus far been rejected and the Government of Nicaragua
has limited its cooperation with various entities of the
inter-American and United Nations systems, including
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights.

Peru notes with deep concern the ongoing status
quo in favour of impunity, which has been forcing
tens of thousands of Nicaraguans to seek refuge in
neighbouring countries and could ultimately lead to
new acts of violence, which must be prevented. Given
that and the recommendations made by the Secretary-
General in his recent report on the role of regional
organizations in conflict prevention and resolution, we
consider it appropriate that the members of the Council
be duly informed and that they be able to express their
support for OAS efforts to promote a peaceful and
sustainable solution in Nicaragua. Once again, we urge
the Government of Nicaragua to take advantage of the
good offices available and to resume dialogue with
all parties, within the framework of its internal order
and the inter-American system and in accordance with
international law and international human rights law.
In conclusion, we recall that Peru's commitment
to peace, stability and democracy in our region, and
in particular in Nicaragua, is neither new nor foreign
to the history of the Council. Last century, in the
1980s, through the efforts of the so-called Contadora
support group, Peru actively contributed to achieving
sustainable, democratic and inclusive peace in Central
America. Today we reaffirm our commitment to and
solidarity with the brotherly Nicaraguan people, while
reiterating our readiness to assist in finding peaceful and
sustainable solutions and in continuing to consolidate
Latin America and the Caribbean as a region of peace.

