Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I think you, Sir, for
convening today's open debate. I also appreciate the
briefing by Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, which was very
useful.

The Middle East peace process remains at the core
of any efforts aimed at restoring regional stability.
Ukraine consistently supports the Middle East peace
process and the principle of a two-State solution, with
Israel and Palestine coexisting in peace and security. In
this regard, we are outraged by the latest wave of attacks
and widespread violence. Ukraine strongly condemns
the terrorist attack in East Jerusalem on 8 January,
which is another stark reminder of how dangerous the
situation has become.

Preserving the current status quo and doing nothing
will only lead to further deterioration of the volatile
security environment for both Israelis and Palestinians.
I want to make it crystal clear that absolutely no
terrorist act can be justified, and we strongly condemn
any attempts to glorify such acts. Perpetrators must be
brought to justice, as should instigators and sponsors
of terrorism. At the same time, both sides must
demonstrate genuine restraint and refrain from the
use of force that could only stir up violence and lead
to increased casualties. This is a very bad time in the
region to do things that can play into extremists hands.

Diplomatic efforts must be redoubled to contain
and de-escalate the latest wave of violence and unlock
Israeli-Palestinian negotiations. Ukraine welcomes any
international effort aimed at bringing new dynamics
to the Middle East settlement process or at finding
opportunities for the resumption of negotiations
between the Israeli and Palestinian sides. We believe
that the French initiative and the recently-concluded
international conference in Paris remain an important
element in the international efforts to give peace a
chance.

Nevertheless, it is obvious that any international
effort aimed at encouraging the negotiation process
cannot succeed without direct dialogue between the
parties to the conflict, the Israeli and Palestinian
sides, and a genuine adherence to their commitments.
Ukraine reiterates its position that Israeli-Palestinian
peace agreement lies within the framework of the
unconditional fulfilment by the parties of the relevant
Security Council resolutions, the Madrid principles,
including land for peace, the road map, the agreements
previously reached by the parties and the 2002 Arab
Peace Initiative.

The Syrian conflict is probably the greatest
regional challenge - and one of the largest global
challenges - the world is facing as we enter the
year 2017. We look forward with hope towards the
resumption of the intra-Syrian political talks scheduled
to take place next month in Geneva. However, there
are still plenty of reasons to remain sceptical about the
prospects for these talks. The underlying cause for this
scepticism is the fact that Damascus is moving with all
deliberate speed to impose a military solution in Syria,
ignoring its commitments to the political track and
implementing a kneel-or-die type of strategy.

By adopting resolution 2336 (2016), the Security
Council gave a generous credit of trust to the Russian
Federation and its ability to deliver results after the
announcement of the nationwide ceasefire in Syria.
However, after nearly three weeks, we do not see
substantial changes in the country, neither on the
battlefield nor in the political domain. I believe that the
Syrian government forces' offensive in Wadi Barada
and eastern Ghouta is the main impediment to the
resumption of talks. To make the ceasefire work, a
necessary level of confidence and trust, which is clearly
missing now after so many years of conflict in Syria,
should be built up among the parties. The establishment
of a credible multiparty monitoring mechanism with the
participation of the United Nations is a key requirement
for any viable ceasefire to work.

Unfortunately, so far, the monitoring mechanism
embedded in the 29 December ceasefire agreements
exists only on paper. We believe that only full
implementation of and adherence to the letter and spirit
of the 2012 Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex)
and resolution 2254 (2015) can lead to the settlement of
the conflict in Syria. That is why the only way out of
the current impasse is a results-oriented discussion on
the establishment of a credible, inclusive nonsectarian
governance-transition body, followed by the adoption
of a new Constitution and the holding of elections.

Ukraine is convinced of the urgent need to put an
end to the violence in Yemen. The continued lack of
progress in the intra-Yemeni political process is deeply
troubling. However, the absence of a final agreement so
far should not be interpreted by the parties as a pretext
for escalating the fighting. The nationwide ceasefire
must be re-established and observed, paving the way for
a new round of talks. We therefore call on the parties to
resume direct talks without preconditions and conduct
these negotiations in the most flexible and constructive
manner, which would enable them to swiftly reach a
final and comprehensive agreement.

Without meaningful dialogue the results may be
disastrous. The only parties that would benefit from
this would be the terrorist groups that are increasingly
active in Yemen. It is increasingly worrisome to see
Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula continuing to
demonstrate a sustained ability to expand its base of
support in Yemen and exploit deepening division lines
in the war-torn Yemeni society.

The rapidly evolving threat of violent extremism
surpasses the boundaries of any region. It benefits from
existing conflicts and continues to destabilize countries
across the Middle East. The Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL), despite some serious military setbacks,
remains a viable threat to regional and global security.
Pending the ultimate inevitable conventional military
defeat of ISIL, there is an urgent need to create a day-
after strategy with the regional actors playing a leading
role in preventing a resurgence of its clones. Without a
clear way out ofthe multiple crises that are tearing apart
the Middle East, particularly those in Syria, Yemen and
Iraq, it will be impossible to contain the growing threat
of violent extremism and the global spread of terrorist
groups.

