Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank the United Kingdom for having
requested this urgent meeting of the Security Council.

Just yesterday, here in the Chamber, the President
of Medecins Sans Frontieres, who was seated exactly
where the Syrian delegation is seated, stated that more
than 300 attacks had occurred in Aleppo over the past
few days, with hundreds of civilian deaths and the
destruction ofsix medical facilities (see S/PV.7685). Last
week in a closed meeting, we said what today we would
like to repeat openly, with more urgency if necessary:
we need to rectify the situation in Syria immediately,
along the three tracks in this conflict, namely, the
cessation ofhostilities, the political negotiations and the
desperate humanitarian situation. The Security Council
must support the work of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura,
through bilateral efforts with the parties and through
a statement on the three issues that I just mentioned.
As the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General said,
the priority now is the cessation of hostilities. All the
parties to the conflict must urgently comply with the
parameters established by resolution 2268 (2016). The
next step must be a return to the negotiating table in
order to take up the political transition in Syria once
and for all.

The most recent attack on a hospital took place
yesterday, launched by the opposition forces. That is
in addition to other attacks committed by Government
forces. All of them were of enormous seriousness.
We demand once again that all the parties to the
conflict, in particular the Government of Al-Assad, to
respect international humanitarian law in the conduct
of hostilities.

Mr. O'Brien said in closed consultations - and
yesterday the President of Medecins Sans Frontieres
repeated it i that in Aleppo it is dangerous to live
next to a hospital. Mr. O'Brien once again reminded
us of that today. It is unbelievable that it is often more
dangerous to be a doctor, a patient or a family member
visiting a patient than it is to be a combatant.

Aleppo is the first opportunity to demonstrate
that we take resolution 2268 (2016) seriously. As I said
yesterday, our threshold of tolerance in the face of
attacks against medical facilities and medical workers
should be zero. We want the medical workers and
patients that still survive in Aleppo to be the first to see
some kind of outcome from this resolution.

