Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank you, Sir, for
convening this very important debate today. Today, of
course, is Remembrance Day, when many of our
countries honour those who fought in the wars of the
twentieth and the twenty-first centuries, including
those who fought in United Nations and other
peacekeeping missions. On this date, 11 November, in
1918 the First World War ended. Almost 20 million
people died in that war, 7 million of them civilians.
The seeds of that war bred a second, far worse conflict.
At least 70 million people died in the Second World
War - the deadliest war ever - and at least 50 million
of those were civilians. It is right and responsible that
we should meet to debate the protection of civilians on
this particular day.

We commend the Council for its hard work on
resolution 1894 (2009), which has been adopted today,
and we are grateful for that work. The protection of
civilians is, of course, a broad topic, so I will focus my
statement today on improving the implementation of
protection mandates by peacekeeping missions.

As we know, it has been 10 years since the
Security Council first mandated the protection of
civilians in a peacekeeping operation, the United
Nations Observer Mission in Sierra Leone. We are
pleased to see that this imperative is being considered
systematically and routinely by the Security Council
when mandating peacekeeping missions today. However,
as acknowledged in the New Horizon non-paper and
elsewhere, there still exists a significant gap between
what the Security Council is mandating and what
peacekeepers are able to do and capable of doing.

To address this gap, military and police personnel
tasked to protect civilians clearly need appropriate
guidance in order to implement protection mandates
effectively. Appropriate guidelines that explain to
peacekeepers what is expected of them in the field will
obviously assist in identifying the resources and
training required by peacekeepers, aid the formulation
of and planning for a more effective and clearer
mission mandate, and provide a framework against
which mission success can be measured more
accurately in the field and learned from. Guidelines
will assist peacekeepers in the field by articulating a
range of possible protection of civilians
operationalization strategies that can be utilized.

The development of guidelines is even more
critical for Member States that are in the process of
developing their capacity to support their own regional
peacekeeping operations. Australia is working with the
African Union (AU) to strengthen African
peacekeeping capacity through the development of
such guidelines. The AU Commission, together with
Australia, will host a symposium in Addis Ababa in
March next year to assist with the AU's
groundbreaking work on this issue. We hope that the
symposium will not only be a valuable exercise for the
African Union itself and my own country in improving
understanding of how to implement these mandates,
but that it will also contribute to broader dialogue
amongst Member States.

Ensuring that peacekeepers in the field have the
resources they need to fulfil protection mandates is
critical. Without adequate resources, equipment and
training to implement a mandate through the life cycle
of a mission, the safety and security of the deployed
peacekeepers, as well as the civilians they are tasked to

protect, are obviously put at risk. The former force
commander of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur, General Agwai, addressed
this issue here in August, and identified the critical
need for troops to have the right tools and to be well
trained. The development of guidelines on the
protection of civilians will provide a framework for
determining the resources and the level of training
required to implement that mandate successfully.

Finally, I would like to refer to the need to ensure
that the lessons being learned in the field are captured
and utilized to improve the implementation of
protection of civilians mandates. The study
independently commissioned and recently released by
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs is
an important step towards drawing together lessons
being learned in the field. We hope that the study will
serve as the beginning of a serious conversation on the
protection of civilians that needs to be carried out
between the Secretariat, the Security Council, and
troop- and police-contributing countries.

To help further that dialogue, on 8 December
Australia and Uruguay will host here in New York a
second workshop - following a first held in January -
on the protection of civilians in peacekeeping
operations. The workshop, we hope, will provide an
opportunity for the stakeholders involved in
peacekeeping operations, particularly the troop- and
police-contributing countries, to provide their thoughts
on the recommendations in the independent study,
based, of course, on their practical experience in the
field.

In order for United Nations peacekeeping to
better protect civilians, clearly we must develop a
common and better understanding of what we expect
United Nations peacekeepers to do when they are
required to implement these difficult mandates.
Australia looks forward to participating in a much
more substantial and serious dialogue on this
imperative with other Member States.

