I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided by the Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Antonio Guterres; His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon; Ms. Sarah Cliffe, Director, Center on International Cooperation, New York University; as well as the statements delivered by Her Excellency Mrs. Retno Lestari Priansari Marsudi, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia; His Excellency Mr. Pham Binh Minh, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Viet Nam; His Excellency Mr. Urmas Reinsalu, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Estonia; Her Excellency Ms. Naledi Pandor, Minister for International Relations and Cooperation of South Africa; His Excellency Mr. Niels Annen, Minister of State, German Federal Foreign Office; and by the representatives of Belgium, China, the Dominican Republic, France, the Niger, the Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Tunisia, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America, in connection with the video-teleconference on "Peacebuilding and sustaining peace: Pandemics and the challenges of sustaining peace", convened on Wednesday, 12 August 2020. In accordance with the understanding reached among Council members for that video-teleconference, the following delegations and entities submitted written statements, copies of which are also enclosed: Australia, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Denmark, Ecuador, El Salvador, the European Union, Georgia, Guatemala, India, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Liechtenstein, Malta, Mexico, Morocco, the Netherlands, Nigeria, the Peacebuilding Commission, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, the Republic of Korea, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Switzerland, Thailand and the United Arab Emirates. Pursuant to the procedure set out in the letter dated 2 April 2020 from the President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus-disease pandemic, the enclosed briefing and statements will be issued as a document of the Security Council.
