Ms. Moglia (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): The
Argentine delegation wishes to welcome the way in which
the situation in Tajikistan is being addressed. We thank
Mr. Petrov for his briefing and we thank the Secretary-
General for his report, document S/2000/387.

We want to say how pleased we are at the way in
which the political process in Tajikistan has evolved since
January 1993, when the United Nations Mission of
Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT) was established as a
small political office in Dushanbe in the midst of the civil
war that broke out immediately following Tajikistan's
achievement of independence. The efforts of successive
Special Envoys and Special Representatives of the

 

Secretary-General to promote inter-Tajik talks were
productive and ultimately led to a ceasefire.

Subsequently, through the General Agreement on the
Establishment of Peace and National Accord in Tajikistan
of June 1997, the Government and the opposition, as well
as Tajik society as a whole, made clear their wish for peace
and democracy.

The Peacekeeping Forces of the Commonwealth of
Independent States, the Contact Group of Guarantor States
and International Organizations and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe Mission also took part
in this productive process. We should like to express our
sincere gratitude to all of them.

We regret, however, that in consolidating this process
there have been times of great difficulty for the security of
UNMOT personnel. We have had to mourn the loss of six
of its members. We should like to pay a special tribute to
them. We should like to tell their families that their
sacrifice was not in vain.

Furthermore, we are aware that the recent
parliamentary elections were far from being perfect, that
there are still many armed elements whose actions are
beyond the control of the Government, that there are acute
economic and social problems and that the instability in the
region is contributing to the situation of insecurity.

Accordingly, we agree with the Secretary-General's
comments, contained in his report, that the continued
support of the international community in the post-conflict
phase will be important for Tajikistan's ability to sustain
and build on the achievements of the peace process. In this
context, we await with great interest the proposal that will
be sent to the Security Council relating to the possible
establishment of a post-conflict peace-building office that
will have the important and lofty objective of addressing
the institutional, social and economic development of the
country, within a framework of peace, democracy and
respect for human rights. We believe that the presence in
Tajikistan of the United Nations, whose work was essential
and invaluable, will thus be guaranteed during this new
stage of democratic consolidation.

In this spirit, we support the draft presidential
statement that endorses the Secretary-General's plan to
withdraw UNMOT when its mandate expires on 15 May
and that encourages Member States and other interested
parties to make voluntary contributions to projects for the
social and economic recovery of the country.

