Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I would like to
start by congratulating Prime Minister Netanyahu
on being asked to form a new Israeli Government
and Prime Minister Shtayyeh on the formation of the
new Palestinian Authority Government. The United
Kingdom looks forward to working with both of their
Administrations to advance the objectives of peace and
prosperity. I also thank our civil-society briefers.

Like other Governments, the United Kingdom
continues to encourage a just resolution to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict, in line with international law
and the relevant Security Council resolutions. Our
understanding, shared by most Council members,
continues to be that sustainable peace requires a
safe and secure Israel, living alongside a viable and
sovereign Palestinian State, based on the 1967 borders
with agreed land swaps, Jerusalem as the shared capital
of both States and a just, fair, agreed and realistic
settlement for refugees. It will take the support of the
whole international community to make such a historic
peace possible.

I understand that the Balfour Declaration was
raised, and I would therefore like to set out the United
Kingdom Government's position on it. The Balfour
Declaration was written in the middle of the First World
War. Its 100th anniversary was two years ago, in 2017.
It is a product of its time. We understand and respect
the sensitivities about the Balfour Declaration and the
events that have taken place in the region since 1917.
We are committed, as I have just said, to establishing
security and justice for Israelis and Palestinians through
lasting peace. Just as we fully support and are proud of
our role in the creation of the modern State ofIsrael as
a Jewish homeland, so we fully support the objective
of a viable and sovereign Palestinian State. There are
two halves of the Balfour Declaration, the second half
of which has not been fulfilled. The occupation is a
continuing impediment to securing the political rights
of the non-Jewish communities in Palestine that the
Balfour Declaration also envisaged. To that extent, it
remains unfinished business.

Today, however, I want to join others who are
calling for us to look forwards, not backwards. We
urge the new Israeli and Palestinian Governments to
seize the opportunity to reverse the current destructive
dynamic, improve the immediate situation on the
ground and strive to create the conditions conducive to
negotiating a lasting peace. That should begin without
delay and with renewed direct dialogue in order to find
a solution to the current revenue-transfer crisis. The
goal of a two-State solution is at stake. The current
impasse on the transfer of clearance revenues poses a
risk to stability and threatens the viability of a future
Palestinian State. The United Kingdom firmly believes
that prosperity and strong Palestinian institutions serve
Israel's long-term security interests. We encourage the
Israeli Government to reverse its decision to withhold
revenues, which undermines the Oslo Accords, as
other speakers have made clear, and we encourage
the Palestinian Authority to accept the remainder of
the revenues on a provisional basis, since refusing all
revenues will only harm Palestinians.

The advancement of yet more illegal settlements is
eroding the physical viability of a two-State solution.
We condemn the Israeli authorities' announcement on
4 April of intentions to advance plans for more than
4,600 settlement units across the West Bank, which
is the single largest settlement announcement in
recent years, as many have noted. We are also deeply
concerned about the pre-election comments made by
Prime Minister Netanyahu in support of the possible
annexation of at least some parts of the West Bank.
Such a move would be contrary to international law and
destructive to peace efforts.

With the current destructive dynamic between
the parties, there is nothing to quell the incidences
of violence that we continue to witness, which
risks hardening extremist positions on both sides.
We condemn in the strongest terms, and without
equivocation, the terrorism of Hamas and other militant
groups in Gaza. Settlement violence should also be
wholeheartedly condemned, and the Israeli authorities
have a responsibility to provide appropriate protection
to the Palestinian civilian population. We are second to
none in recognizing Israel's legitimate need to provide
security, but we continue to have concerns about the
excessive use of force by the Israel Defense Forces.
Measures used should be appropriate and in line with
international law. Accountability should be sought
through swift, transparent investigations.

The new Israeli and Palestinian Governments have
the ability to lead their people to a better future, free
from violence. Leaders can either seize the opportunity
to move forward and create a new dynamic, or they
can continue with short-termism and self-interest,
which will lead only to further deterioration for their
people. At this holy time of year, following Pesach and
before the start of Ramadan, we urge them to use their
new mandates to pursue a lasting legacy of peace. It
is up to us in the Council and the wider international
community to support the parties in their efforts to
achieve a just and lasting resolution.

