Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I would like to
congratulate Malaysia on its Council presidency for the
month of June.

Since the adoption of resolution 1612 (2005) 10
years ago, the international community has continued
to raise awareness regarding the protection of children
in armed conflicts. Our efforts, however, have often
been hampered by blindness and savagery. In 2014,
we witnessed how countless children were sacrificed
in conflicts for which they were not responsible.
Our concern is that victimizing children is not only
unacceptable in itself but sows the seeds for conflicts
in future generations.

As the "Children, Not Soldiers" campaign, launched
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Zerrougui and UNICEF, points out, children are not
soldiers. No responsible member of the international
community should use children for military purposes.
Nor should the sacrifice of children be accepted as a
mere unintended consequence of military actions. "An
eye for an eye will make the whole world blind".

We support the Secretary-General, who stresses our
common humanity and calls upon all Member States not
to lose sight of the vital objective of protecting children,
which is both a moral imperative and a legal obligation.
We also support the Secretary-General's zero-tolerance
policy on sexual exploitation and abuse. Accountability
is the key to ending gross violations against children
and preventing their recurrence. Monitoring and
reporting, listing in the Secretary-General's report,
targeted sanctions and enhanced justice mechanisms
have proved to be effective in seeking accountability.

We welcome resolution 2225 (2015), adopted today,
which includes abductions as a new trigger for listing
in the Secretary-General's annual report. Enriching
our toolkit for the protection of children is a signal
that our shared vision is expanding, while pressuring
all stakeholders to join us. It is encouraging that, this
year, armed groups in the Central African Republic and
South Sudan have released children under their control.
Extremist groups such as Boko Haram and the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant, however, are likely to
remain persistent. That is when a more fundamental
and determined approach should be taken.

Lastly, we stress that children cannot be completely
safe from devastating armed conflicts once they break
out. Prevention is the best strategy. As a member of
the Peacebuilding Commission, the Republic of Korea
will continue to make efforts to prevent relapses into
conflict. When prevention fails, a political solution
should be swiftly sought. We should be especially
vigilant with respect to situations in which the
overwhelming sacrifice of children is overshadowed by
the political and military context and perceived as an
inevitable part of armed conflicts.

