Mr. Mendonca e Moura (Portugal): Manifestations
of religious-based intolerance and violence are
increasing in many regions of the world. Violent
incidents targeting individuals, communities and
sites on the grounds of ethnicity, religion or belief are
occurring in increasing numbers in various countries.
This situation is exacerbated in situations of armed
conflict, where persons belonging to minority groups
often disproportionately suffer the effects of hostilities
and are particularly vulnerable to displacement through
population relocations and forced migration. They often
form a considerable part of the refugee flows.

It is a global scourge. No region is free from that
phenomenon, but the widespread and systematic
violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms
in the Middle East, a region with very diverse ethnic
and religious groups, is of particular concern. We must
act together and promptly in order to tackle it.

We are appalled at the increasing Violations of
international humanitarian law and serious human-
rights abuses, including mass killings, extrajudicial
and summary executions, the deliberate targeting of
civilians, mass expulsions, forced conversions and
other forms of the targeted persecution of individuals
on the basis of their religion, belief or ethnicity. The
attacks against the Yazidi community in Iraq, the
abduction and killing of Christians in Syria, the
beheading of Coptic Christians in Libya, the deliberate
targeting by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIS) of ethnic and religious communities, such as
Sunni Muslims, Christians, Yazidis, Shabaks and other
groups in Syria, are some of the unspeakable examples
that demand a collective and urgent action from all of
us. Tactics to foment terror and fear are also being used
by ISIS and other extremist groups to exert control
over communities by vandalizing and destroying what
is most sacred - places of worship and religious and
cultural heritage sites.

Human rights Violations by States can contribute
to radicalization and recruitment. Hatred and violence
towards ethnic or religious communities do not occur
without the prior stigmatization and dehumanization
of targeted groups and the incitement to hate. It is
the result of a social, cultural, economic and political
legacy that usually finds expression in discriminatory
policies and practices of exclusion and marginalization,
State repression, endemic corruption, lack of trust
in public institutions, a culture of impunity and the
denial of human rights and the tenets of international
humanitarian law.

It is the obligation of States to ensure that persons
belonging to national or ethnic, religious or linguistic
minorities

"may exercise fully and effectively all their human
rights and fundamental freedoms without any
discrimination and in full equality before the law",

as proclaimed in the Declaration on the Rights of
Persons Belonging to National or Ethnic, Religious
and Linguistic Minorities. Furthermore, States have
the responsibility to protect their populations from
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity, and from incitements to commit
such acts. Human-rights abuses are the first signal of
alert that genocide and crimes against humanity may
follow. The international community should hold States
and non-State armed groups to account and make them
aware of their existing obligations under international
law, including human-rights, humanitarian, criminal
and refugee law.

Overcoming a culture of impunity must be a priority.
Those who commit or are complicit in acts of violence
must be brought to justice. Portugal believes that the
International Criminal Court should continue to play a
fundamental role in deterrence, complementary to the
role played by courts at the national level, by holding
perpetrators accountable and by investigating and
prosecuting those responsible for committing atrocities
against civilian populations.

Addressing the threat posed by non-State armed
extremist groups and terrorists calls for a comprehensive
approach to the underlying causal factors, including by
engaging in an effective communication strategy to
prevent the evolution from radicalization to terrorism,
to suppress the flow of foreign fighters, but most of all
to promote political and religious tolerance, economic
development, and social cohesion and inclusiveness.
We obviously welcome the proposal announced by the
Secretary-General this morning to establish a panel of
experts to draw up guidelines to better tackle violent
extremism.

Long-term stability in the Middle East requires
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms, as
well as tackling the root causes of extremist ideologies
derived from ethnic and religious discrimination
and exclusion. Concerted action, including through
interreligious dialogue initiatives, on the part of all
relevant stakeholders - States, religious communities,
civil society organizations, media representatives, and
so on - is crucial in that regard. The promotion and
protection of the rights of persons belonging to national
or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities contributes
to political and social stability and peace and enriches
the cultural diversity and heritage of a society. States
must promote a culture of tolerance, inter alia, through
education, in particular human-rights education.
Accordingly, respect for pluralism can only become a
reality when social, economic and political inclusion
and cohesion in societies occurs.

The right to the freedoms of thought, conscience,
religion or belief is a fundamental right of every human
being. As a universal human right, the freedom of
religion or belief safeguards the respect for diversity,
and its free exercise directly contributes to democracy,
development, the rule of law, peace and stability. We
must strive to promote and protect those rights in line
with the core values enshrined in all key international
human-rights instruments adopted by this Organization.

