Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation welcomes your
initiative, Sir, in convening this formal meeting of the
Council to discuss the issue of demining in the context of
United Nations peace-keeping. My delegation considers
this meeting to be a very important and timely one, given
the alarming proliferation of land-mines around the world
and their continued use by some of the world's armed
forces. We are by now familiar with the statistics that
have been quoted in this Chamber pertaining to
land-mines, and in the interest of saving time I shall not
repeat them here. Suffice it to say that these weapons kill
or maim more than an estimated 20,000 people a year,
primarily civilians, a high proportion of whom are
innocent children and women who risk their lives playing
or eking out a living on land strewn with anti-personnel
mines. In countries of recent conflict, millions of these
terrible weapons lie buried, waiting for some unsuspecting
victims to trigger them.

Alarming as these statistics are, they do not tell the
entire tragic story. They do not tell us in graphic detail of
the horrendous injuries and deaths mines inflict on their
victims or of the tremendous social and economic costs
they exact of these countries, most of which have already
been impoverished by long years of conflict. In many of
these countries the toll in terms of human deaths and
injuries is enormous, indeed incalculable, and continues
long after the conflicts have ended. Vast tracts of
otherwise arable land lie fallow and uncultivated on
account of these mines, even when, in many cases, there
is a severe shortage of land for food production to feed
the teeming millions. This pathetic situation has plunged
many of the affected countries into even greater depths of
poverty and dependence on foreign aid. The situation is
made worse by the exorbitant cost of mine clearance,
which imposes a heavy drain on the national treasuries of
the countries concerned. With such vast numbers of these
cruel and indiscriminate weapons strewn around the
world, which by some estimates might take more than
1,000 years to be completely cleared, there should be a
serious rethinking of existing military doctrines that
legitimize the use of these land-mines.

In addressing this problem, Malaysia joins others in
calling for serious efforts to resolve the mines crisis
which, in our view, is a catastrophe of global proportions
requiring concerted and coordinated action by the entire
international community. We would urge increased global
awareness of the pernicious problems created by these
devastating weapons so as to ensure that there will be no
conspiracy of silence about the use and debilitating effects
of these weapons.

As a country which is becoming more involved in
global peace-keeping operations, Malaysia is naturally

 
concerned about the safety of its peace-keepers. We have
always believed that if the peace-keeping troops of the
United Nations are to carry out their tasks effectively they
must be adequately armed to defend themselves. They must
also be adequately protected and kept out of harm's way as
much as possible, and not be unnecessarily exposed to the
risk of being blown up by these land-mines. It is important,
therefore, that United Nations peace-keeping operations
should include mine-clearing exercises as an integral part of
such operations. In this regard we commend the measures
already taken by the United Nations following the adoption
of consensus resolutions by the General Assembly since its
forty-eighth session. Such measures as the inclusion of
mine clearance work in the mandates of several
peace-keeping operations and increased coordination
between the Department of Peace-keeping Operations and
the Department of Humanitarian Affairs in the context of
such operations should significantly contribute to increased
security for United Nations peace-keeping forces. We
would welcome even more effective implementation of
these measures in current and future peace-keeping
operations.

However, Malaysia's concerns go beyond those of a
peace-keeping troop-contributing country. As a member of
the international community, we empathize with the plight
of those affected by land-mines - such as our close
neighbour Cambodia, which is seriously afflicted by this
tragedy - and wish to contribute towards ameliorating
their hardships and to work together with the rest of the
international community in finding an early solution to the
problem.

We can draw some encouragement from the fact that
the international community is being sensitized to this
problem, resulting in a surge of interest on the part of both
Governments and the general public towards finding
practical measures to bring the scourge of land-mines to an
end. It is also gratifying to note that the issue had been
addressed by the Review Conference of the States Paries to
the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use
of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May be Deemed
to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate
Effects, held in Geneva earlier this year, resulting in a
revision of the Protocol pertaining to land-mines. Malaysia
welcomes the adoption of the revised Protocol as a
significant contribution towards improving existing laws
pertaining to land-mines. However, welcome as they are,
these constitute only half-measures which fall short of the
ultimate goal of the complete elimination of land-mines.
Malaysia is of the view that only a total ban on
anti-personnel mines will put an end to the tragic
consequences of the laying of land-mines and therefore
expresses strong support for efforts to impose a global
ban on these inhumane weapons. Pending such an
outcome, which we hope will materialize in the
not-too-distant future, Malaysia would put the onus on
mine-producing countries to ensure a more stringent
regime governing the production and transfer of these
weapons. In this regard, we should seriously consider the
possibility of including such transfers in a future,
expanded, United Nations Register of Conventional Arms
in the interest of encouraging greater transparency in
military matters.

In commending you, Mr. President, on your initiative
in bringing this important issue to the Council for formal
discussion, my delegation welcomes the seven-point
action programme recently announced by His Excellency
Mr. Klaus Kinkel, Foreign Minister of Germany. We
consider the action programme an important contribution
towards alleviating the effects of this global tragedy. We
also welcome the initiative of the United States on this
issue, as well as the positive roles played by other
countries and international organizations - such as
Canada, Japan and the International Committee of the
Red Cross - in addressing this global problem. Malaysia
wishes to associate itself strongly with these efforts and
will work closely with the rest of the international
community in the search for a lasting solution to the
problem which, in our view, can only come about through
an effective global ban on these weapons.

Clearly, in this exercise the role of the major powers
is pivotal. They should manifest clear leadership and
seriousness in pushing the process forward. They should
lead by example and demonstrate clear commitment to
phase these weapons out of their arsenals. It is our hope,
however, that this phasing-out process will involve not
just low-tech land-mines, but also high-tech land-mines,
culminating in a final ban on all land-mines in order to
insure non-selectivity in the treatment of this subject.

