Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): I would
first like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
country's assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. On behalf ofBenin, I would like
to thank the Republic of Korea for organizing this open
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.

Benin agrees with the Secretary-General's
analysis of the issues in his latest report of May 2012
(S/2012/376) and in his statement this morning on the
protection of civilians. It is essential that we follow up
on his recommendations, including those concerning
the responsibility to protect. I have some remarks to
make on the topic.

Faced with conflict situations, the Security Council
should have the determination to assure civilians
as reliably as possible that they are protected. The
effectiveness of its action depends on the authority
that international humanitarian law, particularly the
1949 Geneva Conventions and its Additional Protocols,
carries in the eyes of the parties to a conflict. To
reinforce it, the Council should make violators of that
law pay a heavier price. Those responsible for serious
crimes should be excluded from conflict settlements and
tried, including by the International Criminal Court,
depending on the seriousness of the crimes committed.
Benin would like to express its gratitude to
France for the priceless contribution it has made to the
liberation of the Malian people suffering under the yoke
of international terrorism and for the efforts it continues
to make, together with the Malian and African forces
taking part in the African-led International Support
Mission in Mali, to restore security in the cities that
have been retaken and help to build peace in the country.

Peacekeeping operations should be given a clear-
cut mandate and appropriate resources for its execution
so that they can ensure the protection of civilians when
they are under imminent threat of violence. In that
connection, Member States must achieve consensus
on issues pertaining to the rules of engagement of
peacekeeping operations, so that the United Nations
will not be forced to standby helplessly while the
cardinal principles of the Organization are being
flouted, as is the case currently in Syria. It is important
for peacekeeping operations to ensure the safety and
inviolability of humanitarian assistance personnel in
order to discourage the acts of violence that are often
committed against them. The action undertaken on
their behalf should be carried out with wisdom in order
to preserve the neutrality of humanitarian assistance
and of those individuals who are trying to provide it.

In low-intensity conflict situations that do not
require the deployment of peacekeeping operations, the
United Nations could rely on civil society organizations
to ensure the protection of civilians through daily
mediation among the communities on the ground. In
that connection, the concept of unarmed peacekeeping
performed by civil society organizations is making
headway. We have to find the necessary guidelines in
order to take advantage of the opportunities available
for helping the peace process at a lower cost to the
international community.

The Council should address the question of the
use of explosive devices by warring parties in densely
populated areas, which have a disproportionate effect
on the civilian population. We should also pursue
the efforts under way to criminalize the use of such
weapons. We need to take appropriate steps in due
course to carry out demining and the retrieval of
non-explosive devices, which expose civilians to
considerable danger in both conflict and post-conflict
situations. Benin has a regional demining centre, which
is prepared to cooperate with the United Nations in that
sphere.

The protection of civilians requires us to fight
effectively against the use of children in armed conflicts
and the sexual exploitation of women and young girls
and against acts endangering the vulnerable living
conditions of the elderly. The Council must continue its
efforts to ensure the effectiveness of steps undertaken
in implementation of resolutions 1612 (2005) and 1820
(2008) designed to shield children and women from
certain particularly harmful forms of human rights
violations.

In conclusion, I can only say that the best
protection of civilians is that which is ensured above
all by the prevention of conflicts, in accordance with
the provisions of resolution 1625 (2005), the promotion
of a culture of peace and sustainable development,
as a guarantee for human security and the stability
necessary for their full development.

The question of good governance is of crucial
importance, as are the strengthening of resilience to
external shocks and efforts to combat the proliferation
of small arms. In that regard, we urge States to work
towards a consensus for the adoption of a robust and
balanced arms trade treaty during the forthcoming
final conference planned for March. The entire United
Nations system should endeavour to strengthen
the effectiveness of the efforts of the international
community in that sphere.

