Mr. Regis (Haiti) (spoke in French): I would first
like to thank the President for inviting the Government
of Haiti to participate in this special meeting of the
Security Council devoted to considering the final report
of the Secretary-General (S/2017/840) on the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH),
presented to us by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Haiti, whose mandate comes to a
close on 15 October in accordance with resolution 2350
(2017) of 13 April.

The report is particularly significant because the
Secretary-General, with the acute sense of reality
that we know he possesses, provides a meticulous and
coherent assessment of MINUSTAH during its 13 years
in Haiti and draws valuable lessons from it for future
peacekeeping operations. He also offers an objective
analysis of the recent developments in the country's
political and economic situation and its immediate
and long-term challenges. He also welcomes the new
directions that the country is taking, as well as the
opportunities arising from the restoration of its political
stability. The report notes that

"Eight months after the President of Haiti,
Jovenel Moise, assumed office, the country
continues to take steps to further consolidate its
democracy and stability". (5/2017/840, para. 2)

The Haitian Government welcomes the Secretary-
General's appreciation for that progress, which all
observers have acknowledged. That progress is the
result of the firm determination of the President of the
Republic and the Government to strengthen the rule of
law and democracy, strengthen State institutions and
ensure the promotion and protection of human rights,
while at the same time implementing essential structural
reforms that will enable our national institutions to
cope with recurring crises and deal with our many and
complex development challenges.

In that regard, as the Secretary-General
rightly underscored,

"The Government continues to assume greater

leadership over the development agenda, as

evidenced by the 'Caravan of Change' programme

and by investments designed to strengthen the social

and economic infrastructure." (ibid., para. 23)

That approach also encompasses the fight against
corruption, which the President has made a top priority
for his national programme of action.

The Haitian Government has also taken due note of
certain areas of concern raised in the report, particularly
the judicial system's limited progress, lengthy delays in
the adoption of certain crucial legislative reforms and
persistent concerns related to human rights, especially
the issue of prolonged preventive detention and
overcrowding in prisons. The Government has given
its full assurances that it will focus on those issues
and on finding solutions to them. It is fully behind
the Secretary-General's call for an inclusive national
dialogue aimed at seeking solutions that will enable us
to strengthen social and political cohesion, consolidate
democratic institutions and re-start efforts to achieve a
sustainable economy.

With regard to the armed forces, the Government
shares the Secretary-General's View on the opportunity
to make their remobilization a unifying national project
that can enjoy the people's confidence. That is the
approach we intend to take, in line with the provisions
of the Constitution on re-establishing a national army
that will be essentially focused on development.

The Haitian Government subscribes to the report's
conclusions on the assessment of MINUSTAH. Even if
the progress it has made can be considered limited in
certain cases, the Mission has succeeded in fulfilling
its three key objectives as outlined in resolution 1542
(2004) - security and stability, support for the political
process andbuilding the rule oflaw andpromoting human
rights. Today Haiti's situation is radically different from
what it was in 2004, when, according to the Security
Council, it constituted a threat to international peace
and security in the region, justifying the deployment
of a peacekeeping and stabilization mission. As the
report emphasizes, political and institutional stability
is now being strengthened. Haiti is fully capable of
ensuring security and providing a secure and stable
environment conducive to a smoothly running political
process and the revitalization of investment, the
economy and development. An end to instability and
political uncertainty, the restoration of the rule of law,
the peaceful renewal of democratic institutions and
the strengthening of the capacities of various State
institutions, including the judicial system and the
Haitian National Police, are all valuable achievements
that must be protected and consolidated.
Similarly, during its 13 years in Haiti, MINUSTAH
has implemented a wide range of valuable projects and
initiatives, including 1,788 quick-impact projects in
various areas, such as the rule of law, good governance,
public infrastructure, revenue-generating activities,
environmental protection, drinking-water supplies,
as well as other social and humanitarian activities.
In particular, the Secretary-General's points to
our community violence reduction programme as
exemplary and rightly urges that it serve as a model for
future United Nations peacekeeping operations.

Of course, within this assessment, we cannot
ignore the major shadow that has been cast on our
situation by the cholera epidemic, which has brought
thousands of deaths and for which the United Nations
has finally admitted responsibility, recognizing the role
it played in triggering a disease that has caused such
terrible suffering for the Haitian people. In that regard,
the Government of Haiti would like to commend the
Secretary-General's determination and personal
commitment to carry out what he calls a moral duty by
effectively implementing a new approach to the fight
against cholera. The United Nations

"has a moral responsibility to the victims, as well
as to support Haiti in overcoming the epidemic and
in building sound water, sanitation and health-care
systems". (S/2017/840, para. 52)

The Government of Haiti associates itself with the
urgent appeal to Member States to ensure that the
United Nations Haiti Cholera Response Multi-Partner
Trust Fund is finally granted the necessary resources to
fulfil all of the commitments made and implement the
two components of the plan of action against cholera
without delay. It is high time that was done.

Today, there is peace, security and political
stability in Haiti, which is reason to rejoice. However,
we are all aware that much remains to be done. The
report highlights a number of deficiencies, gaps to
be filled, and delays and challenges to be overcome.
For its part, the Haitian Government is working
hard to remedy that situation. But this is a long-
term project that will require continued, persistent
action. That is why the Government of Haiti and the
Security Council have agreed to establish a mission
to consolidate the achievements of MINUSTAH in
three main areas - strengthening the rule of law, with
a particular focus on improving the justice system;
developing the Haitian National Police and promoting
and protecting human rights. The new United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) is
the expression of that new framework of cooperation
between the United Nations and Haiti, aimed at
consolidating the achievements made so far. However,
I should emphasize that MINUJUSTH will carry out
its mandate in a context that clearly no longer reflects
the traditional threats to international peace cited in
resolution 1542 (2004), which created MINUSTAH.
We therefore hope that this new reality will be taken
into account in the next Security Council resolution on
the subject and in the new agreement that will govern
MINUJUSTH's presence in Haiti as of 16 October,
which is essentially one of technical cooperation.

Stabilization in Haiti has now been achieved. As
MINUSTAH's mandate ends, now is the moment to hail
its contribution to consolidating civil peace, democracy
and security, establishing the rule of law and promoting
human rights in Haiti. The Government of Haiti would
like to express its gratitude to members of the Security
Council, the Secretariat and all of the entities of the
United Nations system, as well as all Member States,
especially troop-contributing countries, for their
participation and ongoing support for the Mission. We
also thank and congratulate Ms. Honore, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti,
for her outstanding work and dedication to the cause
of peace.

If I might deviate from my written text, I would
like to salute the memory of Mr. Hedi Annabi, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Haiti, and
his deputy, Mr. Da Costa, as well as the United Nations
peacekeeping soldiers who met a tragic death during
the devastating earthquake of 12 January 2010 in Haiti.
On a personal note, I met with Mr. Annabi, who came to
lecture at a conference held at an academic institution I
directed, two months before the earthquake.

The country is now turning over a new leaf. In
that context, the Government of Haiti believes that
cooperation with the United Nations system should be
expanded, revitalized and, above all, better adapted to
current realities, while focusing on the country's true
needs, within the framework of a genuine strategy for
achieving sustainable peace that will enable Haitian
institutions to take ownership of the tools needed to
ensure peace, security and stability and consolidate
the rule of law, while resolutely addressing the
country's economic and social modernization and
sustainable development.

As MINUJUSTH prepares to begin its mandate,
the Haitian Government strongly hopes that the new
Mission will make a lasting contribution to our efforts
to meet the challenge of sustaining peace, which goes
hand in hand with growth, sustainable development and
the eradication of poverty.

