Mr. Terzi di Sant'Agata (Italy): Let me congratulate
you, Sir, on your position as President of the Security
Council and on the excellent work you and your delegation
have already done during this very busy month. I would
like to express the same appreciation to your predecessor,
the Permanent Representative of Kenya.

Italy fully associates itself with the statement made on
behalf of the European Union by the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom.

We strongly support the conclusions of the Peace
Implementation Council Steering Board meeting held in
Luxembourg on 9 June 1998, which set the stage for further
progress in the peace process in Bosnia. Since the last
Peace Implementation Conference, in Bonn, substantial
progress has been achieved, thanks also to the tireless
efforts of the High Representative and his Office, and of
the United Nations.
As we have said repeatedly in the past, if we wish to
make the peace process irreversible and achieve full
stabilization of the country and of the region, the parties
and the international community need to make a strong
commitment.

In the Balkans, the international community has
striven to halt the break-up of the area and restore the State
and its institutions. Italy assumed a major responsibility in
Albania, where the Government and the people have been
fully engaged in the process of restoring democratic
institutions. We and other countries must continue to make
a strong commitment in this regard.

Peace and coexistence in Bosnia are entering a
decisive year. The Dayton agreements laid the groundwork
involving the establishment of unified institutions, some of
which are yet to be built. Italy has made a military and
financial commitment that it will maintain to help oversee
a social order that is still fragile, including after the
adoption of the present draft resolution. But we are also
contributing more police units to help foster the return of
refugees and the consolidation of shared structures that are
still in an embryonic state. The general elections scheduled
to take place in September are the most important event on
this year's calendar. Only then can we measure how much
longer the international presence is needed to maintain
stability.

So far, the international community's strategy in
Bosnia has achieved positive results in implementing the
Dayton agreements. The Implementation Force (IFOR)
and the Stabilization Force (SFOR) have proved to be
increasingly flexible instruments, apt to create an
environment where the parties can cooperate more
actively in establishing the institutions provided for in the
peace accords. The continuation of the SFOR mission
calls for an increased effort to cooperate with civilian
entities. Italy fully supports this concept of operation.

From the outset, Italy has supported the idea of
establishing a multinational specialized unit within SFOR,
with the same mandate as other SFOR elements. Such a
unit would enhance SFOR's ability to support the local
authorities in responding to civil disorder, but without
engaging in police functions, including situations related
to the return of refugees and displaced persons. Italy
intends to make a substantial contribution to this unit.

Regrettably, the last three months have seen an
increase in Violent incidents that target returning refugees
and displaced persons, especially those that belong to
minority groups. This trend must be rapidly reversed so
as to avoid jeopardizing years of effort. The combined
forces of SFOR and the United Nations Mission in Bosnia
and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) will no doubt have to
concentrate on this priority issue over the next few
months.

Italy is one of the main contributors of emergency
assistance and reconstruction aid to Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Effective use of reconstruction funds may
prove crucial to fostering and consolidating peace.
Economic assistance must also encourage
democratization. This approach does not mean penalizing
or discriminating against one party or another: it means
encouraging the adoption of a positive attitude towards
each and every aspect of the peace process, such as
respect for human rights, the return of refugees, media
liberalization and the fight against corruption.

The enhancement of political, civil and media
freedom and the establishment of pluralism in opinions
and political parties are still priority objectives. The
ultimate goal should be political stabilization through
democratic elections, with a View to achieving the
insertion of a democratic and prosperous Bosnia as a
modern nation in Europe.

The United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is making a decisive contribution to these

 

goals, especially through the restructuring of law
enforcement institutions and through the International Police
Task Force (IPTF), to which Italy contributes substantially.
We welcome the expansion of IPTF's role in key public
security issues, such as financial crime, smuggling,
corruption and judicial reform, and we support the
information provided by the Secretary-Generals report on
these aspects. The close relationship between UNMIBH and
SFOR is particularly important. In the months to come, it
will continue to provide the ideal framework for fostering
peace and stability in the country.

