Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the

outset, we welcome the participation at this meeting of
His Excellency Mr. Gustavo Meza-Cuadra, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Peru, and wish him every
success as he takes up the duties inherent in his new
role. We also sincerely thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations, for his
invaluable briefing this morning. I also wish to thank
Ms. Helen La Lime, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Haiti, for her efforts undertaken
in coordination with the United Nations Mission
for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) and her
communications with all relevant stakeholders with a
view to moving the political process forward.

I would like to focus today on three main issues:
the political and security situation, the humanitarian
situation and the next steps to be taken. With regard
to the political and security situation, we are deeply
concerned about the current political environment in
Haiti and its adverse effect on the stability and security
of the country. According to the latest report of the
Secretary-General on MINUJUSTH (S/2019/805),
negotiations in the last few months on the confirmation
of a new Government have been unsuccessful, and a
constitutional crisis caused by the failure to organize
elections in time to renew the current legislature, whose
term expires on 13 January 2020, is looming, which
has led to the escalation of violence in the country. We
therefore call upon all parties to keep calm, observe self-
restraint and refrain from taking any steps that might
lead to renewed violence. We commend the measures
taken by the Haitian President to continue the national
dialogue in order to find a solution of the current crisis.
We also commend the Haitian National Police in its
efforts to contain the situation and maintain security.

The latest report of the Secretary-General further
identifies impunity as a core issue. Impunity impedes
progress in substantially improving governance
and accountability. In this regard, we call upon the
Haitian National Police and the judiciary to carry out
full investigations of perpetrators of State corruption
and human rights violations, thereby ensuring
accountability. Efforts to reform the judicial system
must be extended in order to restore the trust of ordinary
Haitian citizens in the country's political and economic
elite and convince them that national recovery and
the building of their future are best obtained through
democratic and peaceful means.

With regard to the humanitarian situation in Haiti,

we are concerned that if the security situation continues
as it has it will jeopardize access to humanitarian aid
for those who need it. We note in particular the major
challenges facing hospitals in Haiti, owing to shortages
of fuel, potable water and other necessities. As Council
members are aware, these challenges also affect
orphanages, civil-protection units and other emergency
services, whose capacity is already limited. Moreover,
2.6 million people in Haiti are suffering from food
insecurity. If the current situation persists, thousands
more people will be affected. Accordingly, we welcome
the allocation of $5 million by the Central Emergency
Relief Fund to enable humanitarian actors to respond
to the emergency needs of the country resulting from
food insecurity.

In terms of the next steps, I would like to propose
measures that we believe would be useful as Haiti begins
a new chapter in its history. First of all, we stress the
need to conduct a broad and inclusive dialogue among
the Haitians in order to remove political obstacles,
revitalize the economy and restore stability in the
country. We also urge all stakeholders to set aside their
differences and personal interests and work together to
overcome the current obstacles the country is facing.
This is the only way to ensure progress towards
achieving sustainable development and fulfilling the
2030 Agenda.

We are also concerned about the failure, to date, to
confirm a new Government. We would also warn against
applying pressure to conduct elections in Haiti if the
country is not yet ready for them, because ofthe potential
for unintended negative effects. We know that Haiti
might need external aid given the challenges it faces.
We therefore encourage the United Nations - through
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti and the
United Nations country team - as well as regional and
international partners, including the Organization of
American States, to provide the necessary support to
Haiti in this decisive and very sensitive phase.
The closure ofMINUJUSTH and the departing staff
means that there will be no peacekeeping operation in
Haiti for the first time since 2004. We would like to
take this opportunity to commend the women and men
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
and MINUJUSTH for their efforts aimed at helping
Haiti achieve political gains, develop the capacity of
the Haitian National police and create an environment
conducive to the development of the country.

In conclusion, we would once again like to express
our sincere thanks and gratitude to Ms. Helen La Lime,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Haiti, the women and men of MINUJUSTH and the
United Nations country team for their tireless efforts,
dedication and contributions to stability in Haiti and the
support that they have provided in helping the country
achieve the Sustainable Development Goals.

