We align ourselves with the statement to be delivered by the delegation of the European Union (EU). As we hold our discussion here in the Security Council, EU and Western Balkan leaders are discussing how to strengthen their cooperation, especially to overcome coronavirus disease (COVID-19). I am glad that Bosnia and Herzegovina is receiving full attention on both continents today. It was a pleasure to hear Ms. Irena Hasie's realistic explanation of young people's needs and aspirations in the country. Estonia supports non-governmental organizations that promote the greater participation of young people in shaping their societies. I would like to thank High Representative Valentin Inzko for his twenty-third regular report to the Secretary-General (S/2020/345, annex) since assuming his post in 2009. It is admirable that, although the size and budget of Mr. Inzko's team have decreased by more than 50 per cent since then, the tasks that it tackles remain closer to 100 per cent. Estonia would like to state its full support for a robust and effective Office of the High Representative, which is still necessary in order to fulfil its mandated responsibilities. Although the appointment of the Council of Ministers in December was a very positive development, we note with much regret the paralysation of the work of many State-level institutions, including the Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly, by the Alliance of Independent Social Democrats party. It was also disappointing to learn that, during the latest reporting period, the authorities of the Republika Srpska intensified their divisive rhetoric and resorted to frequent actions targeting the country's sovereignty, territorial integrity and even its Constitution. Although leaders in the country showed preparedness to cooperate, especially at the beginning of the crisis, they should now halt regressing towards the pre-pandemic status quo. In Mr. Inzko's opinion, is there any possibility of that happening? We are glad that doctors throughout the country have shown strong efforts to cooperate with each other, including in the divided city of Mostar, as lately reported in the media. As Bosnia and Herzegovina hopes to defeat the pandemic, the continued pursuit by some State authorities to block decision-making at the State-level and to restrict revenue to State institutions is very regrettable. It can hinder the ability of institutions to appropriately function and respond to extraordinary situations, such as the COVID-19 pandemic. Estonia stands in strong support of the EU's solidarity with the Western Balkans and its mobilization of the substantial financial support package of €3.3 billion to help the region overcome the COVID-19 crisis. We commend the work and support of all others that provide material and other assistance to Bosnia and Herzegovina, such as the United Nations Resident Coordinator Office and the United Nations Development Programme. Also, the European Union-led Operation Althea is a strong contributor to the country's work in maintaining a safe and secure environment. We fully support its continued executive mandate and call on all parties to refrain from any actions or policies that could destabilize the security situation in the country. In July this year, we will commemorate the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Srebrenica genocide. The downplaying of that tragic historical event in any way is unacceptable. We are concerned over reports about the hailing of war criminals and institutions being named after them. Spreading nationalist and provocative rhetoric, denying war crimes or glorifying convicted war criminals is not in line with the country's Euro-Atlantic perspective. We hope that the municipal elections in October will be free and fair, and we call on the authorities in the country to start with preparations in a timely manner and to find a solution that will allow elections to take place in the city of Mostar. We also call on the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities to strengthen the rule of law and to implement binding judicial decisions. Estonia is certain that Bosnia and Herzegovina's future is connected with the Euro-Atlantic path, in line with the legitimate aspiration of its citizens. We welcome the recently renewed commitment of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency to fulfilling the 14 key priorities of the European Commission opinion. In order to move forward, all political leaders of the country should deliver concrete results and implement fundamental reforms. During this difficult time, and on the occasion of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Dayton Agreement, we call on all levels of the Government to work in solidarity and unity.
