Mr. Ladsous: I thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to hold this meeting with all of our Force
Commanders, taking advantage of this encounter that
takes place every year. This is a great opportunity to
spend the whole week discussing with our military
colleagues all the challenges that they face. Let me
very clear, Mr. President: every single one of our Force
Commanders has a story to tell - of courage and
determination, but also of challenges. Those stories
are a reality for which we should be grateful to them,
because of the attitude that they display with the support
of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and, in
particular, the Office of Military Affairs. While each
of them has a story to tell, we thought that this year it
would be of particular interest to focus on three issues,
which are so relevant to the situations that face us at the
present time.

First, we will hear from Lieutenant General
Yohannes Gebremeskel Tesfamariam, who, after
being Force Commander in Abyei, is now performing
the same duties in South Sudan, where he faces the
tremendous challenges associated with the protection
of civilians in situations that the Security Council
knows too well. We will then hear from Major General
Finn, who, as the Force Commander and Chief of Staff
of the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization,
faces a context that has changed massively in what used
to be a classic peacekeeping operation. However, in that
aggravated situation, he faces the particular difficulty
of the caveats imposed by troop-contributing countries.
I think that is something useful that the Security
Council could take into account.

Last but not least, we will hear from Major
General Lollesgaard, who recently took command
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). That will
draw attention to the issue of asymmetric threats, and
the particular and very challenging environment that
he experiences on a daily basis at the Mission. As
members may remember, MINUSMA has experienced
more casualties than any other operation in the past
20 years - which is quite revealing of modern-day
peacekeeping.

I will say no more; each of the generals will
make his points. Let me just take this opportunity to
publicly thank them all very much once again for their
commitment and their dedication to duties that have
never been as difficult as they are nowadays.

