Mr. Otunnu: Mr. President, you are not a
newcomer to this Chamber. For over two decades, the
South West Africa People's Organization knocked at the
door of the Council and you sat at this corner of the
table, pleading the cause of freedom and independence for
the people of Namibia. Today, Namibia is free. It is not
only a Member of the United Nations, but an active
member of the Security Council. We rejoice with the
people of Namibia on this happy turn of events. And
today, you, Sir, are the President of the Security Council;
in a few weeks you will assume the presidency of the
General Assembly; for several years now, you have been
the dean of Foreign Ministers hailing from Africa. I
congratulate you, Mr. President, on these very impressive
achievements.

I wish the Government and the people of Namibia
great success in their admirable endeavours to consolidate
unity and democracy at home while contributing actively
to building peace and security in the world.

 

I should like here to pay a very special tribute to a
remarkable leader. I refer to Madam Graca Machel of
Mozambique and South Africa. Her ground-breaking work,
which provided the first comprehensive and compelling
account of the ways in which children are being abused and
brutalized in situations of conflict, provided the strong
foundation on which we are building today. The front-line
work of the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR), the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the European
Union - these particularly - strongly supported by the
community of international and local non-governmental
organizations, together with the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), the World Food
Programme (WFP), the World Health Organization (WHO),
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations (FAO) and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), have been crucial in
translating our common agenda into practical realities that
can make a difference for children on the ground. I am
very grateful for their cooperation and support, and I look
forward to our continuing and very close collaboration.

Children are innocent and especially vulnerable.
Children are less equipped to adapt or respond to conflict.
They bear no responsibility for conflict, yet suffer
disproportionately from its excesses. All non-combatants are
entitled to protection, but children deserve special attention
and require special protection. Moreover, children represent
the hopes and future of every society; destroy them and you
have destroyed a society.

Yet today, we are witnessing unspeakable
abominations directed against children in situations of
conflict: children being killed; children being made orphans;
children being maimed; children being uprooted from their
homes; children being raped and sexually abused; children
being deprived quite simply of their education and health;
children being exploited as child soldiers; and children
being left with deep emotional scars and trauma.

As we meet here today, in approximately 50 countries
around the world, children are suffering from the effects of
conflict and its aftermath. Today, there are over 20 million
children who have been displaced by war within and
outside their countries. Some 300,000 young persons under
the age of 18 are currently being exploited as child soldiers.

The magnitude of what we are witnessing attests to a
new phenomenon. There has been a qualitative shift in the
nature and conduct of warfare.

Several developments mark this transformation.
Almost all the major armed conflicts in the world today
are civil wars. They are being fought among brother
enemies and sister enemies. They are marked by
widespread social breakdown and lawlessness, the
proliferation of weapons, the involvement of multiple
armed groups and the massive use of children as child
soldiers. A key feature of this struggle is the
demonization of the so-called enemy community. In this
setting the village has become the battlefield and civilian
populations the primary target. This is soldier-on-civilian
violence on an unprecedented scale. The excesses are no
longer exceptional. They are widespread around the globe.
They are going on today in some 30 locations of conflict.

It is against this background that today we estimate
that up to 90 per cent of casualties in ongoing conflicts
around the world are civilians, and the vast majority are
children and women.

There is a danger that we in the international
community may be exposed so much that we could come
to regard as normal a phenomenon that in fact represents
a radical departure from the fundamental norms of
conduct acceptable to any of our societies. We must not
allow this to happen.

We can and must reverse this trend of abomination.
In this context, I wish to put forward some concrete
proposals for the Council's consideration.

First, let us resolve, on the eve of the new
millennium, to launch an era of application, the
application of international norms and standards. Over the
past 50 years, the nations of the world have developed a
truly impressive body of international humanitarian and
human rights instruments.

But the impact of these instruments remains
woefully thin on the ground. We must therefore shift our
energies from the juridical project of the elaboration of
norms to the political project of ensuring their application
and respect on the ground. This can be accomplished if
the international community is prepared to employ its
considerable collective influence to this end.

My second recommendation concerns reinforcing
traditional value systems. We must not cast aside local
traditional value systems that have traditionally provided
ethical bearings to many of our societies. In most
societies distinctions always existed between acceptable
and unacceptable practices even in times of war, with

 

taboos and injunctions proscribing the targeting of civilian
populations, especially women and children. But today in
so many conflicts around the world, we see a free-for-all.

I am reminded of the observation made by a Kenyan
elder from El Das recently. He said quite simply:

"In our tradition, men fight men. But now they are
targeting women, children and the elderly."
We must mobilize all our resources - especially parents,
extended family, elders, teachers, schools, religious
institutions - to reclaim and reassert those values and
taboos that have traditionally been instrumental in
protecting children and women in times of conflict.

T hirdly, there is the concept of children as a zone of
peace. We must undertake concrete initiatives to prevent or
mitigate the suffering of children who are actually caught
up in ongoing conflict. In other words, we must translate
the concept of "Children as a Zone of Peace" into practical
arrangements and measures on the ground.

In my recent visits to several countries, parties in
conflict have committed themselves to some of the
following measures: not to interfere with access to
populations in distress or with the distribution of relief
supplies, to observe humanitarian ceasefires, not to attack
schools or hospitals, not to use landmines and not to recruit
children as child soldiers. But the international community
must steadfastly hold the parties in conflicts to these
commitments. It is critical that concerned actors -
beginning with the Security Council, plus Governments,
regional organizations, United Nations agencies and civil
society organizations - reinforce these commitments
through their own channels of communication and
influence.

My fourth recommendation concerns neighbourhood
initiatives. Although most of today's armed conflicts are
internal, the victimization of children is often exacerbated
by cross-border activities, the transfer of weapons, the use
of landmines, the recruitment and abduction of children and
the movement of displaced populations. Threats facing
children within countries in conflict often cannot be brought
under control without addressing the cross-border
dimensions. That is why we have proposed the development
of "neighbourhood initiatives". The idea is to develop
dialogue that would ultimately lead to specific agreements
and concrete measures at the neighbourhood level on cross-
border threats to children.

Fifthly, the business community should be engaged.
There is an urgent need to monitor and control the flow
of weapons, especially small arms, and the exploitation of
natural resources in theatres of conflict, where there is
evidence that children and women are being
systematically brutalized. Illicit trade in timber, gold or
diamond tends to fuel the war machines responsible for
atrocities against children and women. I urge the business
community to assume their social and moral responsibility
in this regard. For a start, I urge them to develop
voluntary codes of conduct within their own industries to
address this serious issue.
Sixthly, children's protection and welfare should be
placed on the peace agenda. Children suffer
disproportionately in times of war, and therefore they
have the highest stake in peace. That is why we must
ensure that their protection and needs feature prominently
in any negotiations to end war and in peace accords. I am
pleased that this is beginning to be the case in the peace
processes in Burundi, Sierra Leone, Sudan and Colombia.

Seventh, the needs of children in the aftermath of
conflict must be addressed. Even when fighting stops,
children will continue to bear physical, social and
psychological scars and to suffer the long-term
consequences of war. In post-conflict situations, children' s
needs must be at the forefront of sustained efforts for
reconstruction, the consolidation of peace and the support
of local rehabilitation. At the international level, the key
actors must make this central in their programmes and in
their planning. At the national level, I am equally
convinced that there is need for a national body, perhaps
a national commission on children, to ensure an effective
response to the needs of children affected by war.

Eighth, special attention should be paid to the
protection and welfare of children in the context of peace
operations. Particular attention needs to be paid to the
protection and welfare of children in United Nations
mandated field operations aimed at promoting peace,
preventing and resolving conflicts and implementing
peace agreements. There are three distinct elements which
are important in this regard. First, the needs of children
should be explicitly recognized as a priority in the
mandates. Secondly, to ensure the implementation of such
mandates, there should be a senior officer dedicated to
coordinating and ensuring that the welfare of children is
respected. And thirdly, we believe that training must be
given to all members of a peacekeeping team, civilian and

 

military, on issues regarding the protection, welfare and
rights of women and children.

A ninth recommendation concerns the importance of
reporting to the Security Council on the fate of children. It
is important, in our View, that whenever reports are
submitted to the Council on situations of armed conflict and
related humanitarian emergencies, such reports should
include assessments of the impact of those situations on
children. This will provide the Council with information on
the basis of which the protection and welfare of children
can be addressed on an ongoing basis.

A tenth point is the need to review the effects of
sanctions on children. All efforts should be made to relieve
the suffering of children living under sanctions regimes.
Whenever the Security Council adopts measures under
Article 41, it is critical to give consideration to their impact
on children and to provide appropriate humanitarian
exemptions.

An eleventh point concerns the voice of children. I
have been struck by the absence of and hunger for
information and recreation among children in situations of
conflict and its aftermath. We therefore need to develop in
those situations radio stations and programmes devoted
entirely to the needs of children in situations of conflict and
its aftermath.

A twelfth recommendation relates to the recruitment
and use of children in armed conflict. The participation of
children in armed conflict is one of the most horrendous
trends of recent times. To stem the present tide, we need to
adopt a three-pronged approach.

First, I support the efforts to raise the age limit for
recruitment and participation from 15 to 18 years.
Secondly, parallel with the efforts to raise the age limit, we
must mobilize right now an effective movement of
international pressure that can lean on the armed groups
that are currently abusing children in this way. Thirdly, and
equally important, we must address the political, social and
economic factors that create an environment in which
children are induced by appeal of ideology or by
socio-economic collapse to become child soldiers.

As regards signing and ratifying international
instruments, I strongly urge all Member States to sign and
ratify those international legal instruments that afford
protection to children in situations of armed conflict. I am
referring in particular to the Statute of the International
Criminal Court and the recent International Labour
Organization Convention, adopted in June of this year.

As regards providing for children in situations of
imperfect peace, I have been struck by the fact that even
in situations of imperfect peace there are often spaces for
responding more systematically to the needs and welfare
of children. I have seen this in Rwanda, in the Sudan, in
Burundi, in Colombia and in Sierra Leone. Child
protection and welfare must not depend on the attainment
of complete peace, but should be provided whenever the
space exists to do so.

Turning to the situation of internally displaced
communities, on my missions this past year I have
everywhere witnessed the deeply distressing and
precarious situation of internally displaced populations. In
fact, most of the children I have encountered in my visits
were internally displaced within their countries. Their
predicament underlines the need and the urgency for the
international community to find a way to provide more
systematic protection and practical support to the some 25
million persons presently displaced within their own
national borders. Most of these people are children and
women.

The magnitude of this problem has been brought
home to us by Mr. Francis Deng. The guidelines he has
produced on internally displaced persons should be widely
disseminated and used by Governments, parties in conflict
and the humanitarian community as a whole.

Ultimately, the best way to end to the suffering of
children is to prevent the occurrence and recurrence of
conflict. In order to prevent the occurrence and recurrence
of conflict, both international and national actors have a
responsibility to take political, economic and social
measures that can generate within communities a sense of
hope in place of despair, a sense of inclusion and
participation instead of exclusion and a sense of
belonging instead of alienation.

In conclusion, I must tell the Council how, in my
recent Visits to countries affected by conflict, I have been
so deeply touched and humbled by examples of ordinary
people doing extraordinary things within their local
communities. I think of the host families I visited in
Albania and Macedonia, in Kukes and Tetovo. They were
ordinary and, for the most part, very poor families, with
nothing to spare. But in an extraordinary demonstration of
solidarity and generosity, they opened their homes and

 

hearts to more than 50 refugees from Kosovo, most of
whom were children and women.

I think of my visit last February to a little village in
Burundi called Ruiigi. We have all been told that in
Burundi and Rwanda Tutsi and Hutu can never get along
with each other. But in Ruiigi I encountered three
remarkable people - Maggy, Beatrice and Isaac - who by
their examples have repudiated this paradigm.

Maggy is a Tutsi woman who in her Village during the
upheavals of 1993 witnessed unspeakable inter-communal
massacres, even in the secretariat of the church where she
worked. She determined at that time to become a
revolutionary for peace and reconciliation among the Hutu
and the Tutsi. She resolved to rebuild homes for child
survivors of these massacres, children of all ethnic groups.
When I visited I saw several of these homes.

In Ruiigi, I encountered another remarkable woman -
Beatrice, a Hutu - who is now working with Maggy to
take care of these children. Beatrice fled Burundi in 1972
during an earlier set of massacres. She went to Rwanda and
met another Hutu refugee from Burundi, got married and
had eight children. In 1994, following the genocide in
Rwanda, the family fled to the Congo. In 1997 their camp
was attacked and her entire family was massacred. She was
the only survivor. Beatrice walked back to Burundi, met
Maggy from her village, and the two women exchanged
stories. The two women determined together that they
would make common cause across the Tutsi-Hutu divide.

When I met Beatrice I asked her how it felt, after
what she had experienced, to be taking care of those
children. She looked me in the face, gave a confident smile
and said, "Working here with Maggy, taking care of these
children, has given back to me the dignity of a mother."

And then I think of my visit to Juba in southern
Sudan, of my reunion with my university roommate
Dr. Paul Tingwa, who at the time was a refugee in my
native country of Uganda. Now he is running a hospital in
the middle of a war zone, with barely any shirt on his back
or shoes on his feet. But he is holding on tenaciously in
this zone because of the desperate need of the children and
women in that area.

I remember the evening I spent with the women of the
Kuku and Yei camps in southern Sudan - women who, in
spite of their adversity and suffering, were singing and
rejoicing. They simply defied the fate imposed upon them
by war. They were busy building schools and huts for their
children. They asked for only two things. First, they told
me, "Go tell our leaders and the international community
we just want peace." Their second request: "We want
some assistance with schooling for our children."

I think of my visit to Rwanda, where I met some of
the 60,000 children who from one day to the next became
the heads of households because all their parents had been
massacred.

More recently I was in Colombia. I think of a visit
to camps for internally displaced persons, in Quibdo and
elsewhere. The children there are so full of energy, so
eager to learn, so cheerful, ready to go - but they have
no opportunities. They only ask for a little help for
schooling or health care.

I say that we of the international community must
get closer to these communities. We must learn from
them. We must draw inspiration from their example, and
we must reinforce their local efforts.

This is why, in spite of the suffering I have seen and
the adversity in the places I have visited, I have come
back with a renewed sense of hope, and I say to the
Council and the rest of the international community that
the way forward to help these communities that are
caught in the midst of war and its aftermath is to go
women, go children, go local.

I thank you, Sir, for your initiative in convening this
meeting.

