Mr. Olguin Cigarroa (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank the High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Mr. Valentin Inzko, for his briefing and for
the presentation of his report (S/2014/777, annex).

We begin by welcoming the results of the general
elections held on 12 October, and we commend the fact
that they were held in an orderly way. We also note the
concerns expressed by the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe electoral observation mission
and we call for elected leaders to act swiftly to ensure
the creation of the new Government without delay.
Similarly, we call on all political leaders to take this
opportunity to move towards true national integration
and reconciliation and to refrain from negative rhetoric.
Such acts undermine the cohesion among the various
ethnic communities in the country, hinder national
reconciliation and slow the country's progress towards
Euro-Atlantic integration.

Given the challenges resulting from the severe
floods and landslides that affected many communities
in both entities this year, we consider it important that
the new authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina work
together to address the challenges facing the country as
it moves towards membership in the European Union
and NATO.

We support the efforts of Bosnia and Herzegovina
to overcome its past, and highlight the important work
being done in the exhumation, identification and return
of the remains of people missing as a result of the
armed conflict and human rights violations. Chile's
experience shows the importance of that process for
national reconciliation, which is why our country
experts have held several meetings with Bosnian
authorities and technical staff with a view to enhancing
their knowledge of methodologies and techniques for
the search for and identification of victims.

We reiterate the firm commitment that our country
has shown from the beginning to the process aimed
at achieving a stable Bosnia and Herzegovina that is
committed to defending its territorial integrity in a
politically stable State with functioning institutions in
the service of its people and to creatingjobs, especially
for young people, in peace and prosperity. Chile
participated in the United Nations Mission in Bosnia
and Herzegovina with police personnel and continues
to do so today in the European Union-led peacekeeping
force (EUFOR) Operation Althea. Last year marked 10
years of uninterrupted Chilean military presence there.
We believe that the presence of EUFOR Operation
Althea in Bosnia-Herzegovina remains vital, which
is why we supported the renewal of its mandate for a
further 12 months.

Similarly, we call upon the international community
to maintain its commitment to supporting the
aspirations of the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina
in a Euro-Atlantic future and to provide the necessary
resources to fulfil its mandate under the 1995 Dayton
Agreement.

Finally, I would like to reiterate our support to
the Office of the High Representative, which should
continue to receive political support to carry out its
important functions.

