Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): Let me begin,
Madame President, by joining my colleagues in
congratulating you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council this month. We wish you
every success. I also wish to thank Ambassador Salam
of Lebanon for his stewardship of the Council in the
busy month of September.

South Africa is deeply concerned about the
deteriorating political and humanitarian situation in
Syria. It is our hope that the situation will be resolved
in a peaceful manner and in accordance with the will of
the Syrian people. We condemn the loss of life in Syria
and call for maximum restraint on the part of all parties
to the conflict. We demand an immediate end to all
violence in Syria.

On the humanitarian front, we call on the Syrian
authorities to facilitate access for humanitarian
agencies, including the United Nations, in accordance
with the relevant international human rights and
humanitarian law.

We urge the Syrian authorities to initiate an open,
transparent and all-inclusive political process with
their people to address their grievances, in order to
guarantee their fundamental political rights and
freedoms, including their right to freedom of assembly
and freedom of speech. We also encourage the
opposition to participate in this political process with a
View to ensuring peace and stability in Syria.

A holistic political solution must be found, one
that will respect democracy, political reform, justice
and human rights, as well as the socio-economic
development needs of the people of Syria, in order to
ensure long-term peace and stability. This solution
must also preserve the unity, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Syria.

Syria is integral to a wider resolution of the
Middle East conflict. Its stability is linked to that of its
neighbours. Any action on the part of the international
community on Syria, therefore, including action by the
Security Council, should be cognizant of the regional
implications. We have seen recently that Security
Council resolutions have been abused, and that their
implementation has gone far beyond the mandate of
what was intended.

With the regard to the draft resolution
(S/2011/612) before us, South Africa was concerned
about the sponsors' intention to impose punitive
measures that would have pre-judged the resolution's
implementation. We believe that these were designed
as a prelude to further actions. We are concerned that
this draft resolution not be part of a hidden agenda
aimed at once again instituting regime change, which
has been an objective Clearly stated by some. We are
thus concerned about the fact that the sponsors of this
draft resolution rejected language that clearly excluded
the possibility of military intervention in the resolution
of the Syrian crisis. We maintain that the Security
Council should proceed with caution on Syria lest we
exacerbate an already volatile situation.

It is for these reasons that my delegation
abstained on the draft resolution before us.

