Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (spoke in Chinese): First
of all, I wish to thank Mr. Otunnu for his very detailed
briefing.

Since the signing, last 7 July, of the Lome Peace
Agreement by the Government of Sierra Leone and the
Revolutionary United Front, the situation in Sierra Leone
has, on balance, remained calm and the ceasefire agreement
has been observed. The disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of ex-combatants has started. Other relevant
provisions of the Agreement have also been implemented
to varying degrees.

The Chinese delegation is pleased with this progress
and wishes, in this connection, to express its thanks to the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
and the ECOWAS Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) for their
protracted and outstanding contributions to the peace
process in Sierra Leone.

At the same time, we are soberly aware that many
aspects of the situation in Sierra Leone remain uncertain
and the forces of peace are still fragile. Therefore, at this
juncture it is vitally important that the international
community provide Sierra Leone further help and
encouragement.

China has consistently been of the view that the
United Nations, and the Security Council in particular,
should respond as soon as possible after the signing of the
Lome Peace Agreement, in order to provide concrete
support to the peace process in the country. In this regard,
we thank the Secretary-General for his report to the
Security Council of 23 September, as contained in
document in S/1999/1003, which clearly sets forth
specific recommendations for the establishment of the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL).

At the same time we are satisfied that the Council
has, on this basis, quickly drafted the relevant draft
resolution and reached agreement on the text after many
rounds of consultations.

The draft resolution before us is the first Council
resolution on an African question to be adopted since the
Council's open debate on Africa last month. It
accommodates the requests of the Government of Sierra
Leone and the African members and reflects the concerns
of other Council members. It is comprehensive and
balanced and, to a certain degree, reflects the Council's
attention to and input on African issues. China appreciates
this.

We hope that the Secretariat will begin to prepare as
soon as possible for the deployment of UNAMSIL and,
at the earliest possible opportunity, conduct consultations
with the Government of Sierra Leone on specific
arrangements. We trust that, under the leadership of
Ambassador Okelo, the Secretary-General's Special
Representative, the Mission will enjoy close cooperation
with the Government of Sierra Leone and the Economic
Community of West African States Monitoring Group and
that it will strive with dedication and sincerity to play an
important role in the consolidation of peace in Sierra
Leone.

At present, the people of Sierra Leone generally
aspire to peace and stability and long for national
reconciliation. They hope for an early start to economic
reconstruction and the rapid healing of the country's
wounds from eight years of civil war. We believe that the
draft resolution to be adopted by the Council on the
establishment of UNAMSIL will give new impetus to the
peace process in Sierra Leone and contribute to the
economic development and stabilization of that country.

In View of all this, the Chinese delegation will vote
in favour of the draft resolution before us.

 
