Mr. Nduhuura (Uganda): Ijoin you, Sir, and others
in condemning the barbaric and cowardly attack on the
United Nations compound in Mogadishu, and convey
my condolences to all the bereaved.

I wish to commend you and the delegation of the
United Kingdom on your leadership of the Security
Council this month. I also thank you for convening this
debate on the important topic of conflict prevention and
natural resources. We also thank Deputy Secretary-
General Mr. Jan Eliasson, Africa Progress Panel Chair
Mr. Kofi Annan, World Bank Managing Director
Ms. Caroline Anstey, and Under-Secretary-General
and Associate Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme Ms. Rebeca Grynspan for
their insightful briefings.

We acknowledge that peace, security, development
and human rights are closely linked and mutually
reinforcing. In this context, it is essential to intensify
efforts aimed at ensuring that conflicts are prevented
through comprehensive strategies that address their
root causes. My delegation would like to stress that
the primary responsibility for preventing conflicts
lies with individual Member States and that initiatives
undertaken within subregional, regional or United
Nations frameworks should support and complement
the roles of national Governments.

The African Union (AU), in this regard, has shown
its resolve to address the root causes of conflicts on
the continent, including through the African Charter
on Democracy, Elections and Governance; the African
Peer Review Mechanism; the Continental Early
Warning System, the Panel of the Wise, and the AU
Post-Conflict Reconstruction and Development Policy.

On the issue of conflict prevention and natural
resources, I would like to make four points.
First, endowment with and harnessing of natural
resources - minerals, water, fisheries, forests, oil,
natural gas, coal and so on - provides countries with
significant opportunities for national development.
Uganda reaffirms the principle of permanent
sovereignty over natural resources as an inalienable
right that must be exercised in the interest of national
development and the well-being of the population.

Secondly, when countries' natural resources are
well managed and the revenues generated are utilized
to spur economic growth through investment in critical
areas such as economic diversification, infrastructure
development, education and health, numerous benefits
are derived. These include employment creation and
improvement in livelihoods, which contribute to laying
a strong foundation for peace and socioeconomic
development. This is one of the ways of avoiding the
so-called resource curse, or the paradox of countries
and regions with abundant natural resources, especially
non-renewable resources like minerals and fuels,
tending to have less economic growth and worse
development outcomes than countries with fewer
natural resources .

Thirdly, natural resources can and often do cause
conflicts within countries if they are not properly
managed, as different groups and factions fight for their
share, while other conflicts may arise out of attempts
to control and exploit resources or the allocation of
the revenues accrued. In other cases, access to natural
resource revenues by belligerents through illegal
exploitation can fuel or prolong conflicts. There have
also been cases of inter-State conflict over natural
resources.

We therefore emphasize the need to intensify
national, regional and international efforts to improve
natural-resource management through the sharing
of best practices and such measures as stabilization
funds, subregional development programmes,
revenue-sharing regimes and transparency initiatives.
Additional measures may include local programmes
that compensate for the negative impacts of resource
exploitation through programmes for environmental
protection, infrastructure development and employment
creation.

In conclusion, we recognize the importance of
commodity monitoring and certification schemes
and initiatives such as the Kimberly Process and the
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative, as well as
other tools aimed at curbing the illegal exploitation of
natural resources, including through raising awareness
among the private sector and all stakeholders. Atthe
same time, Uganda underscores the need to promote
legitimate trade in natural resources for economic
growth and development.

