Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by welcoming you, Mr. President, and
thanking you for presiding over today's meeting.

I would also like to welcome His Excellency the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, Mr. Carlos
Holmes Trujillo Garcia, to the Council. I would like to
thank Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, for his
comprehensive and valuable briefing on the most
significant achievements and challenges to peace
in Colombia.

I would like to commend the measures taken by
the Government of President Ivan Duque Marquez and
its commitment to continuing to implement the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable
and Lasting Peace. I must also thank the delegations of
Peru and the United Kingdom for organizing the visit to
Colombia. I thank the Government for facilitating the
mission and everyone who participated in its success.

Colombians have proven to the world that
Colombia can overcome the past, after signing the
peace agreement to end the conflict and build peace,
along with continued efforts to implement the historic
agreement. The agreement has ended a conflict that
lasted for more than halfa century, claimed many lives,
injured a great number and left many missing. It is an
example for the whole world on how to end conflicts
through diplomacy and negotiation. One of the most
important challenges facing the implementation of the
agreement is the socioeconomic reintegration of former
members of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia-Eje'rcito del Pueblo (FARC-EP).

Given what we saw during our mission, we agree
with the report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/530)
that the most important challenge is the lack of
adequate, timely funding to implement all aspects of
the transition and the dearth of opportunities to gain
access to land through legal means. However, we
highly appreciate the Government's efforts to facilitate
the socioeconomic reintegration of former FARC-EP
members through various initiatives, plans and projects
that have been adopted by the National Council on
Economic and Social Policy.

We look forward to achieving the objectives of
the reintegration process through the efforts of the
Government and local communities and authorities and
gradual transition processes involving the provision of
food and basic services until long-term measures for
regional training and reintegration efforts are formulated
after August 15. We underscore the importance of the
illicit crop substitution programme, providing legal and
security guarantees to former members of the FARC-
EP, and overcoming all challenges to implementing all
aspects of the peace agreement.

Unfortunately, the killings of and threats against
community leaders, including women and indigenous
leaders, and human rights defenders are continuing.
It has been confirmed that nearly 230 killings have
taken place since the signing of the peace agreement,
as Mr. Ruiz Massieu mentioned.

In addition to a number of prevention and
protection initiatives, we commend the measures taken
by the Government to revitalize the Comprehensive
Programme on Guarantees for Women Human Rights
Defenders and Leaders. We also applaud all the
Government's efforts to re-establish its authority over
all territories and to hold all criminals accountable. We
hope that the statutory law of the Special Jurisdiction
for Peace, which was adopted on 6 June, will serve as
the main pillar to help build the confidence necessary to
create a conducive security and political environment.
We look forward to peaceful elections with a large
turnout in October, as well as to the completed
implementation of all aspects of the peace agreement.

Finally, we commend ongoing efforts to promote
the peace process through the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia, under the leadership
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and in cooperation with national and local authorities,
civil society, international organizations and the private
sector. We also commend the Mission's efforts to
involve young people and youth organizations. I must
also emphasize the important role played by women
in implementing the peace agreement, as well as in
development, peacebuilding and reconciliation.

