Mr. Fall (spoke in French): I should like at the
outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
September. I should also like to take this opportunity to
congratulate your predecessor, Ambassador Wehbe,
Permanent Representative of Syria, who led the work
of the Council last month with exemplary
effectiveness.

In addition, I am grateful to you, Mr. President,
and to members of the Council for having allowed me
to take the floor in my capacity as Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People to participate with you in this
important debate - initiated by the Arab Group - on
the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question, following the Israeli decision in
principle to expel or banish the President of the
Palestinian Authority, His Excellency Mr. Arafat.

I have two series of comments to make. The first
concerns the explosive situation on the ground
following the attacks and incursions by the Israeli army
on Palestinian territory, the extrajudicial executions
and the spiral of attacks, violence, counter-violence,
vengeance, counter-vengeance, which - as has been
repeatedly stated here - is rooted in the Israeli
occupation of Palestinian territory. I would add that the
situation has worsened extremely seriously, since we
have recently witnessed suicide attacks and loss of
human life on the part of both Israelis and Palestinians.

Our Committee, as it has always done, most
vigorously condemns all forms of violence and all
attacks, whatever the motivations, whoever the victims
and whatever the justifications, a priori or a posteriori.
Because life is sacred, we cannot use children or other
innocent people to seek to support any cause of any
sort; we are very clear on that.

Israel is continuing to plant settlements in
Palestinian territory, in total violation of international
law, and I believe that that deserves to be emphasized.
The Council truly needs to send a strong signal to the
occupying Power to make it understand - in the
context of the international community's
condemnation - that those actions must cease. There
must also be an end to the building of the separation
wall, which will only encroach seriously on Palestinian
territory and which, if we are not careful, will be a sort
of fait accompli that predetermines the future
relationship and the drawing of the border.

The second series of observations that I should
like to make concerns the threat of banishment or
deportation decided in principle by the Israeli
Government. Is it a trial balloon, a deliberate intention
or a well-considered decision, or is it a kind of
diversion - a diversion with incalculable
consequences? At a time when all our attention is
focused on the need for both parties to implement the
road map, is it an attempt to divert attention in order to
create a new causus belli - a new situation based on
which the community's attention would be focused
elsewhere, and we would ask Israel to show its
understanding, to do this or that, and everyone would
move in Israel's direction, to call upon it to reverse its
decision? That would risk shifting attention from the
origin of the problem, which is the occupation of
Palestinian territory and the continued building of the
separation wall.

Having said that, I think that the Council is at a
crossroads, because a grave decision has been made
and a personality of the Israeli Government, no less,
has indicated that Israel has several options, including
the elimination of President Arafat. There is only a
short distance between that and a killing or an
assassination. And if that were to take place, the
consequences would be unpredictable, not only for
Israel and Palestine, but also for the Middle East and
the whole international community, even Africa.

Here, I should like to say that, in certain countries
where prayers are said in mosques on Friday - such in
as Senegal, where I am from - we are certain that this
situation would be used to create chaos and that it
could even lead to the breaking of diplomatic relations
between some countries or between some countries and
Israel, which we do not want to happen. That is why
we call upon Israel to be measured, to have a sense of
discernment and to be careful, because someone could
make an appeal, perhaps out of a burst of anger or to
launch a trial balloon, but others - who already have
the opportunity to assassinate a Prime Minister, co-
laureate of the Nobel Peace Prize - may take that
appeal seriously and could go beyond Israel's
proclaimed intention. An accident, including
unintended friendly fire, can occur anywhere.

So that is why our Committee would like to focus
the Council's attention and to raise its awareness of the
need for the international community to help the
Palestinian people, who live in a most deplorable
economic situation. We ask for the assistance of the
United Nations family and of donor countries,
otherwise the situation will worsen. We ask that the
road map be implemented in good faith by all the
parties so that that vision - which was initiated by
President Bush, adopted by the Arab Summit and the
Security Council and endorsed by the African Union in
its decision of last July at Maputo - is realized at last,
and so that the Cassandras, the extremists on both sides
will never again be able to carry out their pernicious
designs so harmful to the peace we all seek.

