The President (spoke in French): I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the representative of Belgium. All members have underlined that the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) is a significant achievement. It is particularly important to reaffirm the gains of the NPT and to strengthen them in the current international context, where mistrust prevails over collective action and where the red lines of the past are likely to be crossed. Indeed, our multilateral system, based on international law and carefully built through consensus, is being increasingly undermined, particularly in the area of non-proliferation and disarmament. The lack of progress towards the complete, verifiable and irreversible denuclearization of North Korea and the threats to the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action concerning Iran, as well as the end of the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty and the still uncertain extension of the New START Treaty, are not encouraging signs. Admittedly, the current security environment brings specific constraints that should not be underestimated. But the current challenges cannot be an excuse for inaction or, worse still, a step backwards where the interests of some prevail over those of others. Belgium therefore reaffirms its strong support for the three pillars of the NPT and urges all signatory States to spare no effort to achieve a positive outcome at the upcoming Review Conference. Our ultimate goal is a world free of nuclear weapons and there is only one way to achieve it: the full implementation of the NPT. The Security Council has its part to play by addressing non-proliferation issues, such as North Korea and Iran, as well as by improving the overall security situation through its role in conflict resolution. Moreover, a specific responsibility falls to the five permanent members of the Council, the only nuclear- weapon States recognized by the NPT. As States that possess approximately 90 per cent of the world's nuclear arsenal, the United States and the Russian Federation have the duty to avoid unlimited military and nuclear competition. The fate of the New START Treaty, the onlytreaty limiting the deployment of strategic weapons, is of great importance in that context. We welcome the recent actions taken by the United Kingdom and France to reduce their stockpiles and means of delivery. We hope that China will follow the same path, including a complete and irreversible halt to the production of fissile material for military purposes. An international system based on the rule of law can succeed only if the rules are respected by all. Even if some States have a specific responsibility, the cooperation of all States remains necessary for the success of the NPT. That is why we call for the universalization of the Treaty. Belgium also recalls that a world without nuclear weapons means a world without nuclear tests. Belgium regrets that the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, which was signed more than 20 years ago, has still not entered into force due to the non-accession of eight annex 2 States. The implementation of the NPT also requires support for its institutional actors, in particular the International Atomic Energy Agency as well as the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization, to which an appropriate platform must be given at the Review Conference. Finally, we wish to underscore that, as the next Chair of the Nuclear Suppliers Group, Belgium will be particularly attentive to recent technological developments that are likely to shorten the path towards the acquisition of nuclear weapons. In conclusion, Belgium strongly reaffirms its commitment to the NPT and calls on the members of the Council to look beyond their differences and work together to advance non-proliferation, nuclear disarmament and the peaceful use of nuclear energy. I now resume my functions as President of the Council. There are no more names inscribed on the list of speakers. The meeting rose at 4.50 p.m.
