Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We welcome the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2371 (2017), condemning in the
strongest terms the continuing ballistic-missile tests
conducted by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
in violation of various Security Council resolutions.
The step taken today, imposing additional sanctions
measures as a consequence, is therefore proper.

It is important that we continue to maintain the
unity of the Council in addressing this problem. In our
view, this is perhaps the most critical factor that may
ensure a breakthrough eventually, if, in addition, the
matter is handled with a great deal of care and wisdom.

The nuclear- and ballistic-missile-related
programmes of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea pose serious threats to regional and international
peace and security. It is absolutely crucial that the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea immediately
cease these provocative actions in order to reduce the
tension in the Korean peninsula and prevent its further
escalation. That is why we believe taking the measure
the Council took today was made unavoidable.

It is becoming all the more apparent that this
situation could get out of hand if it is not managed
properly. We believe it is important to make additional
efforts to try to open up possibilities for the diplomatic
path towards the resolution of a problem that is indeed
both complex and dangerous.

One thing is undeniable - and on this all
reasonable people must agree - and that is that there
is a need for channels of communication to avoid
the risk of miscalculation and reduce tensions in the
Korean peninsula. That is why we believe that there
is an urgent need for finding a lasting, comprehensive
political and diplomatic solution to the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea issue through dialogue
and negotiation. It is indeed a good thing that the just-
adopted resolution takes this into account. This requires
that the Democratic People's Republic of Korea return
to its international commitments on denuclearization
and fully comply with the relevant resolutions of
Security Council.

Finally, the latest ballistic-missile launch by the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea reminds us that
the full implementation of the Council's resolutions by
all Member States is much more critical now than ever
before. We believe that Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1718 (2006) and the Panel of Experts
that supports it will continue to play a critical role in
this regard, and they should be encouraged to further
strengthen their engagement with Member States to
improve implementation of the measures.

Let me conclude by reiterating, once again,
Ethiopia's firm commitment to continuing to work
towards the full implementation of these Security
Council resolutions, including the one that we have
adopted today.

