Mr. Manongi (United Republic of Tanzania):
The United Republic of Tanzania associates itself with
the statement to be made by the Permanent
Representative of Malaysia, Ambassador Hamidon Ali,
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM).

Tanzania is gravely concerned about the recent
upsurge in violence in Israel and the occupied
Palestinian territory. Increased rocket attacks against
Israel from northern Gaza, as well as Israeli military
operations, especially artillery strikes on suspected
rocket launch sites, are contributing to a cycle that
undermines the prospects for durable peace in the
region. We regret that populated areas have come under
fire, causing death to innocent civilians, including
children. We deeply regret the loss of life and the
suffering resulting from the violence. We urge both
parties to refrain from any measures which could lead
to more violence. We call upon both sides to exercise
maximum restraint.

Violence is against the interests of both Israel and
Palestine. We reiterate our conviction that Hamas
needs to move towards acceptance of the three
principles laid out by the Quartet, namely, non-
violence, recognition of Israel and acceptance of
previous agreements, including the road map. We agree
that the Palestinian Government should be able to take
a clear stance against violence and actively seek to
gain control over the firing of rockets and suicide
bombings.

It is in this sense that we join in condemning the
suicide bombing that took place in Tel Aviv this
morning. It is also our belief that, for its part, Israel is
obliged to take meaningful steps to reduce the
suffering of Palestinians by ending blockades,
curtailing arbitrary arrests and extrajudicial killings,
stopping the demolition of houses and halting
settlement activity, including the barrier construction,
on occupied territories. Israel should refrain from the
use of excessive force and cease targeted killings,
which contravene international law. We believe that it
is only through peace talks with the Palestinians that
the conflict can be resolved and we believe that
unilateral action and the resort to force will only make
matters worse.

The suspension of monthly transfers of revenues
collected by Israel on behalf of the Palestinians must
be brought to an end. Continued withholding of this
revenue constitutes a serious blow to the cash-strapped
Palestinian Government and constrains its capacity to
deliver public services to its people. The cut-offs of aid
and tax revenues are already crippling the Palestinian
treasury. This has made it virtually impossible to pay
salaries to Government employees, including police,
teachers, medical personnel and others. The failure to
transfer tax revenues, together with the suspension of
much-needed foreign aid, amounts to collective
punishment because it is not only the employees that
are affected, but also their dependents. We urge that the
flow of revenue to the Palestinians not be interrupted at
this hour of need and increased demand.

In conclusion, it is our view that the international
community, including key regional actors, must guide
the two sides towards negotiations and compromise,
leading to a just, comprehensive and lasting peace in
the region. We believe that the cherished objective of
having a viable, democratic, sovereign and contiguous
Palestinian State living side by side with Israel in
peace and security is within reach and is attainable.

