The President: I will now make a statement in
my national capacity, before turning again to Mr.
Annabi.

The United Kingdom's Views are very much in
consonance with what has been said around this table,
and also with European Union policy, which is well
known and which will be further expressed when we
have an open debate.

I think we have had an extremely useful briefing
and a very interesting visit from the Assistant
Secretary-General. I note his quite optimistic
assessment that significant progress towards
independence is being made on most, if not all, fronts.
I think that this is one of the potential success stories of
the United Nations, and we must keep it going that
way.

The elections are extremely important. At this
stage, we are happy about the date of 30 August. But it
is very important that any refugees wishing to return
from West Timor should be allowed to do so by 20
June so that they can register if necessary. That is an
important milestone on the way to elections. In that
context, we are grateful for the announcement by the
Government of Indonesia that the registration of
refugees in West Timor will take place on 1 May, but
this should be preceded - and I hope that this will get
back to the United Nations Transitional Administration
in East Timor (UNTAET) - by a comprehensive
information campaign in the camps so that they know
what is going on.

We are also encouraged by the initiative of
General da Costa to invite representatives from
UNTAET, the International Organization for Migration
and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees to join him on a visit to the
camps. But before any return to West Timor by the
international community can be contemplated, it is
essential that the Indonesian Government make further
serious efforts to improve security.

We welcome the progress being made by both
Indonesia and UNTAET in bringing to account those
responsible for crimes in East Timor, and we welcome
the decision taken by the Indonesian Parliament on 21
March to set in place arrangements for the
establishment of an ad hoc court for such trials. We
hope that that will be pursued as a matter of urgency
and that the question of extradition from Indonesia of
suspects in the crimes that we have been talking about
is also pursued, and not dropped.

After independence, East Timor will require
extensive international support, and a lot of us have
referred to that in this discussion. Comprehensive
planning for that from an early stage, with the full
participation of United Nations agencies, and drawing
on expertise both in the field and in New York, will be
essential for a successful transition to the post-
independence phase. We particularly look forward to
the Secretary-General's report on that aspect, to be
issued in the summer. But I would like to ask Mr.
Annabi whether progress is being made towards
establishing a proper, integrated mission task force for
that coordinated effort along the lines of the Brahimi
recommendations. We regard the Secretary-General as
being in a position to do that if he so decides, and we
would like him to move forward on that.

I am conscious that the one question that the
Assistant Secretary-General perhaps missed was about
information on women held in East Timor and West
Timor. There is actually some concern that, because
there are no agencies present on the ground, we are not
getting information about women being held and
abused in West Timor, and we would like UNTAET
and others to follow that up.

It goes without saying that the United Kingdom
will continue to support very strongly UNTAET's
efforts, and we wish nationally to pay tribute to
UNTAET for what is being done, and to Sergio Vieira
de Mello for his leadership.

The news about Xanana Gusmao's resignation is
of some concern - I agree with Ambassador
Mahbubani about this. We understand and respect his
decision to stand down. But in our View, it will be very
important for him to continue his valuable contribution
to national affairs in these early stages as we into East
Timorese independence, and we hope that that
contribution is not going to be lost to us.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I come back to Mr. Annabi to take up any final
points. If members of the Council wish to make any
brief comments or add a question or two at the end,
that will be possible. Then I shall sum up.

