Mrs. Gregoire-Van-Haaren (Netherlands): 1 thank
Uruguay for convening this debate on the protection of
civilians and health care in armed conflict. We welcome
the discussion on this issue, which requires our urgent
attention at the highest level.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the observer of the
European Union and with the statement delivered by
the representative of Switzerland on behalf of the Group
of Friends of the Protection of Civilians. In addition, I
would like to make the following remarks.

In his latest report on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict (S/2017/4l4), the Secretary-General
emphasizes three priority areas for improvement,
which the Netherlands fully supports. I would like to
focus on two of the three protection priorities. The first
is protecting the mission of humanitarian and medical
personnel and prioritizing the protection of civilians.
Despite the Security Council's unanimous adoption
last year of its landmark resolution 2286 (2016), we see
little change on the ground. We cannot condone attacks
on medical personnel and health infrastructure, notjust
because the safety of medical missions is at the heart
of humanitarian action, but also because it will more
generally erode respect for international humanitarian
law. We cannot allow attacks on health-care services
to become an accepted part of warfare. We, as Member
States, must put the recommendations of the Secretary-
General for the implementation of resolution 2286
(2016) into practice. And we should do more. Improved
and harmonized data collection will provide a factual
base for mechanisms such as the Security Council-
mandated Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism on
grave violations against children in armed conflict.

We are very worried about the direct and indirect
effects of the attacks on medical facilities in Yemen and
what they mean for the access to health care of Yemeni
children, who are currently facing a cholera epidemic
on top of severe malnutrition. An environment that
ensures the safe and unimpeded delivery of medical
care in armed conflict is vitally important. The
20 million people currently at risk of famine desperately
need rapid, unimpeded and sustained access to
humanitarian aid, which should be accorded in full
respect for humanitarian principles and international
humanitarian law.

That brings me to my second point, which is the
importance of ensuring that the parties to conflicts
strengthen their respect for international law. In
Syria, Yemen and other conflict situations, civilians
are more than ever becoming the victims of appalling
violence. In order to protect them, we urgently need
to improve respect for international humanitarian law,
and States should use their influence on the parties
involved in armed conflicts to protect civilians. States
should also engage constructively in the process
aimed at strengthening compliance with international
humanitarian law led by the International Committee of
the Red Cross and Switzerland. Ensuring accountability
for serious violations of international humanitarian
law is vital, and impunity is unacceptable, because it
ultimately helps to undermine the rule of law. Where
parties to a conflict persist with serious violations,
the Council should take decisive action to ensure
accountability, including through referral to the
International Criminal Court.

There is also a role for other actors. The Kingdom
of the Netherlands welcomes the General Assembly's
establishment of the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Those Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in Syria. We urge all Member States to support the
Mechanism financially and politically, since it can
play an important role in preventing impunity for
international crimes committed in Syria. We also
call on troop-contributing countries to endorse the
Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians in
peacekeeping operations.

In conclusion, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
would like to emphasize that it has deep respect and
appreciation for the work done by humanitarian workers
and medical staffin exceedingly difficult and dangerous
circumstances. We call on the international community,
the Security Council and individual countries to
implement the Secretary-General's recommendations
in his report on the protection of civilians in conflict.
As a partner for peace, justice and development, the
Kingdom of the Netherlands will continue to contribute
to that agenda, in close collaboration with Italy, other
Member States and relevant actors.

