Mr. Tshibanda (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): I should like at the outset to
congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for this month and to thank you
for your timely convening of this important meeting on
the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in this important year of my country's history. Through
you, I should also like to thank France, with which the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has close and long-
standing ties of mutual respect and esteem.

I wish to echo the unanimous praise of last
month's Colombian presidency of the Council, and to
express my personal gratitude for the zeal and
expertise with which the Colombian presidency
accomplished its tasks.

I further wish to pay tribute to Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon, whose introductory statement reflected
his tireless will to strive to build peace in my country.
We shall never be able to thank him enough for his
personal involvement in seeking a lasting solution to
the disruption of peace and international security that,
at a certain point in time, prevailed in the Democratic
3
Republic of the Congo, and for having spared no effort
to enable the universal Organization to help the young
Congolese democracy to blossom and the Congolese
people to attain their political and socio-economic
aspirations.

The United Nations engagement with the
Democratic Republic of the Congo dates back to July
1960 and is currently represented by the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
which replaced the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) almost a year ago. My presence here today
demonstrates the obvious importance that the
Congolese Government attaches to the support that my
country has received from the United Nations and the
international community.

Indeed, we believe that we are jointly responsible
for regular evaluations of the United Nations activities
in support of our Republic's Government in order to
ensure that they remain relevant to our objectives and
to the changing nature of the challenges we face, and
that our partnership becomes increasingly effective,
thereby enhancing the Organization's credibility. My
deepest wish is that the exchanges that we shall hold at
this meeting will allow us to forge a threefold
consensus between the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Security Council on the progress that
has been made towards normalizing the situation in my
country, on the obstacles that continue to impede that
normalization and that urgently require our joint
attention, and - on the basis of that dual
evaluation - on the United Nations future activities in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in particular
with respect to MONUSCO's mandate.

In our View, there is no better point of departure
for this exercise than the results achieved to date by the
joint assessment established pursuant to paragraph 7 of
resolution 1925 (2010). From that perspective, we
recall that resolution 1925 (2010) identified three main
objectives for the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and MONUSCO, with specific
results to be obtained for each objective. As the
Council will understand, there is no need for me to
remind those who adopted this resolution of its
objectives and the results expected for each of them.

In that context, the conclusions of the joint
assessment can be summarized today as follows. The
first objective concerns military operations and the
reduction of the threat posed by armed groups. First,
military operations as such have ended. Ongoing
efforts are aimed at neutralizing the last pockets of
resistance of roving, residual armed elements in order
to eliminate all threats to peace.

Secondly, operations led by the Forces armees de
la Republique democratique du Congo (FARDC), with
the support of MONUSCO, have drastically reduced
the operational capacities of armed groups. Those
groups now consist of six to 12 elements, the extent of
whose criminal activities nevertheless continues to
pose a threat to the security of the population in some
remote areas of the country.

Thirdly, an ever-decreasing number of areas
where security is still disturbed by the presence of
those roving, residual armed elements are viewed and
treated by both parties as sensitive and unstable.
Nevertheless, they are entirely under the control of
Government forces.

Fourthly, in their missions, the Government
forces often benefit from the logistical support
provided by MONUSCO.

The second objective concerns the means
available to the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to effectively protect the
population and gradually take over the security
functions of MONUSCO. In that regard, initiatives
have been taken to equip the country with increasingly
effective security forces. Within the FARDC, those
initiatives have involved the identification and
management of troops, the reorganization of troops
into regiments, the resumption of training for units and
the recycling of existing troops.

Regarding the Congolese national police, it is
worth recalling a number of points. First, training will
be provided for border police, who are to be deployed
from Kalemie to Ituri to assist border post services and
mitigate border porosity. Secondly, 400 elements from
the armed groups will be deployed once they have
received appropriate training in Kapalata, in Orientale
province. Thirdly, police officers will be recycled by
MONUSCO. Fourthly, a vote will be held on the
reform of the Congolese national police, the legislation
for which is soon to be enacted.

The third objective is to strengthen State
authority throughout the national territory by
11-34509
implementing civilian administration, which is the
guarantor of the rule of law. Here, we would recall
several points. First, the legitimate authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo control almost all
of the territory that had previously been controlled by
armed groups. However, some vestiges of the former
parallel administration of the Congres national pour la
defense du people remain in the territory of Masisi, as
do some of the Simba group in Maiko National Park.

Secondly, the Congolese national police are
present throughout the liberated territories, with the
exception of northern Dungu. However, their
effectiveness is constrained by the shortage of officers,
lack of logistical support and insufficient training of
staff.

Thirdly, the judicial system is playing an
increased role and its functioning continues to
improve. New prosecutors have been recruited, trained
and deployed in sensitive areas. Furthermore, in
provinces where abuses have occurred, military and
civilian circuit courts have been set up, with support
from MONUSCO, to resolve the problems created by
the distance of courts and tribunals from the areas
where crimes are committed.

Fourthly, unfortunately prison management in the
field is insufficient and, where it is present, there are
many deficiencies. For instance, infrastructure is
outdated and staff, resources and training are lacking.

This stark and objective evaluation is the
outcome of the joint actions undertaken by experts on
both sides - MONUSCO and the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Given the security
situation that prevailed in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo only two years ago, this assessment
provides ample grounds for satisfaction. Substantial
progress has indeed been made in reducing threats to
the security of our people and in improving the
conditions for the Government's takeover of security
responsibilities. In addition, with the normalization of
our relations with neighbouring States, we can
legitimately consider ourselves to have emerged from
the peacemaking and peacekeeping stages.

Nevertheless, significant challenges remain and
we do not seek to downplay them. They are, however,
more closely linked to the requirements for
peacebuilding, democracy, good governance and
building State capacities. In that way, the State will be
11-34509
able to more efficiently and effectively carry out its
national functions.

From that standpoint, the Government has set
itself a number of priorities for which we expect we the
support of the international community. First, the
organization of elections at the end of the current
Government's mandate will ensure that the Congolese
people can take charge of their own destiny.

Secondly, security sector reform involving the
army, the police, the judicial system and penal services
will be undertaken so as to guarantee the rights and
security of citizens, stabilize the country and the
region, and put an end to the impunity of those who are
found guilty of unspeakable crimes, such as the rape of
women and other massive human rights violations. The
Government's commitment to fighting those crimes
was recently highlighted by the lengthy prison
sentences handed down for crimes of rape committed
by numerous officials, including high-ranking army
and police officers.

Thirdly, efforts will be made to combat the illegal
exploitation of natural resources, which has
exacerbated the conflict in the eastern part of our
country and throughout the region, in particular by
implementing the instruments that were adopted to that
end at the Extraordinary Summit of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, held in Lusaka
last December.

Fourthly, capacity-building efforts will be made
for the public and territorial administrations with a
view to successfully implementing the country's
stabilization programmes. Those include the
Stabilization and Reconstruction Plan in Conflict-
Affected Areas of Eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo (STAREC), and the decentralization and
national reconstruction programmes commonly
referred to as the "five pillars of the Republic".

Fifthly, we will strengthen good-neighbourly
relations with all neighbouring States through dialogue
and the enhancement of regional cooperation, which is
the gauge of peace and stability both within the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and throughout the
region.

Turning to the elections, the Government is
determined to meet the challenge of holding them
peacefully, in keeping with the timetable established in
the Constitution and by guaranteeing the free and
democratic nature of the elections. To that end, we
have established the Independent National Electoral
Commission, which is the institution responsible under
the Constitution for organizing the elections. It consists
almost equally of representatives of the majority and of
the opposition.

Some other important developments have
improved the prospects for holding these elections.
Voter registration and review of the electoral rolls has
already begun. These operations are proceeding
normally in several provinces at once. After wide-
ranging consultations with political participants from
across the spectrum, the Electoral Commission has
published an overall electoral timetable, according to
which elections for the President of the Republic and
national deputies will be held on 28 November, and the
President-elect sworn in and inaugurated on 20
December. It is an eloquent indication of the
Commission's bipartisan nature that the timetable was
presented and explained on behalf of the Commission
by its Vice-Chairman, who represents the opposition,
not the majority.

Secondly, in evidence of the approval of the
timetable by almost the entire political class, important
opposition leaders confirmed their participation in the
forthcoming elections by registering after its
publication. In that regard, I note that the law
establishing the Supreme Council for Audiovisual and
Other Communications, which is mandated by the
Constitution with ensuring freedom of the press and
respect for ethics in the dissemination of information,
as well as equitable access for all political parties,
associations and citizens to official channels of
information and communication - a significant role
where elections are concerned 4 has been enacted, and
the Council itself will be established shortly.

Furthermore, despite its limited resources for
addressing the challenges of reconstruction in a post-
conflict country, the Government has committed to
covering 60 per cent of the total cost of the
elections - proof of its willingness to take ownership
of the process and its commitment to consolidating
democracy. It is clear that there is still a balance of 40
per cent needed to fully fund the election budget. I
reiterate the Government's appeal to the international
community to come to our aid in financing the gap. In
this regard, we have already submitted a request to the
United Nations for logistical support from
MONUSCO, since the size of our national territory,

coupled with the current sorry state of our
transportation infrastructure, is one of the main
potential obstacles to the smooth conduct of our
electoral operations. MONUC's assistance in this area
was crucial in 2006, as that of MONUSCO will also
undoubtedly be in the next elections. We would like to
express our gratitude for that assistance in advance.

That said, thanks to the technical assistance
coordinated by the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) that we have already received
from the international community, and drawing on the
practical experience of election organization in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo bequeathed to us
through the human resources of the Independent
Electoral Commission, the National Independent
Electoral Commission is equipped to conduct the entire
electoral operation, with the help of the Government
and the country's other institutions according to their
areas of competence.

Furthermore, unlike the situation in 2006, when
the nation was in the throes of armed conflict and the
authority of the State was almost non-existent in a
significant portion of the country, the security situation
is now stabilized virtually throughout the national
territory, and we have reached the end of a legislative
term characterized by institutions that function
smoothly, lively democratic debate and freedom of
expression. Beyond the intensity of the build-up to the
elections, we believe there is therefore nothing major
that can impede or derail the electoral process to the
point of requiring any contribution from MONUSCO
beyond its logistical support, or any further special
dispensation that would undermine the sovereignty of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

In this regard, as in everything else, we would
ask that, however essential it may be, all future
assistance from the United Nations, and MONUSCO in
particular, be conceived and organized in a way that
makes full use of the investments made by the
international community. In this way, we can end the
crisis of legitimacy, relaunch the economy and rebuild
a State in the Democratic Republic of the Congo - in
other words, capitalize and build on the remarkable if
still precarious results that we have achieved in this
area by working together in the past few years.

In that regard, and considering the evolution of
the security situation on the ground, we believe that the
time has come for us to launch together a transition
phase that will include a restructuring and
reconfiguration of MONUSCO and its mandate with a
view to an orderly and progressive yet steady
withdrawal of its military component, while taking into
account the recommendations of our respective experts
on the joint assessment team. As a responsible partner,
the Government assures the Council that it has no
intention of jeopardizing the consolidation of the
security situation under way. It believes rather that the
irreplaceable assistance of the United Nations should
be adapted to the new realities on the ground. To that
end, we will limit ourselves to the following
comments.

Regarding security sector reform, which is a top
priority for our Government, we have opted to focus
mainly on bilateral cooperation in the area of reform of
the armed forces. In this context, agreements have
already been negotiated with a number of friendly
countries and are in the process of being implemented.
We nonetheless count on MONUSCO for reform of the
national police force, with the immediate goal of
training national units needed to police the elections.

As regards judicial reform, the Government is
hoping for the support of the international community
for its efforts in the area of zero-tolerance policies that
seek to end impunity throughout the country. More
specifically, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
seeks significant support for establishing the joint
tribunals that were proposed in the mapping exercise
report so as to identify crimes committed during the
period covered by the report.

On the economic front, with the consolidation of
peace and improved employment and income
opportunities, especially among young people and
women, the fundamentals are generally good but still
fragile. In order to consolidate them and create the
conditions for strong, sustainable growth with shared
social benefits, the Government intends to pursue a
prudent fiscal policy, conservative management of the
public purse, development of basic social and
economic structures, and the structural reforms begun a
number of years ago with the assistance of the
International Monetary Fund, the World Bank and
UNDP. We also intend to improve the business climate,
particularly through legal and judicial security,
diversifying resources for growth and seeking greater
added value locally, especially by giving a greater role
to small and medium-sized businesses. As we pursue
this commitment, we call for assistance on the
development agencies referred to previously and other
agencies of the United Nations system that could help
us meet the Millennium Development Goals.

In this respect, the elements related to economic
recovery, social rehabilitation and insertion that are
part of the stabilization and reconstruction programmes
are particularly significant. These elements include
STAREC and the programme developed by the United
Nations country team aimed at ensuring consolidation
and development in the western and central regions,
which, while spared from conflict, still face the
consequences of the instability that is rife in the north
and east of the country. We therefore count on the
active involvement of the United Nations and the
international community in their financing and
implementation.

It is commonly acknowledged today that the
assistance provided to countries in post-conflict
situations, such as mine, must meet those countries'
priorities and real needs so that the population can
truly benefit from the peace dividends. The Democratic
Republic of the Congo acknowledges that it needs
lasting peace in order to efficiently and effectively
tackle the challenges of building an efficient State, a
State that is strong and prosperous, that respects the
rights of its citizens and that is able to meet their
needs. It therefore still expects a great deal from the
United Nations, which undeniably has the capacity to
help strengthen Congolese public institutions. We only
ask that we be able to shoulder, as responsible adults,
the prerogatives of our restored sovereignty.

The operative words, in the reflections that we
invite the Council to undertake on the future of our
cooperation, are "dialogue" and "partnership", based
on the principle of ownership for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and of subsidiarity when it
comes to the international community. To be effective,
we acknowledge that ownership requires strengthening
our national capacities. We are convinced that there is,
in this respect, a great deal of room for fruitful
cooperation.

