Mrs. Haley (United States of America): When I
first came to the United Nations two years ago, I was
a little taken aback by this monthly meeting. The fact
that the United Nations would consider the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict was not striking. After all, it is a
matter of international peace and security. What was
striking was the frequency and the one-sidedness of the
discussion.

Members of the Security Council have heard me say
this many times - the problems of the Middle East are
numerous, and yet we spend a vastly disproportionate
amount of time on just one of them. The United
Nations has shown itself to be hopelessly biased, as we
witnessed again only two weeks ago when the General
Assembly failed to condemn Hamas's terrorist activity
against Israel.

Over the past two years, I have attempted to
provide more value to this monthly meeting by using
my time to speak about other pressing problems in
the Middle East. I have spoken about Iran's illegal
weapons transfers and destabilizing support for
terrorism throughout the region. I have spoken about
the barbarism of the Al-Assad regime in Syria. I
have spoken about Hamas's illegal and diabolical
use of human shields. I have spoken about Hezbollah
jeopardizing the safety of the Lebanese people and its
violations of Israeli sovereignty, which have come to
light even more clearly in the past month. I have spoken
about Iraq, Yemen, refugees and humanitarian crises.

I have done that for two reasons. I have done it
to illustrate that most of the region's problems have
absolutely nothing to do with the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. I have also done it to encourage the United
Nations to move away from its obsession with Israel.
That obsession of the United Nations with the issue has
been entirely unproductive. In fact, worse than that,
it has been counterproductive. It has sent a loud and
false message to the Palestinians that they may perhaps
be able to achieve their goals by relying on the United
Nations rather than through direct negotiations. It has
sent a loud and accurate message to the Israelis that
they can never trust the United Nations. That biased
obsession is not the path to peace. It is the path to an
endless stalemate.

Today is the last time that I address this monthly
meeting as the United States Ambassador. For that
reason, I will deviate from my practice of the past
two years. Today, I will directly address the Israeli-
Palestinian issue. Given my record, some may
mistakenly conclude that I am unsympathetic towards
the Palestinian people. Nothing could be further from
the truth. This is how I see it.

Israel is a thriving, strong, prosperous country. It
has always wanted peace with its neighbours. It has
clearly demonstrated its willingness to make great
sacrifices for peace, including by giving up large areas
of land. But Israel will not make a peace agreement at
any price, and it should not do so. No United Nations
resolutions, anti-Semitic boycotts or terrorist threats
will ever change that. Throughout its existence, and
even today, Israel has been surrounded by threats to its
security. It would be foolish for it to make a deal that
weakened its security. Yet, even in the face of constant
threats, Israel has become one of the leading nations in
the world. Israel wants a peace agreement but it does
not need such an agreement.

Then there are the Palestinian people. Like the
Israelis, they are a deservedly proud people. They, too,
do not need to accept a peace agreement at any price. But
the condition of the Palestinian people is very different.
Economic opportunity, health care and even electricity
are all scarce in the Palestinian territories. Terrorists
rule much of the territory, undermining the safety of all
civilians. The Palestinian people suffer terribly, while
their leadership clings to 50-year-old demands that
have become only less and less realistic. What awaits
the Palestinian people with a peace agreement are the
prospects of a huge improvement in the quality oftheir
lives and far greater control over their political future.

It is time that we faced a difficult truth: both sides
would benefit greatly from a peace agreement, but the
Palestinians would benefit more and the Israelis would
risk more. With that backdrop in mind, the Trump
Administration has crafted its plan for peace between
Israel and the Palestinians. I do not expect anyone to
comment on a peace proposal that they have not read.
But I have read it, and I will share some thoughts on it
now.

Unlike previous attempts to address this conflict,
this plan is not just a few pages, containing unspecific
and unimaginative guidelines. It is much longer and
contains much more thoughtful detail. It brings new
elements to the discussion, taking advantage ofthe new
world of technology in which we live. It recognizes
that the realities on the ground in the Middle East
have changed in very powerful and important ways.
It embraces the reality that today, things that were
previously unthinkable can be done. This plan will be
different from all previous ones. The critical question
is whether the response will be any different. There are
things in the plan that every party will like, and there
are things in the plan that not all of them will like. That
is certainly true for the Israelis and the Palestinians,
but it is also true for every country in the world that
has taken an interest in this subject. Every country or
party will therefore have an important choice to make.
Council members can focus on the parts of the plan that
they dislike. For irresponsible parties, that would be
the easiest thing to do - simply reject the plan because
it does not satisfy all of their demands. Then we would
return to the failed status quo of the past 50 years, with
no prospects for change. Israel would continue to grow
and prosper. The Palestinian people would continue
to suffer, and innocent people on both sides would
continue to be killed.

Their other choice is to focus on the parts of the
plan that they do like and encourage negotiations to
move forward. And I can assure the Council that there
is a lot for both sides to like. Ultimately, as always,
the final decisions can be made only by the parties
themselves. Israelis and Palestinians will decide their
own futures. They will decide what sacrifices they
are willing to make, and they will need leaders with
real vision to do that. But my friends at the United
Nations, particularly my Arab and European brothers
and sisters, will also play a very important part. And
they will face the same choice. The choice between a
hopeful future that sheds the tired, old, and unrealistic
demands of the past, or a darker future that sticks with
the proven failed talking points of the past. The world
will be watching. More importantly, the Palestinians
and Israelis will be watching. Their response will be
affected by our response.

I have heard privately from many of my Arab
friends. They have said that they know that a solution
is urgently needed, but their Governments have not
been willing to talk to their constituencies about what
is realistic or to the Palestinian leaders about the harm
they are doing to their own people. By taking the easy
route, they are really saying that the Palestinian people
are not a priority for them, because if they were, they
would all be in a room helping to bring both sides to
the table.

As for the American people, we have demonstrated
time and again our commitment to peace in the Middle
East. We will continue to offer our hand in friendship
to the Palestinian people, whom we have supported
financially far more than any other country has done.
The Palestinians have everything to gain by engaging
in peace negotiations, but whatever others may decide,
the world must know that America will remain steadfast
in its support to Israel and its people and security. That
is an unshakeable bond between our two peoples, and
it is that bond, more than anything else, that makes
peace possible. My hope is that once I become an
outside observer - one who has invested much time
on this issue - we will no longer be having this same
conversation and hearing the same old speeches in
years to come.

