Mr. Lauber: I welcome the opportunity to brief
the Security Council on my first visit to Burundi in my
capacity as Chair of the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). The objective ofmy
visit is to establish direct contact with the Government
of Burundi and other key stakeholders to gain a first-
hand understanding of the current political situation
and to learn of the Government's plans on how to
address it. I am also exploring opportunities for the
future engagement of the PBC and the contributions
that the Commission could make to ease tensions.

Today was the first day of my visit, and I would
like to give a brief account of the meetings with
representatives of the Government, the United Nations
country team, the Special Envoy of the African
Union and members of the diplomatic community. I
had open and substantial discussions with the second
Vice-President of Burundi as well as with the Minister
of External Relations and International Cooperation.
Those talks focused on the security situation, efforts
to initiate the political dialogue among Burundians, the
socioeconomic situation of the country, and partnership
with regional and international actors. I encourage
the Government to intensify its engagement with the
international community, namely, with the East African
Community, the African Union, the European Union,
bilateral partners and, of course, the United Nations
system.

I also expressed the hope that the Government
would engage in an inclusive and genuine dialogue
process in order to restore trust among the Burundian
people. I encouraged my interlocutors to accept offers
of international assistance or de-escalation measures
such as the disarmament of armed groups. I also
expressed my concern about inflammatory rhetoric
that could incite hatred among different groups of
Burundian society. Both the second Vice-President
and the Minister reiterated the Government's interest
in continued cooperation with the PBC Burundi
configuration.

The continuing violence, insecurity and ongoing
human rights violations appear to be key concerns for
my United Nations interlocutors, who have highlighted
that the situation negatively impacts the operations
of the United Nations in Burundi. Let me express my
deep regrets over the deaths of two United Nations
staff members who have fallen victim to this violence
within the past three weeks. I should also like to seize
this opportunity to commend the work of the United
Nations team on the ground, which is working under
difficult circumstances.

Tomorrow and on Wednesday, I will meet with the
First Vice-President and the Minister of the Interior
of Burundi, as well as with different stakeholders,
including civil society actors, political parties, the
Inter-Burundian Dialogue Commission and the Truth
and Reconciliation Commission. I will also meet with
representatives of international financial institutions.
An audience with the President of the Republic is
scheduled for Wednesday.

As I continue consultations, I will reiterate my
appeal to all stakeholders to refrain from violence, both
physical and rhetorical. I will further discuss the impact
of the current situation on the economy of Burundi. Iwill
then continue my mission to Uganda, where I will meet
with the Minister of Defence, Mr. Crispus Kiyonga,
who has been charged by President Museveni with
facilitating the dialogue among Burundians mandated
by the East African Community. On Friday, I will meet
representatives of the Government of Tanzania, the
World Bank and the East African Community in Dar es
Salaam before returning to New York.

Upon my return to New York, I will prepare a
report that will outline, inter alia, peacebuilding
challenges emerging from the current situation, as well
as opportunities and priorities for the PBC engagement
in 2016. The report will be shared with the members
of the PBC Burundi configuration at the debriefing on
18 November, as well as with the Security Council, as
per established practice and in line with the advisory
role of the PBC. The report will also inform the work
plan for PBC engagement in Burundi in 2016.

