Mr. Gayama (Congo) (spoke in French): I, too,
should like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
organized this important debate on Timor-Leste at a
time when that country is approaching a historic
milestone: the holding of important elections in April. I
should also like, on behalf of my delegation, to
welcome Prime Minister Jose Ramos-Horta, whose
presence among us clearly reflects the expectations of
the people and the Government of Timor-Leste with
regard to this Security Council meeting. In addition,
we wish to thank Mr. Atul Khare, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Timor-
Leste, for presenting his excellent report (S/2007/50),
which shows the dedication with which he; his
predecessor, Ambassador Hasegawa; and all United
Nations personnel have worked to ensure the success
of the mandate of the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT).

Moreover, we wish to congratulate the people and
all the authorities of Timor-Leste, without whose spirit
of cooperation and responsibility peace would have
been jeopardized for the long term after last year's
incidents. Here, we should also thank once again the
countries contributing international security forces for
the resolute action and spirit of cooperation that they
continue to demonstrate in their relations with the
United Nations.

The Congo has always been among those that
have emphasized the need for a long-term commitment
to Timor-Leste, for reasons that touch on the principles
of international law, international humanitarian law and
solidarity aimed at preventing any threat to
international peace and security. Therefore, my
delegation would like to make several observations in
that regard.

First, the Congo welcomes the gradual
completion of the entire legal and organizational
framework related to the forthcoming elections. We
call for the establishment of a national electoral
commission, with the agreement of all parties involved
who are seriously committed to respecting the code of
conduct and all rules of the electoral process. With
respect to the holding of the elections, we also support
the inclusive participation of all actors in national life,
at all levels, in the positive steps being taken under the
auspices of the Dialogue Commission, and we
encourage the role of UNMIT in carrying out the
national reconciliation process.

Similarly, we urge the "Commission of Notables"
to find a satisfactory solution to meet the claims on the
table before the elections. The role of that structure is
both novel and well-adapted to the complex situation
in Timor-Leste. It will provide useful assistance to the
Government, which must urgently make every effort to
finalize the subsidy programme for former soldiers, on
the one hand, and ensure dialogue with the fugitive
former members of the military police, on the other.

However, it is clear that there is also a need to
appropriately build the confidence of the Timorese in
their judicial system. The joint implementation by
UNMIT and the Timorese Government of an
overarching strategic plan to rehabilitate the judicial
sector, as envisaged, should enable that sector to
restore its reputation by showing its readiness to
combat impunity and to interpret the law with an
abiding concern for justice for all.

While we note the importance of the
recommendations of the Independent Special
Commission of Inquiry, we also believe that no
obstacle must be allowed to prevent their
implementation or that of the plan to reform,
restructure and rebuild the security sector envisaged by
the Government, with UNMIT's assistance.

Those are just a few of the important steps that
must be taken to complete the progress made in the
security sector and to lead the people of Timor-
Leste - with full confidence and diversity of opinions,
but also in unity - towards the elections, which are
likely to ensure a stable and peaceful atmosphere for
the country.

Thus, while reaffirming our total faith in the
political maturity of the people of Timor-Leste, my
delegation believes that we must continue to assure
them of the support of UNMIT, whose mandate should
be extended for 12 months to build on the actions
undertaken, on the basis of the specific
recommendations made by the Secretary-General.
As the Secretary-General notes in his report, if
we are not careful, the upcoming elections could pose a
real challenge to national unity in Timor-Leste. That is

why my delegation supports strengthening the police,
as recommended by the Secretary-General, in order to
ensure security during the elections, even if it means
withdrawing a significant number of those elements
after the elections.

Finally, my delegation would like to emphasize
once again the need, after the elections, to persist in the
fight against the factors that are exacerbating the crisis,
such as unemployment and poverty. The
implementation of the compact between Timor-Leste
and the international community - with the support of
most of the international development agencies -
which we called for at the meeting held on 27 October
2006, will be a test for Timor-Leste, which has all the
assets it needs to develop and to acquire a status within
its reach: that of a democratic and prosperous nation.

