Mr. Bordyuzha (spoke in Russian): I should
like at the outset to thank the Russian delegation for
having convened today's meeting on such an important
issue as cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations in maintaining international
peace and security. We also thank Mr. Ban Ki-moon for
his statement.

The year 2017 will be marked for us by two
anniversaries: the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
signing, in Tashkent on 15 May 1992, of the Collective
Security Treaty, and the fifteenth anniversary since
the establishment, on the basis of that Treaty, the
Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO). In
that time, the CSTO has created a comprehensive legal
basis regulating the work of the organization in all
areas of its work, establishing the necessary political,
diplomatic, military, and human rights, and special
resources for ensuring the individual and collective
security of member States and counteracting traditional
and new threats.

In developing existing concepts of collective
security, in Yerevan in October we held a meeting of
the Council at which it adopted the CSTO collective
security strategy for 2025. One important area of our
work is coordinating with senior political officials of
member States and cooperating with other international
and regional organizations. We are extending our
working contacts with such international organizations
as the United Nations, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS), the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization (SCO) and other major international
structures.

We are strengthening CSTO forces. We now have
a joint CSTO force that, beyond bilateral and regional
groups, includes collective forces for rapid response, a
collective CSTO air force, a rapid-deployment force for
Central Asia and CSTO peacekeeping forces. We have
established and are improving our military-technical
and military-economic cooperation mechanisms with
member States.

In the area of response to security threats, the
efforts of CSTO members are focused on counteracting
international terrorism and extremism, illegal drug
trafficking, illegal migration, trafficking in persons,
and crime on the Internet. The effectiveness of these
CSTO special operations - including the Kanal
anti-narcotics programme, the anti-illegal migration
programme Nyelegal, the anti-cybercrime programme
Proxy and the Nayomnik programme, aimed at
preventing CSTO fighters from entering conflict
zones - has been recognized for its effectiveness.

Of particular importance in this year's work of
the CSTO is counteracting international terrorism.
We are extending our cooperation with national
anti-terrorist services. We are establishing a legal
framework for a common security space for member
States and undertaking joint efforts to adopt a plan
to implement the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy. In a recent meeting of the CSTO
Council, a mechanism - unique among international
organizations - was adopted for drawing up a single
list of terrorist and extremist organizations in the CSTO
format. In counter-terrorism, we are endowed with a
collective CSTO response force that is undergoing
extensive training to develop special forces. At our
initiative, in addition to cooperation with specialized
agencies of the United Nations, we coordinate with
anti-terrorist structures of OSCE, CIS and SCO.

As a result of the migration crisis in Europe, we
have adopted collective measures to enhance our fight
against illegal immigration. We have begun to monitor
migration flows from areas of armed conflict, mobilize
resources and train joint forces to work with internally
displaced persons. To increase the effectiveness of our
measures to counter crime on the Internet, for the past
three years we have had a consultaive coordination
centre to respond to cybercrime. As a follow-up to
the mechanism, our Heads of State have resolved to
create a CSTO crisis-response centre. We also intend to
establish a CTSO centre to coordinate with the United
Nations crisis response.

I note in particular that in all areas of our work,
CSTO works closely with United Nations structures.
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon gave an especially
important boost to cooperation between the
organizations when he paid a visit to CSTO headquarters
in 2011 and spoke to representatives of CSTO member
States. Relations with this important international
Organization are high-priority and constructive, as
set out in the memorandum of cooperation between
the CSTO and United Nations secretariats and the
recurring General Assembly resolution on cooperation
between the two organizations. It is also enshrined in
the observer status enjoyed by CSTO in the General
Assembly. When we met with Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon in Moscow and New York, we discussed the
need to enhance cooperation between CSTO and the
United Nations, and we hope for similarly intensive
and constructive dialogue with the Secretary-General
designate, Mr. Guterres.

We have always enjoyed high-level working
contacts among senior officials ofthe two organizations
and their participation in United Nations-CSTO events.
The CSTO secretariat works on such important areas as
counteracting international terrorism and extremism,
illegal drug trafficking and illegal immigration,
peacekeeping and a number of other areas related
to international security. We have had particularly
intensive cooperation with the United Nations,
including Special Representatives of the Secretary-
General, to resolve the situation in Afghanistan and
assess the situation in Central Asia. We have signed
a memorandum of cooperation with the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, which
includes information exchanges and regular high-level
contacts to assess our anti-terrorism efforts.
We are implementing a memorandum of
cooperation with the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC) and exchanging analyses and
information on the drug situation in the region under
CSTO responsibility. CSTO experts will participate in
the UNODC Podmena operation in Central Asia, aimed
at preventing precursors from reaching Afghanistan.
Representatives of UNODC take part in CSTO
operations. The information and teaching materials
prepared by the United Nations are used to train the
staff of counter-narcotics organizations of member
States.

We are also developing cooperation with regional
structures of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, whose representatives
regularly work with CSTO coordination structures. We
hold regular meetings with the leadership ofthe Regional
Office for the Caucasus, Central Asia and Ukraine and
the Office for the Coordination ofHumanitarian Affairs,
and regularly exchange information on emergency
situations. We have agreed a protocol between the
CSTO secretariat, the regional office of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, and regional
representations of the International Committee of the
Red Cross and the Red Crescent in Russia.

We traditionally enjoy high-level cooperation
between CSTO and the United Nations Regional
Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia.
We hold video-teleconferences and regular exchanges
of information on crises situations, and coordinate
joint activities. The Centre's leadership takes part
in many meetings with CSTO Ministers for Foreign
Affairs. We enjoy cooperation with the Monitoring
Team of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL
(Da'esh), Al-Qaida,and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities.

On the basis of memorandum of 28 May 2010,
our cooperation with the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations has intensified. With the Department's
methodological assistance, we train CSTO peacekeepers
and work is under way to establish a permanent police
stand-by force to deploy to peacekeeping operations,
including those under Security Council mandate. We
are completing the establishment of the legal basis to
regulate the work of the CSTO joint peacekeepers,
and preparing a road map up to 2025 that, following
agreement with the United Nations Secretariat, will
facilitate the establishment of preconditions for using
CSTO peacekeeping potential for United Nations
peacekeeping.

In conclusion, I wish once again to express
our readiness to cooperate closely with the United
Nations and to make proposals that we believe
would facilitate and strengthen cooperation between
CSTO and the Organization, with an emphasis on
practical components.

First, we wish to pursue the practice of holding
high-level regional meetings, under the auspices of
the United Nations Secretary-General, to exchange
information related to international security.

Secondly, we hope to coordinate joint efforts and
a mechanism for international cooperation based on
the potential of existing organizations, and to hold
meetings between the CSTO secretariat, the SCO
regional antiterrorist structure, the CIS anti-terrorist
centre, the Department of Transnational Threats and
Security Committee of the OSCE Permanent Council
and the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Committee,
which would promote closer interaction in thisarea.

Thirdly, we would like to see UNODC's cooperation
with regional and international security organizations
focusing on strengthening their coordination of joint
activity aimed at combating illegal drug trafficking and
creating an effective system for the rehabilitation and
re-socialization of drug addicts. We would also like to
see the leadership of UNODC hold frequent meetings
with senior officials of the regional and international
structures that specialize in issues related to combating
illegal drug trafficking.

