Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
The question of protecting civilians in armed conflict has
become increasingly relevant. Despite the international
community's efforts, such conflicts continue to bring death
and suffering to thousands of people, primarily civilians. A
significant number of these are children, women, the elderly
and refugees - in other words, particularly vulnerable
groups. Personnel providing humanitarian assistance
through the United Nations, the International Committee of
the Red Cross (ICRC) and other organizations are also
falling victim. Of course, the main responsibility for
protecting civilians in all circumstances is born by the
States and parties to an armed conflict. This must not
detract, however, from the importance of international
efforts in this area. There is a contribution to be made, in
the context of its task of maintaining international peace
and security, by the Security Council of the United Nations.

The 12 August marked a half-century since the
adoption of the Geneva Conventions on the protection of
victims of war. These marked a true milestone in the
development of international humanitarian law, the
foundation of which was laid 100 years ago by the first
Peace Conference at The Hague, convened on the initiative
of Russia.

Despite the fact that most States are parties to the
Geneva Conventions, the gulf between the provisions
contained therein and their implementation in times of
armed conflict remains, unfortunately, too wide.
Paramount is the need to strengthen the monitoring of
compliance with the norms of international humanitarian
law. An important role could be played here by the ICRC.
In our view, we should also study the question of
expanding the functions of the International Fact-Finding
Commission, as well as the question of convening, in the
framework of the Geneva Conventions, a committee to
review countries' implementation of their commitments.
This would allow us to mobilize the additional potential
of political and international legal resources to protect the
victims of armed conflict and to narrow the scope of
permissibility in the conduct of warfare. The world
community must not tolerate the practice of fomenting
armed conflict or the actions of those who deliberately
ignore international legal prescriptions to protect civilians
and who use violence and terror against civilians and
humanitarian personnel.

Russia, in the United Nations and at the regional
level - inter alia, in the context of the Commonwealth
of Independent States and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe - has frequently made
important humanitarian proposals. One such proposal was
on the need to establish a monitoring system whereby the
international community would evaluate and react quickly
to any violations of the norms of international
humanitarian law. We support efforts to further protect
identifiable groups of people, primarily children, during
armed conflict.

It is very important to ensure national and
international criminal prosecution of persons responsible
for war crimes and crimes against humanity. Ensuring
certain punishment for such crimes, on the basis of
fairness and without double standards, is the task of the
International Criminal Court. Last summer, Russia
supported the adoption of the Court's Statute.

The problem of protecting civilians in armed conflict
requires a comprehensive approach. That is precisely the
thrust of the Secretary-General's recommendations in his
report on this issue. Many of those recommendations are
consonant with Russian initiatives, including on the
establishment of humanitarian corridors and on taking
humanitarian constraints into consideration in the
imposition of sanctions. Also noteworthy is the idea that
the 1994 Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel should be supplemented by a
protocol to extend the scope of legal protection to all
related personnel. A positive role could be played by
including a mass-media component in peacekeeping

 

operations to prepare and disseminate information on
international humanitarian law and human rights. The other
recommendations of the Secretary-General also deserve
serious study.

Today's broad discussion and the decision which the
Security Council will take afterwards should lend additional
impetus to international efforts to protect civilians from
armed conflicts.

