Mr. Ward (Jamaica): We too wish to thank the
Secretary-General for his report and for his efforts,
through his Personal Envoy, to bring peace to Western
Sahara. Jamaica continues to believe that the settlement
plan can be implemented, and that it is important for
the referendum to be held as soon as possible. The
referendum is what Jamaica believes will provide
legitimacy for the process leading to the peaceful
resolution of this dispute.

The mandate given to the Personal Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Mr. James A. Baker III, in 1997
called for him to assess the implementability of the
plan, to examine ways of improving the chances of
resuming its implementation in the near future and, if
there were none, to advise on other possible ways of
moving the peace process forward.

The reports presented so far to the Security
Council indicate that there are divergences between the
parties. They make it quite clear that the expected
referendum will not take place any time soon.
However, the reports have not concretely assessed the
implementability of the plan. Nor have they been the
basis for a determination by the Security Council of
whether or not the plan is implementable.

It is against that background that Jamaica
believes that the current draft resolution seeking the
extension of the mandate of the United Nations
Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
(MINURSO) is not appropriate, because it implies that
there are doubts within the Security Council as to the
implementability of the settlement plan. Jamaica
believes that the draft resolution should be purely
technical and that any political provisions should be
left for a separate draft resolution after the Council has
received a report from the Personal Envoy.

Jamaica believes that the final phrase of
paragraph 1 - "and explore all ways and means to
achieve an early, durable and agreed resolution to their
dispute over Western Sahara" (S/2000/500) - could be
interpreted as a clear signal to the parties to the dispute
that the settlement plan might indeed be jettisoned
without the benefit of full compliance with the mandate
given to the Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General.
Jamaica welcomes the fact that paragraph 2 requests
the Secretary-General to provide an assessment of the
situation before the end of the present mandate. That
should be the report in which the assessment of
implementability is done, which would allow the
Security Council to advise on other possible ways of
moving the peace process forward should there be
agreement that the plan cannot be implemented.

This draft resolution, in suggesting ways and
means to move forward, implies a judgement prior to
hearing from the Secretary-General's Personal Envoy
and before there has been an opportunity to discuss his
report. The Security Council, by adopting this draft
resolution, will not be following its own mandated
procedure.

Jamaica reiterates its full support for the
settlement plan and for the extension of the mandate of
the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in
Western Sahara.
For the foregoing reasons, Jamaica will abstain in
the vote on the draft resolution before us.

