Mr. Ahmed (Bangladesh): Let me begin by
expressing our warm thanks to Mr. Hedi Annabi for his
comprehensive briefing on the situation in East Timor, and
here I would also request Mr. Annabi to convey my
delegation's sincerest appreciation and admiration to Mr.
Sergio de Mello and his team for the excellent work he has
done in East Timor.

Since our last briefing on the situation in East Timor,
there has been some significant development relating to
several issues on the island. First, with regard to the
deployment of civilian police monitors, we have noted with
satisfaction that the rate of deployment has picked up. It is
understood that over 1,100 civilian police officers have so
far been deployed out of an authorized total of 1,640.

Secondly, on the question of the return of refugees, we
commend the Government of Indonesia for extending the
deadline for the return of refugees by three months. We
also express appreciation for its decision to continue
humanitarian assistance to the refugees. One significant
event is the return of ex-combatants. Their return and
subsequent settling down in East Timor will be a process
indicative of how the issue of national reconciliation
would unfold. We believe that these returnees should be
provided safety and security, and the role of the National
Council of Timorese Resistance (CNRT) in ensuring this
will be critical. That in turn will, on the one hand,
convince others to return, and on the other, will augur
well for the establishment of the rule of law.

On the security situation, we welcome the agreement
signed between the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) and the
Government of Indonesia on improved coordination in the
border areas between East and West Timor. We believe
this agreement will stabilize the situation in those areas
and will have a salutary effect on cross-border incursions
and on the return of refugees. The joint inspection tour of
the border areas by the Indonesian army and the United
Nations peacekeeping command is a positive
development. It is also heartening to note that the general
law and order situation has improved. The establishment
of district advisory councils should provide UNTAET
with the opportunity to involve the local population in
various matters of governance, including law and order.
We welcome the decision to appoint as many women as
possible to these councils and, as on earlier occasions, we
strongly support this decision.

As regards civil and judicial administration, the
organization of the Public Service Commission and the
induction of East Timorese members, as well as the
continued training and appointment of judges, mark the
beginning of the transformation of UNTAET into the East
Timorese civil administration. We are of the opinion that
for the local population nothing would count more
towards achieving self-confidence and esteem than the
ownership of the nation-building efforts. We look forward
to the early activation of the judiciary in East Timor. We
are happy to note that UNTAET has started the
recruitment of prison personnel, which will go a long way
in establishing a criminal justice system in the territory.

With regard to the poverty and unemployment
situation, it is perhaps by far the most difficult problem
that UNTAET has faced. This issue has also very recently
generated heightened concern in the media, with the
potential of undoing all that has been achieved by
UNTAET. We urge everyone concerned to do their best
in helping the UNTAET administration address the issue
of poverty and unemployment. The centralized job bank
is an innovation that we trust will be able to make a dent
in the situation. We commend the clean-up projects

 

funded by the World Bank, the United Nations
Development Programme and the United States Agency for
International Development which will provide employment
in the short term and have a positive impact on health and
the environment.

Finally, looking ahead on the issue of national unity
and reconciliation, it is important that the East Timorese
population on both sides of the mental divide see
themselves as partners in progress. A process of national
reconciliation imbued with a sense of pragmatism, fairness
and justice would perhaps help them put the past behind
them. It is commendable that the CNRT has striven to keep
this aspect in mind. The judicial cooperation between
UNTAET and the Indonesian authorities will greatly
facilitate the investigation of human rights violations and
also instil a new realism in the minds of the people about
cooperation and mutuality of interests between Indonesia
and East Timor, for the present and the future as well.

