Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Ambassador Quinlan for his briefing
and commend him for his great efforts in promoting
the work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006).

China has always attached great importance to the
work of the Committee and will continue to cooperate
with its Chair and the relevant parties so that its work is
steadily carried out in a balanced and orderly way. China
has always believed that all parties are duty-bound to
implement the resolutions on sanctions against Iran
resolutely, accurately and comprehensively. However,
the sanctions are not an end in themselves. Both the
Committee and the Security Council should work
towards finding a diplomatic solution. We hope that,
in accordance with its mandate and the principles of
objectivity, fairness and pragmatism on the basis of clear
facts, concrete evidence and extensive consultations,
the Committee will continue to deal appropriately
with cases of alleged sanctions non-compliance. China
will continue to act on the basis of such principles
and actively participate in the Committee's work in a
responsible manner.

China commends the positive trend demonstrated
by the recent diplomatic efforts to resolve the issue
of Iran's nuclear programme. We appreciate the fact
that the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
has maintained consultations with Iran to clarify
outstanding nuclear issues so as to reach agreement
on relevant steps. Currently, the negotiations on a
comprehensive agreement have reached a critical stage.
At the recently concluded fifth round of talks, the six
countries and Iran conducted intensive negotiations on
the draft text of a final agreement and achieved clear
progress. An agreed draft text has been proposed on the
basis of the parties' various texts.

Although the parties still have many differences
regarding the draft text, the negotiations seek to narrow
those differences. China hopes that all parties will
cooperate on the basis of equality and mutual respect
and take into account each other's concerns so as to
move forward the negotiation process. The parties
should remain flexible and pragmatic in order to find
a solution.

The early and complete resolution of the Iranian
nuclear issue and the maintenance of the international
nuclear non-proliferation regime and peace and
stability in the Middle East are in the interest of the
entire international community. As always, China
stands ready to cooperate with all parties in actively
working towards a comprehensive agreement that
is fair, balanced, mutually beneficial and a win-win
result so as to play a constructive role in finding a
comprehensive, long-term and appropriate solution to
the Iranian issue.

