Mr. Lal (India): I thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this debate on an issue of serious concern
for the international community. We also thank the
briefers for their very significant input.

We welcome the adoption today of resolution
2325 (2016), which aims to enhance the architecture
of resolution 1540 (2004) by promoting its full
implementation through increased cooperation,
assistance, transparency and outreach mechanisms. The
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMD)
and their means of delivery to non- State actors continues
to constitute one of the biggest and most serious threats
to international peace and security today.

As a victim ofterrorism for more than three decades,
India is cognizant of the catastrophic dangers that the
transfer of WMDs to non-State actors and terrorists
could entail. It is imperative that the international
community come together to eliminate the risks related
to sensitive materials and technologies falling into the
hands of terrorists and non-State actors.

On its part, India is fully conscious of the
responsibilities that come with the possession of
advanced technologies and is committed to maintaining
effective law-based controls to prevent the transfer of
weapons of mass destruction to terrorist activities and
to maintain effective domestic controls to prevent WMD
proliferation. Through the years, India has enacted
effective laws and regulations and has institutionalized
an array of administrative mechanisms to prohibit
WMD access to non-State actors and terrorists. After
the adoption in 2004 of resolution 1540 (2004), India
took additional steps to further strengthen its existing
legislative and regulatory mechanism for exercising
control over WMDs and their means of delivery.

Meeting new proliferation challenges requires
new approaches for evolving a more cooperative and
consensual international security order that effectively
addresses genuine proliferation concerns and
differentiates between responsible States whose actions
strengthen non-proliferation and those that weaken the
realization of those objectives.

India is party to all 13 universal instruments
accepted as benchmarks for a State's commitments to
combat international terrorism. India welcomes the entry
into force of the 2005 amendment to the Convention on
the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material (CPPNM)
this year. Alongside the International Convention for
the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism and
resolution 1540 (2004), the amended CPPNM. would
strengthen the global nuclear security architecture and
enhance international cooperation and coordination.

As we continue efforts to achieve universal
adherence and reporting to those instruments, we must
not forget the urgent task of closing out negotiations on
a comprehensive convention on international terrorism
at the United Nations, which has been under discussion
since 1996. Such a delay hints at a lack of collective
will on an existentialist issue that has become the most
serious threat to world peace since 1945.

India's Global Centre for Nuclear Energy
Partnership has steadily strengthened its portfolio of
programmes and activities, with a particular focus
on nuclear security, and has conducted more than 30
international and regional programmes involving more
than 300 participants from approximately 30 countries.
In February 2017, India will host in New Delhi the
Implementation and Assessment Group meeting of the
Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism.

India has supported the general objectives of
resolution 1540 (2004). The resolution is in line with
the General Assembly resolution on measures to
prevent terrorists from gaining access to weapons of
mass destruction, which was initially presented by
India in 2002 and has been adopted by consensus every
year since then - and is currently being co-sponsored
by more than 70 Member States. That broad support
reflects the ongoing concerns of the international
community with respect to the risks posed by terrorists
gaining access to WMDs and sensitive materials
and technologies. The resolution enumerates a number
of measures at the national and international levels to
address that threat.

India has always expressed its readiness to offer
assistance to other countries in capacity-building and
in fulfilling their obligations under resolution 1540
(2004) and has organized several regional workshops
in that regard. The resolution has contributed to greater
awarenessamongStatesoftheneedforeffectivemeasures
at the national level to prevent terrorists and non-State
actors from gaining access to sensitive materials and
technologies. The monitoring of its implementation by
the Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) is facilitated by States reporting
their implementation measures.

Providing assistance and cooperation to States
that request it is a key element of the implementation
process. Such assistance programmes should be suited
to national or regional requirements.

We welcome the fact that resolution 2325 (2016),
adopted today, focuses on enhanced cooperation with
other terrorist sanction regimes and hope that it will
lead to strengthening international cooperation and
prevention mechanisms.

India has contributed to international efforts
in enhancing nuclear safety and security standards
through various United Nations initiatives. The
international community should continue to exercise
the utmost vigilance to prevent terrorist groups
from gaining access to WMDs and related materials
and technologies.

