Mr. Baja: I am pleased to present my report on
the two subsidiary bodies of the Security Council that I
have been honoured to chair: the sanctions Committee
on Somalia and the Working Group established
pursuant to resolution 1566 (2004).

Established on 24 April 1992 by virtue of
Security Council resolution 751 (1992), the sanctions
Committee on Somalia is today the oldest subsidiary
body of the Security Council. While the situation in
Somalia has been on the Council's agenda since that
time, the Council's attention to, and treatment of, the
arms embargo only began 10 years later. I have been
given the privilege of guiding the Committee for the
past two years, and I would like to make some
comments about the l4-year-old sanctions regime, and
about the working methods of the Committee in
general.

First, given the wide spectrum of divergent Views
I found regarding the continued relevance of the arms
embargo during my recent visit to the region, the
Security Council may need to consider reassessing the
sanctions regime. The inextricable link between the
arms embargo and the political process, particularly
when it concerns security inside the country, and the
practical considerations of implementing the regime,
suggest that more reflection and action are needed to
ensure that that component of the Council's strategy
for achieving stability and security in Somalia is
attuned to the present state of events. The lifting of
sanctions should, however, be based on political
judgement rather than on technical requirements for the
lifting of such sanctions.

Secondly, the engagement of neighbouring States
is essential for the effective implementation of the
arms embargo. The dialogue with Somalia's
neighbouring States initiated under my chairmanship,
through meetings with representatives of their missions
in New York and my recent visit to the region, has
provided the Committee with more access, information
and insight and has resulted in more cooperation and
commitment from those States. That should be
continued and enhanced. I am pleased to know that that
dialogue is now being emulated and institutionalized in
other subsidiary bodies of the Security Council.

Thirdly, the lack of capacity to enforce arms
embargoes remains a critical issue. Without sufficient
resources and capacities - which have not been
forthcoming from the international community -
enforcement becomes almost impossible. It may be
recalled that in the World Summit Outcome approved
in September, our leaders expressed their support for
strengthening State capacity to implement sanctions
provisions. Capacity-building will have to be addressed
very soon.

Fourthly, maintaining lively interaction between
the Committee and the Monitoring Group will greatly
facilitate the Committee's work. The Committee has
had to rely a great deal on the Working Group, which is
doing an excellent job, in the absence of a reporting
mechanism by Member States. In the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 751 (1992), the
innovation of regular communications from the
Monitoring Group, in the form of biweekly updates
from the field, has kept the Committee abreast on the
latest developments during the long periods between
regular reports.

In the coming months, the Security Council will
have to address a number of challenges: first, the
request by the Transitional Federal Government of
Somalia for exemption from the arms embargo to
enable it to form a credible police force; secondly, the
request for a similar exemption from the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development for its
trainers and observers; thirdly, the increasing piracy in
Somali waters and adjacent seas; and fourthly, the
growing fundamentalism in the country.

The Security Council working group established
under resolution 1566 (2004) is mandated to

"consider and submit recommendations to the
Council on practical measures to be imposed
upon individuals, groups or entities involved in or
associated with terrorist activities, other than
those designated by the Al-Qaida/Taliban
Sanctions Committee". (resolution 1566 (2004),
para. 9)

The resolution further requested the working group

"to consider the possibility of establishing an
international fund to compensate Victims of
terrorist acts and their families and submit its
recommendations to the Council". (ibid., para. 10)

Members of the working group conducted its
activities in two phases. The initial phase involved the
gathering of information, views and perspectives from
sources inside and outside the United Nations to assist
the working group in accomplishing its mandate. The
second phase was devoted to discussion and
consideration of the recommendations of the working
group to the Council.

A key strategy for the working group was to
maintain transparency and openness in its work.
Contributions from non-members of the Council were
welcomed and encouraged. More than 50 member
countries and non-members of the working group
submitted written proposals and ideas on how to
achieve the Group's mandate.

As part of its information-gathering phase, the
working group invited resource speakers to discuss
relevant topics. The working group benefited from the
experience and expertise of the resource speakers
covering practical, theoretical, legal and political
aspects of the work of the Security Council and other
international and regional bodies in counter-terrorism.

The working group noted that paragraphs 9 and
10 of resolution 1566 (2004) are indicative of the
themes that its efforts should focus on. In that light, the
working group agreed to explore possible
recommendations to the Security Council under three
broad headings: practical measures to be imposed
against individuals, groups or entities involved in or
associated with terrorist activities other than those
designated by the Al-Qaida/Taliban Sanctions
Committee; victims of terrorist acts; and scope of
application of the measures that could be adopted
under resolution 1566 (2004).

Under the rubric "practical measures", members
agreed to focus on the freezing of financial assets,
preventing movement, preventing the supply of arms,
strengthening prosecution and extradition, curtailing
recruitment and training, preventing public
provocation, and use of the Internet. On the issue of
victims, members agreed to discuss the support for
victims and the possible establishment of a
compensation fund for them. In the area of the scope of
application of the measures against terrorist
individuals, groups and entities other than those
designated by the Al-Qaida/Taliban Sanctions
Committee, members agreed to discuss the question of
establishing effective means to identify those
individuals, groups and entities.

As the President pointed out, the
recommendations of the working group to the Security
Council are contained in the group's report, which will
be circulated as an official document very soon. I hope
that the Council will have time to digest our
recommendations for any further action in the future.

Having submitted my report as Chairman of the
Somalia Sanctions Committee and the 1566 (2004)
working group, I would like to add a few comments as
the Philippines completes its two-year term on the
Security Council at the end of this month.

The Security Council spends most of its time in
managing internal conflicts. Its scope of action extends
from pre-conflict peacemaking through conflict
management to post-conflict peacebuilding. That
nation-building consumes more than half of the time
and attention of the Council and tends to diffuse its
focus from the more existential threats to international
peace and security, as a result of which real threats to
global security are being addressed through actors and
arrangements outside the Council. The establishment
of a peacebuilding commission could relieve the
Security Council of many economic, social and
humanitarian dimensions of security crises.

The Security Council mirrors power realities. The
unequal power structure gives rise to views of its
inability to act in an objective, consistent and credible
manner. To counter that perception, Security Council
actions must therefore not only be transparent and
accountable, but must be seen and heard to be so by the
international community. Some measures need to be
taken to ensure its effective and efficient functioning,
especially in informal consultations. The various
suggestions made at the December and June retreats of
the Council deserve consideration for implementation.

I hope the Council finds time to evaluate its own
practice and performance from time to time. It is
essential for an organization as important as the
Council to do so. No organization stays relevant unless
it learns to stay ahead of the game and is able to adjust
to paradigm shifts. There is a need for the Council to
assess itself and improve its structures and practices if
it is to serve the interests of the international
community.

The Council itself must have its own lessons
learned unit that would analyse and consider the
effectiveness of the measures it implements and the
practices and procedures it employs, particularly in the
area of sanctions and the mandates of the sanctions
committees and other subsidiary bodies of the Council.
Right now, there is no entity in the Council that does
such work, and that is a huge gap in making the
Council effective and efficient in fulfilling its mandate
under the United Nations Charter.

I would like to suggest a possible innovation in
the Council work starting next year. In my
observations, the subsidiary bodies of the Council have
worked in parallel, divided by an imaginary wall of
what members consider to be each group's mandate
from the Council. What happens is that each group
develops its own practice, finds solutions to its own
problems and essentially duplicates each other's efforts
and reinvents the wheel on similar, if not common, sets
of challenges. I think that a regular exchange of Views,
lessons learned and best practices among the various
chairs of the Council's subsidiary bodies will eliminate
wasteful duplication of effort and add synergy to the
overall cooperation among Council members in the
pursuit of its goals.

I propose that the chairs of the Council's
subsidiary bodies meet as a group on a regular basis to
share and sort out lessons learned and best practices
from each and by all of those bodies. Such meetings
could be enhanced by the resources of the Secretariat
and outside experts and observers to create a deeper
and systematic analytical framework and practical and
workable courses of action. I believe that a meeting of
that type could be held at least twice a year, either on
the side or as part of the biannual retreat held by the
Council in spring and fall every year. I hope that the
Council can consider that proposal for implementation
in the immediate future.

In that connection, civil society and non-
governmental organizations, as appropriate, could play
key supporting roles in ensuring that Security Council
resolutions and statements are not devalued by
remaining textual references in the archives of the
Council, or worse, by inattention from parties on the
ground.

It has been a rare privilege for the members of
my delegation and myself to serve on the Security
Council with so many able and outstanding colleagues.
There have been occasions when we have felt like the
husband who dutifully works his required hours and at
the end of the day rushes out of his office to catch the
five o'clock bus for home. One day, he misses the bus,
but, anxious to be home nevertheless, runs after it
hoping to catch it at the next stop. He misses the bus
again at the second stop, at the third stop and at the
fourth stop, but he keeps on running after it until he
finally reaches home. Out of breath, he profoundly
announces to his dear wife: "Honey, I missed the bus
but I kept on running after it till I reached home, and I
saved us $2". The loving wife, in her usual enigmatic
voice, says, "My poor darling, stupid husband - you
should have run after a taxi and saved us $10."

I would like to end by thanking the members of
the Somalia sanctions Committee and the 1556
Working Group for the constructive and positive
manner in which they approached their task. I thank
the secretariat - led by Mr. Gregor Boventer, who
acted as Secretary of both subsidiary bodies and who
lead a competent team composed of Ms. Anna
Frangipani-Campino and Mr. Tilo Stolz, Ms. Seok
Hoon Bodek, Ms. Vicky Aquino-Tiga, Ms. June Park,
Ms. Lesley Brough and Ms. Rosario Faraon - for their
support in ensuring that we work in a professional
atmosphere with comfortable facilities. And I am very
glad, Sir, to have ended our term under your presidency
and under the skill of British diplomacy.

