Mr. Hamer (Netherlands): I should like to thank
Mr. Annabi for introducing the report and for the
additional information he has provided.

While we are pleased to note that there have been
positive developments such as police restructuring and
judicial reform, we are disappointed at the lack of
progress in the political field. A draft electoral law was
presented to the Parliament twice, and twice lawmakers
could not agree on its passing.

My delegation finds it difficult to conceive of any
step towards further integration of Bosnia and
Herzegovina in international structures as long as the
Parliament fails to adopt an electoral law. Such a law is
a precondition for democratic processes to evolve.

Over the past four months, the international
community has witnessed the uncommon spectacle of a
Council of Ministers' coming close to being declared
unconstitutional. The efforts of the Constitutional Court
and of the Presidency notwithstanding, the problem
remains and a solution has not been found. The
Netherlands urges the parties concerned to engage in
meaningful cooperation and to show a willingness to
compromise in order to create common institutions and to
make them work.

 

We are pleased to note from Mr. Annabi's briefing
that there has been some long-overdue progress in the
implementation of the law of the State Border Service. Still,
relations with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) leave
room for improvement. They are impairing the willingness
of donor countries to assist Bosnia and Herzegovina. Under
the current circumstances, it is even uncertain that the
donor conference scheduled for the end of June by the
World Bank can take place as planned. Therefore, we urge
the parties to honour their countries' international
commitments, not least because this would facilitate
international efforts to assist Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The Netherlands is concerned about the current
strength of the Stabilization Force (SFOR). Its numbers
have reportedly already sunk below the lowest acceptable
level of 20,000 persons deployed. In the View of the
Netherlands, the deployment of SFOR contingents should
be kept at the mandated strength. In this context, I should
like to note that the Netherlands is not in favour of armed
contingents of the International Police Task Force (IPTF).

I have already noted that, under the prevailing
circumstances, it is difficult to conceive of steps towards
the further integration of Bosnia and Herzegovina into
international structures. My delegation strongly believes that
this process should be reversed and that active steps should
be taken towards the further integration of Bosnia and
Herzegovina into the concert of nations. Therefore, the
Netherlands supports the concept of a road-map, as
proposed by European Union (EU) Commissioner Patten
during his recent visit to Sarajevo. This road-map towards
a feasibility study may be a first step towards an eventual
stabilization and association agreement with the EU.

Finally, the Netherlands associates itself fully with the
statement to be made by Portugal, on behalf of the EU, as
a member of the Peace Implementation Council.

