Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Malaysian presidency and you, Mr. Minister,
for organizing this crucial debate, which comes at a
particularly busy time, both politically and emotionally,
in terms of the United Nations agenda. The challenges
identified by the Secretary-General in terms of the
protection of children in armed conflict, the abduction
of children by extremist groups and the recent
allegations of sexual abuse all call on us to solemnly
reaffirm today our commitment to the protection of
children.

I also wish to thank and commend the relentless
commitment of UNICEF, represented here by Ms. Yoka
Brandt, and the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, whose mandate is essential to improving
the situation of children in armed conflict. We must
all support her work and even strengthen it. Finally,
I would like to convey my gratitude to Ms. Eunice
Apio, from the Facilitation for Peace and Development
non-governmental organization, for her enlightening
and moving testimony on the abductions carried out by
the Lord's Resistance Army in Uganda. That testimony,
which is only a reflection of a tiny part of the reality
endured by the nearly 24,500 children abducted
since 2002, shows the added value of this debate and
especially the importance of resolution 2225 (2015),
which we have just adopted. It was high time to update
the United Nations child-protection mechanisms so as
to turn abductions into a criterion for inclusion in the
Secretary-General's black list. I wish to congratulate
Malaysia for its outstanding work on this issue.

The comprehensive United Nations mechanism for
the protection of children deserves our attention today.
Established in 2005 under the leadership of France,
that mechanism now consists of the Security Council's
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict, the
annual report of the Secretary-General, with its black
list, the mandate of his Special Representative and,
especially, a reporting and monitoring mechanism. It is
essential that the mechanism, which identifies violations
committed by the parties on the ground and provides
information for the Secretary-General's reports and
decisions, remain impartial and confidential. It is
important that the United Nations continue to ensure
the methodological effectiveness of the mechanism,
which cannot, of course, account for all the violations
committed in countries in conflict, but remains the
most effective tool to date for informing us about the six
grave violations of children's rights. We must therefore
defend the mechanism and, if necessary, reinforce and
improve it.

Indeed, the mechanism today covers Violations
committed by both Government forces and non-State
armed groups in what are still too many situations. Most
child recruitment and almost 96 per cent of abductions
are committed by non-State armed groups, which are
often difficult to access by the United Nations and
monitoring teams. States must therefore facilitate
the access of the United Nations in their territory in
order to engage non-State armed groups on children's
rights. That was the purpose of the open debate (see S/PV.7414) organized under the French presidency
on 25 March. It was also one of the main thrusts of
the non-paper that we developed on the basis of the
operational proposals of Member States. It is also the
thrust of the Paris Commitments and Paris Principles
on Children Associated with Armed Forces or Armed
Groups, which we call on all States to sign.

Among the non-State armed groups, violent
extremist and terrorist groups pose a special challenge
for the United Nations and the international community.
Unmoved by the black list and indifferent to sanctions,
groups such as Daesh in Iraq and Syria and Boko Haram
in West Africa continue to carry out mass crimes with
complete impunity. In that context, the fight against
terrorism is a necessary, albeit insufficient, response.

There is another even more powerful weapon
to fight Violent extremism, namely, education. It is
in schools and within families that the fight against
radicalization must be taught so as to prevent children
from joining voluntarily, or by force, non-State armed
groups. That is why France firmly condemns attacks
against schools.

France was especially committed to the inclusion
of such criteria as part of the path to blacklisting,
back in 2011. Pursuant to resolutions 1998 (2011) and
resolution 2143 (2014), France remains convinced that
the military occupation of schools should be avoided.
France has taken note of the Guidelines for Protecting
Schools and Universities from Military Use during
Armed Conflict, but regrets that they do not fully
reflect existing international humanitarian law, which
still represents the best protection for civilians and
children during conflict. The scale of the violations
of international humanitarian law today demonstrates
that it is that body oflaw that must be implemented and
respected by States in all circumstances.

I would like to end my statement with a case that
has struck at France's very heart and affected the
people of Central Africa and the United Nations as
a whole, namely, the allegations of sexual violence
committed against minors by foreign troops, including
French soldiers. France of course takes very seriously
those serious accusations. The French authorities have
reacted firmly and, as soon as they were informed of
the allegations, in late July 2014, immediately sought
justice. A judicial inquiry is under way. The French
authorities are determined to shed full light on the case,
in cooperation with the United Nations and the Central
African Republic. As the President of the Republic,
Mr. Francois Hollande, most vigorously underscored,
if the allegations are proved, his determination will
be unforgiving, with exemplary disciplinary action
imposed on those responsible, in addition to the
criminal response, which is under the authority of the
courts.

In that context, we hope that the Secretary-
General's decision to set up an independent external
review of the process by which the United Nations
deals with the allegations of sexual violence by foreign
troops in the Central African Republic will strengthen
the early-warning and response systems of the United
Nations in that regard.

Finally, in the name of truth and the fight against
impunity, my country fully backs the policy of due
diligence with respect to foreign troops and the zero-
tolerance policy in cases of sexual abuse involving the
United Nations. I reiterate that France considers the
implementation of those policies a top political priority.
More than ever before, we owe that not only to the
victims, but to all of those that are fighting every day
on behalf of the protection of children.

