Mrs. Nakamitsu: I thank you, Sir, for the
invitation to brief the Security Council on the incident
in Salisbury, in the United Kingdom, on 4 March 2018.
As I have no independent information on this issue, I
will be conveying information kindly provided by the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW).

The Council has met previously to discuss the
4 March incident in Salisbury involving a toxic
chemical - allegedly a nerve agent - and the poisoning
and hospitalization of three individuals as a result. As the
Council is therefore aware, and as part ofits response to
this incident, the United Kingdom requested technical
assistance from the OPCW Technical Secretariat under
article VIII of the Chemical Weapons Convention,
which states that the Technical Secretariat shall provide
technical assistance and technical evaluation to States
parties in the implementation of the provisions of the
Convention, including evaluation of scheduled and
unscheduled chemicals.

Accordingly, the OPCW Director-General decided
to dispatch a team to the United Kingdom for a technical
assistance visit. The technical assistance team deployed
to the United Kingdom on 19 March for predeployment
and from 21 to 23 March for full deployment. In the
course of its work, the team received information on
the medical conditions of the three individuals affected
and collected blood samples from those individuals,
under full chain of custody, for delivery to the OPCW
laboratory and subsequent analysis by OPCW-
designated laboratories.

In addition to those activities, the team conducted
on-site collection of environmental samples, again
under full chain of custody. The team also requested,
and received, splits of samples taken by British
authorities for comparative purposes and to verify the
analysis of the United Kingdom. The team was briefed
on the toxic chemical that had been identified by the
United Kingdom. It reviewed the analytical results and
data from chemical analysis of biomedical samples
collected by the United Kingdom authorities from the
affected individuals and of environmental samples
collected on site.

The OPCW has since stated that the results of the
analysis of biomedical samples conducted by OPCW-
designated laboratories demonstrate the exposure of
the three affected individuals to that toxic chemical. In
addition, the results of the analysis of environmental
samples conducted by OPCW-designated laboratories
demonstrate the presence of the toxic chemical in the
samples. Finally, the results of the analysis by the
OPCW-designated laboratories of the environmental
and biomedical samples collected by the team of the
OPCW technical assistance visit confirm the findings
of the United Kingdom relating to the identity of the
toxic chemical that was used in Salisbury on 4 March.
The technical assistance visit team noted that the toxic
chemical in question was of high purity.

Based on the results of the sample analysis by four
OPCW-designated laboratories, the OPCW Technical
Secretariat prepared a report containing and elaborating
on the information that I have just shared. On 12 April,
that report was transmitted to the United Kingdom and,
at the request of the United Kingdom, to all other States
parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention. The
OPCW has also prepared and made publicly available a
summary of the report.

Speaking at a meeting of the OPCW Executive
Council today, the Director-General underscored that
the reliability and technical capabilities of the OPCW-
designated laboratories have been subject to close and
rigorous scrutiny over the years. He added that the
States parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention
can be assured of the credibility and integrity of that
network. He further noted that the work of the technical
assistance visit in relation to the incident was carried out
by the OPCW independently without the involvement
or support of other States parties and that it was not part
of the United Kingdom's own internal investigation.

The Secretary-General has expressed his deep
concern about the assessment that a nerve agent was
employed in a targeted manner aimed at inflicting
harm or death. On many occasions, the Secretary-
General has also expressed his support for the work of
the OPCW. In that regard, he welcomed the request of
the United Kingdom to independently verify the toxic
chemical that was used in the incident. The use ofnerve
agents - or any other chemical weapons - by any
party under any circumstances is unacceptable and is a
serious violation of international law.

