Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg would like to thank Rwanda for
organizing this briefing during its presidency of the
Security Council on a topic of great importance, that
is, "Prevention of conflicts in Africa: addressing the
root causes". We are honoured to have you, Madam
President, presiding personally over this meeting.

The conflicts that unfortunately destabilize certain
parts of the African continent engender devastating
violence, which has resulted in systematic violations
of human rights, including those of women and
children, large-scale sexual violence, massive internal
displacement, worsening humanitarian crises and the
destruction of infrastructure. Those conflicts bring
socioeconomic development and poverty eradication
efforts to a brutal halt. It is a fact that violent conflict
constitutes one of the principal obstacles to the
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals. It
prevents millions of individuals from living in dignity.

In that context, it is up to the Security Council,
which bears the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, and
to the whole United Nations system to strengthen their
efforts, in harmony with the African Union, regional
organizations and African States, to prevent conflict in
Africa by tackling its root causes, thereby contributing
to ensuring lasting peace.

For our part, we would like to emphasize certain
root causes that in general constitute triggers and
drivers of conflict. We also wish to underline elements
ofa response before addressing two specific cases: the
Sahel region and the Great Lakes region.

It is the primary responsibility of States to prevent
conflict. We therefore believe that there is a need to pay
renewed attention to models of governance, including
economic governance, and to the paths of democracy,
as well as to the strengthening of State institutions that
have legitimacy and competence, which improve the
security and socioeconomic well-being of all citizens.

Certainly there is no single model of governance,
but to prevent conflicts, to promote peace and to lay
the groundwork for sustainable development in Africa,
it is important to put in place an inclusive political
and economic governance that allows for an equitable
redistribution of wealth, guarantees all citizens better
social protection and gives priority to the creation
of decent work, especially jobs for young people.
In certain cases, the illegal exploitation of natural
resources and the absence of land rights constitute a
trigger for conflict. We believe that particular attention
should be given to the transparent management of
natural resources and of the revenue those resources
generate for State budgets.

Luxembourg's experience in the context of the
Peacebuilding Commission strengthens our conviction
that such a holistic approach - which links sustainable
socioeconomic development, peacebuilding and
security and the promotion of human rights and the
rule of law - is indispensable to prevent a relapse
into conflict and violence. In that context, security and
defence sector reform, in a spirit of national ownership,
is of particular importance. Peacebuilding and
State-building aim at renewing the social contract and
at building trust between a State and its citizens, with

a view to building the foundations ofajust, prosperous
and peaceful society.

The fight against impunity for the most serious
crimes is an important element of conflict prevention.
There can be no lasting peace without justice. The
pursuit of justice and the quest for peace are not
mutually exclusive, but complementary. National
criminal justice systems, which also represent a key
link in transitional justice, constitute the first line of
defence against impunity. In a complementary fashion,
the International Criminal Court plays a crucial role in
bringing to an end the most serious crimes - the crimes
of genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes and,
in the future, the crime of aggression. The deterrent
effect of the Court's mere existence enables the
bolstering of conflict prevention. We regret, therefore,
that it was not possible to include an explicit reference
to the International Criminal Court in the draft
presidential statement that we will adopt in the context
of this meeting.

Since the 2005 World Summit, Luxembourg has
supported the elaboration and the implementation
of the principle of the responsibility to protect, so as
to avoid the recurrence of crimes against humanity,
notably genocide, like those committed during the last
century in Europe, as well as in Rwanda. We owe it
to the memory of the millions of victims of crimes of
the past to refine that principle together, as the United
Nations. We welcome the fact that the principle is
clearly reflected in the draft presidential statement.

We would like to underline the importance of
partnerships and cooperation among the Security
Council, the African Union and subregional
organizations in the area of conflict prevention.
Luxembourg supports efforts undertaken to develop the
partnership between the European Union and Africa in
that context. The European Union has provided more
than €50 million to support the operationalization of
the African Peace and Security Architecture. Those
resources allow for a strengthening of the capacities of
the African Union Commission and of the subregional
organizations, notably the mechanism of the Continental
Early Warning System, the Panel of the Wise and the
African Standby Force.

The regional dimension of conflict prevention has
rightly received increased attention in recent years. In the
case of the Sahel region, the multifaceted crisis, which
led Mali to the edge of the precipice at the beginning of
this year, should come as a lesson. It is now more urgent

than ever to define an integrated strategy for the Sahel
region that would make it possible to prevent conflict
for all States in the region in a lasting way. Ultimately,
it could also be useful for the United Nations to define
an integrated strategy for the Horn of Africa.

In the case of the Great Lakes region, we welcome
the signing, on 24 February, of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region. The signing of this
framework agreement represents a unique opportunity
to break the cycle of violence and to tackle the root
causes of the conflict by stressing regional cooperation,
including terms of trade. For the framework agreement
not to end up like the regional agreements of 2004 and
2006, which have remained dead letters, all signatories
will have to fulfil their part of the bargain, and the
international community must fully support them.

In conclusion, I should like to underline that
Luxembourg's commitment in Africa bears witness
to our conviction that we need to adopt a holistic
and multidimensional approach that encompasses
conflict prevention, the consolidation of peace and the
maintenance of international peace and security. Such
an approach would recognize the intrinsic link between
security and development, two objectives that can be
achieved only through respect for and the protection of
human rights and the rule of law.

