Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): First
of all, I would like to welcome the presence of the
President of Serbia, Mr. Aleksandar Vucie, who is in
attendance and has spoken at this meeting. I thank the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, for his briefing. I also carefully
listened to the statement by Mr. Hashim Thaci.

China has been closely following the Kosovo issue
and has noted the complex dynamics at play in Kosovo's
current security situation. Resolution 1244 (1999) is an
important legal basis for settling the Kosovo issue. It is
China's consistent position that the parties reaching a
mutually acceptable solution through dialogue within
the framework of the relevant Council resolutions is the
best approach to a solution to the Kosovo issue. The
parties concerned should refrain from any rhetoric or
action that could complicate or escalate the situation
and should create enabling conditions for a lasting
solution to the Kosovo issue.

China respects Serbia's sovereignty and territorial
integrity, understands Serbia's legitimate concerns
about the Kosovo issue and commends Serbia's efforts
to find a political solution to the matter. China hopes
that the parties concerned will continue their pragmatic,
constructive dialogue, remain firmly committed to a
political solution, implement the agreements reached,
gradually enhance mutual trust, meet each other
halfway and continue to build consensus with an eye to
a lasting solution that is acceptable to all parties.

Tolerance, reconciliation and harmonious
coexistence among all ethnic groups in Kosovo are in
line with the fundamental interests and development
needs of all the populations. We hope all the parties
concerned will put the well-being of the people first,
protect the legitimate rights and interests of all ethnic
groups, promote their economic and social development
and jointly safeguard peace, stability and prosperity in
the Balkans.

The Security Council should remain seized of the
Kosovo issue and encourage the parties concerned to
engage in genuine dialogue in good faith so we can
continue to play a constructive role in the search for a
proper solution to the Kosovo issue.

