Mr. Gonzalez Parra (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, I thank you, Sir, and the Kingdom
of the Netherlands for convening this open debate of
the Security Council on the topic of collective action to
improve United Nations peacekeeping operations.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

As the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia,
Ms. Maria Angela Holguin Cue'llar, stated during a
debate on the reform of peace operations in September
2017, we in Colombia believe that the time has come
to ensure that United Nations peacekeeping operations
effectively respond to the pressing challenges that they
face in a world of changing threats. In that regard, I
would like to take this opportunity to reiterate our
support for the concept of sustaining peace advocated for
by the Secretary General. We understand the reference
to "collective action" in the concept note (S/2018/184, annex) for this debate as a call for findings synergies
in the implementation of that important concept. We
believe that reconfiguring the peace and security pillar
constitutes a crucial step in the transition from words
to actions. As the concept note aptly points out, that
concept is a shared responsibility of all stakeholders:
host nations, regional organizations, States Members,
including troop- and police-contributing countries,
and, of course, the Secretariat and the Security Council.

My delegation agrees with the concept note's View
concerning the need for those actors to conceive of
their contributions in terms of precise and strategic
goals and a concrete perception of the outcomes to be
achieved on a case-by-case basis. Such collaborative
work cannot be limited to situational challenges, but
must constantly strive to satisfying the greatest of
aspirations - achieving peace - including through
strengthening national capacity and fostering the
conditions that enable countries to confront their
challenges independently, as well as to foster the
development and well-being of their people. The
Secretary-General raised the issue with the greatest
clarity when he stated earlier today,

"Put simply, peace operations cannot succeed if
they are deployed instead of a political solution
rather than in support of one".

The groundwork has already been laid with
important contributions, among which I would like to
highlight the report of the Advisory Group of Experts
on the Review of the Peacebuilding Architecture
(see S/2015/490), which rightly calls for overcoming
fragmentation in the implementation of mandates.
Moreover, the report of the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) reminds
us that peacekeeping operations must maintain their
focus on people. Those assessments, together with
ideas on how to move forward, are judiciously reflected
in the report (S/2018/43) of the Secretary-General
on peacebuilding and sustaining peace, which has
provided us with proposals to make the United Nations
effective in one of its fundamental mandates set out
in the Charter of the United Nations. We are also
encouraged by the draft report ofthe Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations for this year, as it calls for
avoiding fragmentation and emphasizes an aspect that
we consider crucial both for the effective deployment
and successful completion of a mission. First of all, it
allows us confront the long-standing absence of women
in peacekeeping operations. Women represent only
4.7 per cent of military experts in the field and 3.2 per
cent of troops. The level of representation of women
within the United Nations police is also low - only
16.9 per cent of its members are female. Secondly,
it is essential to provide added value to individual
experiences on the ground in terms of what does and
does not work and how to achieve better outcomes when
we consider the specific conditions of every particular
situation. For there is no magic formula that can be
applied to every situation.

Colombia has not only participated as a
police-contributing country in the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti since 2006, in which we
have lent support to areas such as technical advice in
intelligence, the judicial police, anti-narcotics efforts
and community policing, as well as training their own
forces - an undertaking to which we will continue to
contribute together with the United Nations Mission for
Justice Support in this new phase - but we have also
begun - thanks to the commitment of President Juan
Manuel Santos Calderon - the process of contributing

personnel to other places, including our presence today
in the Central African Republic, Lebanon and Guinea
Bissau. Our goal is to strengthen training and increase
the number of Colombian police and military personnel
in peacekeeping operations. My country believes
that participation in that process is an unavoidable
responsibility as a Member of the United Nations and
as a nation committed to peace.

