Mr. Burian: I have the honour to brief the
Security Council on the activities undertaken by the
1540 Committee since 4 January 2006, when I was
appointed Chairman of the 1540 Committee, and to
introduce the Committee's fourth programme of work,
covering the period 1 January to 28 April 2006.

The main task ahead of the Committee is to
complete by 31 March 2006 the examination of
additional information provided by States in response
to the letters addressed to them by the Committee in
the second part of last year. During this period, the
Committee and its experts will continue engaging in
informal interaction with the Missions in New York
and the designated Points of Contact in capitals in
order to clarify, where necessary, any issue arising
from their correspondence with the 1540 Committee, in
particular on the issues related to national reports.

The examination of national reports is an
important part of monitoring States' efforts to
implement resolution 1540 (2004). The outcome of this
process will be addressed in the report on the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) that the
Committee has to submit to the Security Council by 28
April 2006. In this regard, I would like to inform the
Council that 64 States have provided information
additional to their first reports. All of that data, as well
as any incoming first reports, will continue to be
processed by the Committee.

In order to deepen its knowledge about States'
efforts to implement resolution 1540 (2004), the
Committee decided to use information offered by
States to build a database to bring together information
about States' legislation in one place. I am very pleased
to announce today that the database has been finalized.
It contains links to public sources of information about
legislative and other regulatory measures relevant to
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) from
States that have reported to the Committee.

The database is constructed on the basis of
information provided by those States in their reports
submitted to the 1540 Committee, as well as on the
basis of other relevant information that States have
made public on their governmental websites or
provided to international and regional organizations.

In the spirit of transparency, the Committee will
share the database with States and seek their comments
and consent to make public the information the
database contains about their legislation. The
Committee intends to place the database on its official
website. It may be used as background data by
countries seeking a legislative reference or information
in their efforts aimed at establishing, developing,
reviewing and maintaining appropriate effective
legislation, in accordance with their national
procedures, to implement resolution 1540 (2004).

The facilitation of further reporting and the
conduct of outreach activities remain at the top of our
agenda. Without all countries reporting, as the Council
has called upon them to do, the Committee cannot
provide a holistic and truly comprehensive report to
enable the Security Council to assess the progress all
Member States have made in implementing the
resolution.

As of today, 67 Member States have yet to submit
any report. I would like to call again on those who
have not yet done so to submit their first reports
without further delay. While the Committee would
appreciate receiving further first reports at any time, it
will be difficult to include, in the Committee's report to
the Security Council, information submitted late.

Reporting is the best tool to allow the Committee
to account for States' implementation efforts and to
promote assistance for those who encounter reporting
or implementation difficulties. The Committee
recognizes that full implementation of the resolution
will be a long-term undertaking that needs continuous
dialogue and coordination.

The fact is that all States are vulnerable to being
used by non-State actors who might want to gain
access to weapons of mass destruction and their means
of delivery. The best defence is for States to implement
resolution 1540 (2004) in full by, for instance, enacting
and enforcing effective national legal and regulatory
measures. Otherwise, others could decide that their
territories may be used for the shipping or other transit
of weapons of mass destruction and related materials,
for financing illegal activities or as a safe haven to
broker the sale of materials related to weapons of mass
destruction.

The Committee will continue to raise the issue of
further reporting and to promote the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) through outreach activities. I
will continue to approach, formally and informally, all
countries that have yet to report. In the coming days, I
will send a new reminder to their respective Missions
in New York, and I will also continue the practice of
reaching out to the members of all regional groups in
New York. I have already planned to meet the States
members of the African Group next month. Informal
interaction with other regional groups will follow.

The Committee, with the support of Member
States and the Department for Disarmament Affairs of
the Secretariat, will continue its outreach activities on
the basis of existing financial resources. Seminars and
workshops aimed at raising awareness of proliferation
problems worldwide, facilitating further reporting and
advancing the implementation process are useful tools
for helping us to succeed in our work.

The three Committees consider the issues of
improving reporting and late submission in a
coordinated manner. We are making use of country
visits by the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) in order to raise the issue of reporting with the
States that those bodies visit.

As the examination process of national reports
continues, the Committee will interact and cooperate,
as appropriate, with relevant international, regional and
subregional organizations in order to facilitate the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). Working
relationships with those organizations are being
developed, as appropriate.

The 1540 Committee will maintain close
cooperation with the CTC and the 1267 Committee, as
envisaged in resolution 1566 (2004) and the relevant
statements by Security Council Presidents adopted
during joint briefings in 2005. The Committee's
experts work closely with their colleagues from the
other Committees, making every effort to maximize
synergies between and among the experts of those
three Committees.

Transparency remains a priority for our work.
The Chairman and the Vice-Chairmen will reach out on
a regular basis to Member States. That will include
work with the United Nations media, including through
joint briefings with the Chairmen of the CTC and the
1267 Committee. The Committee will keep updating
its dedicated website as a source of information on
issues related to resolution 1540 (2004).

Within existing resources, the Committee will
continue its practice of informing organizations outside
the United Nations about its work by attending
meetings and conferences. I will make full use of such
opportunities to address, in particular, the issues of
reporting and implementation.
In further examining the first reports and
additional information from States, the Committee will
collect up-to-date information on matters relating to
assistance in order to contribute to the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). I will continue to request
States to update the information already provided to
the Committee regarding their points of contact and
States that have yet to do so to designate points of
contact on assistance and to inform the Committee in
that regard.

As I mentioned earlier, full implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) by all States is a long-term
objective that goes beyond the current mandate of the
Committee. As the end of the current mandate is
approaching, the Committee is engaged in considering
how best to continue its work to provide an enduring
contribution to ensuring the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction, their means of delivery
and related materials. On behalf of the Committee, I
look forward to the cooperation of all States as the
Committee goes forward with its work.

In conclusion, I would like to express my thanks
and appreciation to Committee members for their
contribution and to the group of experts of the
Committee, as well as Secretariat staff, for their
valuable support and efforts to promote and advance
the agenda of the 1540 Committee.

