Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): Let me join the previous
speakers in thanking the Republic of Korea for
convening this open debate under its presidency. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General, the
High Commissioner for Human Rights, the Assistant
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and the
Director of the International Committee of the Red
Cross for their helpful statements.

The Sri Lanka delegation associates itself with
the statement delivered on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement by the delegation of the Islamic Republic of
Iran.
The concerns highlighted by the Secretary-General
and the five core Challenges identified for the protection
of civilians in armed conflict continue to demand our
serious attention. Similarly, gender-based violence,
including sexual violence, deliberate and collateral
attacks on children, schools, health-care facilities
and the denial of humanitarian access to trapped
populations, inter alia, are a disturbing backdrop to
conflict situations, as has been the case for centuries.
That is nothing new. The history of conflict, invasions
and revolution contains a litany of violence against
women, children and the vulnerable.

Today, the safety and security of humanitarian
personnel has also become an increasing concern. Our
discussion must take all these angles into account. If
not, its value will diminish.

Just as the abuse of women and children in conflict
situations has been widespread, in post-conflict
environments also the challenges faced by women and
children remain formidable. Civilization's superficial
veneer is often shattered by the base violence that is
unleashed on the most vulnerable in conflict situations.
Conflict often dislocates families, shatters livelihoods
and also leads to sole-breadwinner situations, with the
resulting negative consequences. Mothers are often
made single as the result of conflict, and, in some cases,
this increases vulnerability to sexual harassment,
exploitation and violence. We also should not forget
the sad reality of child soldiers - children who have
been brutally deprived of their childhood and who have
been used to commit the most appalling acts of violence
against family and community. To an increasing extent,
the violence is unleashed by returned service personnel
on those who are closest to them.

It would seem that the status of civilians in conflict

situations in 2012 has not qualitatively changed, despite
the concerted efforts made by the United Nations and
the Security Council in particular. The slow pace of
change underlines the reality that the task of protection
cannot be addressed only in theoretical terms or by
relying solely on established standards. It requires an
understanding of a multiplicity of different elements,
ranging from political factors, socioeconomic realities,
psychological shadows, the proliferation of small
arms and the influence of the media. Studies should
be multifaceted, and remedial action must be designed
flexibly.

But one must remember that reports of civilian
trauma may sometimes be the result of deliberately
distorted propaganda. The resort to modern technology
and propaganda methods by rebel groups, in particular
terrorist groups and their networks of sympathizers and
the agitated media, is a reality. That is another factor
that needs to be kept in mind when addressing the
question of violence against civilians.

The protection of civilians poses a difficult challenge
in situations where civilians are used as human shields
and bargaining chips by rebel groups. That has made
the application of the standard principles a nightmare.
Once again, there must be a serious consideration of
practical realities based on the experiences of States,
instead of the theoretical application of a one-size-fits-
all humanitarian framework. The Security Council
could make a seminal contribution to the development
of the relevant principles by making a study of those
issues.

Sri Lanka has consistently supported the principles
highlighted in the Council's thematic resolutions since
1999. Sri Lanka's commitment is demonstrated in the
way in which our approach to civilian protection evolved
during the conflict with the terrorist Tigers of Tamil
Eelam, especially at its end and in its aftermath. With
adherence to a policy goal of zero civilian casualties
despite the provocations offered, the conflict ended, but
its legacy remains.

I wish also to point out the speedy and efficacious
manner in which Sri Lanka addressed the post-conflict
resettlement of internally displaced persons, the robust
nature of its ongoing post-conflict reconstruction and
development, and the pursuit of accountability and
reconciliation through domestic mechanisms to address
infractions of the law. All child combatants, who are
treated as victims, not villains, have been sent back to
their communities after a period of rehabilitation, in
less than three years. UNICEF played a key facilitating
role in this matter.

My delegation hopes that the Council's discussion
on the protection of civilians will facilitate a wider
appreciation of the inherent challenges and practical
outcomes based on ground realities. We must also
avoid the convenient and selective application of noble
principles. Reality is to be found not in newspaper
headlines but at the unexciting ground level. It is for
that reason that my delegation has sought to share
some key areas of our post-conflict experience, and we
encourage all to invest greater efforts in understanding
the causes of conflict and in preventing conflicts and
their recurrence, and to respond practically and with
sensitivity to situations affecting civilian populations.
We also continue to emphasize the fact that the nature
of contemporary conflicts poses new challenges to
the established legal principles for the protection of
civilians in conflict situations.

