The President: I am pleased to acknowledge the
presence at the Council table of the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of Portugal and Slovenia. On behalf of the Council,
I extend a warm welcome to them.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Letter dated 11 March 1998 from the Deputy
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/1998/223)

Letter dated 27 March 1998 from the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/1998/272)

Report of the Secretary-General prepared pursuant
to resolution 1160 (1998) of the Security Council
(S/1998/834 and Add.1)

The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Germany and Italy in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Milo (Albania),
Mr. Sacirbey (Bosnia and Herzegovina), Mr. Kastrap
(Germany) and Mr. Falci (Italy) took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council Chamber.


The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General prepared pursuant to resolution
1160 (1998) of the Security Council, documents
5/1998/834 and addendum 1.
Members of the Council also have before them
document S/1998/882, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by France, Germany, Italy, Japan,
Portugal, Slovenia, Sweden, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of
America.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I shall first give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements before the voting.


