Mr. Adom (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation wishes to thank President Michel Kafando,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Burundi,
for his excellent presentation on the sociopolitical
situation in Burundi in the post-referendum period. We
applaud the personal commitment of the Special Envoy

to help this brotherly nation find lasting peace.

My delegation welcomes the relative improvement
of the security situation in Burundi following the
holding on 17 May of the constitutional referendum.
That notwithstanding, at the political level Cote d'Ivoire
deplores the persistent impasse in the Burundian political
process more than eight months after the last session of
the inter-Burundian political dialogue, held in Uganda
under the auspices of the East African Community.
My country urges stakeholders to resume an inclusive
political dialogue and in this regard welcomes the
consultations currently under way in Arusha among
the Office of the facilitator, Mr. Benjamin Mkapa, and
United Nations and African Union teams on the holding
of a closing session for the inter-Burundian dialogue
and the assistance to be provided to the various bodies
responsible for organizing the 2020 elections.

Cote d'Ivoire urges the Burundian authorities to
take the confidence-building measures necessary to
reduce sociopolitical tensions and resume an inclusive
political dialogue among the Burundian people on
the basis of the Arusha Accords. In this regard, my
delegation takes note of the decision taken by Pierre
Nkurunziza, President of Burundi, not to stand in 2020
for another term.

At the humanitarian level, despite the positive
trend observed in the context of the voluntary return of
Burundian refugees, my delegation remains concerned
by the situation of the thousands of refugees who are
awaiting better prospects for a definitive return to their
country. In this context, we welcome the efforts made
by the Burundian authorities, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the
donor community in providing assistance and support
in the context of the programme for the voluntary return
of Burundian refugees to their country.

In that regard, my delegation encourages the
Burundian authorities to endeavour, with the support of
the international community and especially international
financial institutions and bilateral partners, to improve
the economic situation in the country and to create
conditions conducive to the dignified and safe return of
refugees and their reintegration into the socioeconomic
fabric of the country.

To conclude, C6te d'Ivoire calls on the international
community to further support the initiatives of the
East African Community and of the mediator and
the facilitator of the inter-Burundian dialogue, with a
view to the effective resumption of the talks in order
to achieve national reconciliation and lasting stability
in Burundi.

Cote d'Ivoire, my country, strongly supports the
Special Envoy's call on the authorities with regard to
the early signing of an agreement on and the opening
of the Office of the Secretary-General's Envoy in
Bujumbura. Cote d'Ivoire expresses its support to the
Special Envoy, Mr. Kafando, and reiterates to him its
willingness to support all of his efforts in the context of
the inter-Burundian political dialogue.

