Mr. Saikal (Afghanistan): Let me begin by
conveying our best wishes for a successful Council
presidency in September and our gratitude to the
United States for having convened today's debate on
Afghanistan. We thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Yamamoto for his comprehensive
briefing. We are particularly pleased by the presence
of Mr. Ramiz Bakhtiar, Afghanistan's first-ever United
Nations Youth Representative. We were pleased to see
him address the Council today and reflect the voice of
our youth on the overall situation in the country. His
merit-based selection as our United Nations Youth
Representative is a manifestation of how far our
younger generation has come in becoming proactive
agents of change in society.

Today's meeting of the Security Council takes
place at a crucial moment, as we draw near to the
parliamentary elections scheduled for next month and
the international Geneva Conference on Afghanistan
in November, to be followed by the anticipated
presidential elections, in April 2019. If all goes well,
by the middle of next year we should have completed
our political transition, with a new Parliament and a
new Government.

Meanwhile, our security forces are leading the
national struggle against terrorist and extremist groups,
which have increased their brutality against our people
as part of a renewed attempt to take even more innocent
lives, including those of journalists and aid workers,
and subvert our progress.

As guardians of our territorial integrity, our
national security forces continue to grow in size,
strength and professionalism. Moreover, in addition to
the substantial increase of our special forces, we are
also working to triple the size of our air force by 2020.
This, together with our ongoing reform, will have a
profound impact in terms of enhancing our fight against
international terrorism.

In the broader context, and despite the difficult
security environment, we remain on track to solidify
gains in different areas, including governance and
development. This is due primarily to the strength and
resilience of our people in defying complex challenges,
as they have so courageously done throughout the
course of our nation's history; and secondly, to the
continued support of our many friends and allies in the
international community.

The core objective of our enduring partnership with
the international community is based on achieving a
sustainable peace that is seen as just and comprehensive.
As we take stock of the status of peace efforts through
new outreach to the Taliban, we need to draw the right
lessons from the history of engagement with that group.
This is essential to ensure that we are indeed on the
right track as we move forward.

Following our sustained efforts, this year at the
Kabul process conference in February we launched a
reinvigorated and more flexiblepeace plan that presented
unprecedented incentives that were unanticipated even
by the Taliban. It included unconditional talks and
measures for theirreturn to and reintegration into society.
Lately, through increased diplomatic engagement with
various partners, we have strengthened regional and
international consensus in support ofpeace efforts. The
successive civil mobilizations and gatherings ofIslamic
scholars in Kabul, Jakarta and J eddah helped to enable
and welcome the first-ever temporary ceasefire with
the Taliban in June. Nevertheless, despite that brief lull
in fighting, the Taliban rejected the second ceasefire
proposed by us and welcomed by the Council. Making
real progress in peace efforts will not be possible
unless the consistent pattern of manipulating, misusing
opportunities and using deception for strategic gains
comes to an end.

Afghanistan stands fully committed to engaging
in a genuine peace process with tangible results for
our people. However, the guiding principle in moving
forward dictates that the fundamental factors that have
prevented peace efforts from gaining traction must first
be adequately detected and then addressed. All along,
we have underscored the importance of regional support
for our peace efforts, with a specific role for Pakistan.
Advancing the peace process is a key element of the
recently signed Afghanistan-Pakistan Action Plan for
Peace and Solidarity. We welcome last Saturday's visit
of Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi to Kabul,
where he expressed his Government's readiness to
support peace and stability in Afghanistan. The key
determinant in validating that commitment will be the
full and effective implementation of the Afghanistan-
Pakistan Action Plan for Peace and Solidarity.

For nearly a quarter of a century, Afghanistan has
been the site of what I term the "geographical genocide"
of certain circles within our region. The expectation is
that my country should either become their "trusted"
agent or be weakened, bled and represented as the
horrific face of terror around the world, devoid of its
independence, advancement, rich culture and history.
The erratic positions of the Taliban in the peace
talks, their leaderless profile, factional structure and
brutal attacks are used to pursue this policy. Such
genocide, with casualties of more than 10,000 a year
and traumatizing millions - as we have heard in the
presentation by our youth representative - has had
a negative impact on almost everything else in our
country, including governance, economy, electoral
process, anti-corruption, counter-narcotics and so on.
The important thing is that we either address the root
causes or continue to talk about their consequences.

Afghanistan has clearly asserted that regional
and international support is vital to the success of the
Afghan-led peace process. We welcome all coordinated
efforts leading to direct talks that can generate concrete
results, rather than a repeat of the past. We are keenly
following the interactions of some of our partners with
the Taliban, which are being coordinated with the
Afghan Government.

Let me take this opportunity to express a word of
thanks to all partners, inside and outside our region,
who are supporting our peace process. Such efforts,
rendered in a manner that reinforces our ownership and
leadership of the process, remain essential.

Other key issues are the upcoming elections, which
will determine our future stability. Efforts are under
way to ensure that the elections are free, fair, inclusive
and transparent, in accordance with the will of our
people. The successful electoral outcome will have a
profound impact on the future positive trajectory of
Afghanistan. Our people expect us to deliver on this
national process by addressing legitimate concerns
and preventing fraud and insecurity from jeopardizing
the process.

We welcome the Security Council's new emphasis on
the imperative of transparent elections, as emphasized
in its presidential statement (S/PRST/2018/ 15) and
press statements issued in July and August. This is a
welcome development, acknowledged by the people
and Government of Afghanistan. Furthermore, our
national unity and political stability provide the best
guarantee for the long-term stability of our country. In
this light, through a broad national dialogue, we need
to work on all outstanding issues related to upcoming
elections and win the trust of most stakeholders. We
know full well that successful elections and achieving
other important national objectives can best be realized
in a spirit of unity and understanding.

The Geneva Ministerial Conference on Afghanistan
in November will mark a new chapter in relations with
our international partners. Geneva will be a chance for
us to brief the international community on progress
made against the benchmarks of the Self-Reliance
through Mutual Accountability Framework. More
broadly, it will explore the way forward with respect
to peace efforts and the regional economic cooperation
agenda, which is one of the main achievements of the
National Unity Government.

The endorsement of a new mutual accountability
framework will refine the nature of our cooperation
to make it more impactful for our people, through the
improvement of development aid from international
donors and effective project completion in the context
of our national development strategy. The preparatory
meeting for the Ministerial Conference - co-chaired
by Foreign Minister Rabbani, Finance Minister Qayumi
and Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Yamamoto - will be held here in New York on Sunday.
We look forward to seeing everyone there.

We have always placed special emphasis on
achieving an environment in our region, where various
neighbours work in tandem, in a spirit of mutual trust
and confidence for win-win cooperation. We have done
so believing that only such an approach will lead to
success in overcoming common transnational threats
and challenges. We continue to widen our network
of bilateral arrangements with regional countries,
including Central Asian States. In the same spirit, we
recognize the enormous economic and other potentials
that are yet to be fully utilized.

That is precisely the reason behind various Afghan-
led initiatives, such as the Heart ofAsia-Istanbul Process
and the Regional Economic Cooperation Conference on
Afghanistan (RECCA). New memberships in the Heart
of Asia-Istanbul Process signal growing interest among
the broader region. We hope the review and renewal
of the confidence-building measures will enable
each to make progress at a more equal and similar
pace. Furthermore, the RECCA process has achieved
phenomenal success in advancing regional connectivity
and infrastructure development, turning our country
into a platform of cordiality for all.

In conclusion, let us bear in mind that we,
collectively, stand at a crossroads in our strategic
journey for peace and stability in Afghanistan and, more
broadly, for global security. In that regard, the start of
our partnership with the international community in
2001 generated a contract aimed at securing a stable
future for our current and future generations. Together,
we have come a long way, reaching the last stage of the
transformation decade for self-reliance. Let us complete
this vital journey with greater resolve and commitment.

