Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, I would like to welcome the presence of
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Sierra Leone,
Mr. Kamara, and Mr. Jens Anders Toyberg-Frandzen,
Executive Representative of the Secretary-General for
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL). We are also grateful for the
briefing by the Chair of the Sierra Leone configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador
Guillermo Rishchynski.

Sierra Leone is a clear example of the fact that
human beings and communities are not condemned to
failure and that it is always possible to pick oneself up
from the worst tragedies and most difficult situations,
such as civil war, which for 10 years led to deaths, the
displacement of hundreds of thousands of persons and
refugees, and the deploymen of 17,000 United Nations
peacekeeping troops in that country. Clearly this did
not come about by pure magic. What has happened has
come about because of the resolve and perseverance of
the people of Sierra Leone and the cooperation of the
United Nations and the countries of the region.

That is why today, as we close the door on a very
sensitive and painful stage in the development of the
country, characterized by recurring human rights
violations and a serious humanitarian situation in which
pain and suffering became routine, a promising horizon
is emerging in Sierra Leone. Of course, there will be
difficulties; we all have them. But at the same time,
they will be peacefully addressed and resolved because
Sierra Leone has managed to rebuild the rule of law. It
has a Constitution and democratic institutions. It has
been able to achieve peace within its borders, and it
enjoys an extremely promising economic situation with
a predicted growth rate for 2014 of 14 per cent of the
gross domestic product.

Its political leaders and its society are clearly aware
that economic growth alone will not be sufficient, but
that the best ideas and innovative practices must be
implemented in order to guarantee a more inclusive, free
and egalitarian society. Without a doubt, the situation
has turned around and we hope that the Government
of President Koroma and whoever follows him will
continue along that path, which begins with the closure
of UNIPSIL.

We know that the challenges have to be dealt with
in a timely and responsible manner in order to move
forward. In that respect, efforts must be multiplied to
overcome problems related to corruption, an evil that
remains to be overcome with political decisiveness
and efficient mechanisms to ensure transparency,
accountability and the active control of society. That is
essential in order to ensure that the people are once again
able to trust their democratic Government institutions.
In that regard, we welcome the recent announcement
of the Government of Sierra Leone of its intention
to strengthen the Anti-Corruption Commission. We
know that corruption endangers fundamental rights,
exacerbates marginalization, perpetuates poverty and
affects the most vulnerable groups.

The people and Government of Sierra Leone know
that they must continue to fight the deep-seated causes
that led to internal fighting and civil war for so many
years. In that regard, the support of the international
community and the cooperation of the United Nations,
working shoulder to shoulder with the Government
and people of Sierra Leone to help them to meet their
national goals, are indispensable. Due attention should
be paid and particular focus given to the monitoring
and promotion of respect for human rights and the
rule of law, the fight against poverty and inequality,
implementing the corresponding reforms to ensure
good governance, the eradication of corruption,
support for the work ofthe Peacebuilding Commission,
and inclusive dialogue between the political parties
and various social partners. Those are key in order to
consolidate the achievements made.

It is very encouraging to know that, according
to the report of the Secretary-General (S/2014/192),
70 per cent of the 1,800 cases that were submitted to
the Human Rights Commission of Sierra Leone for
consideration since it was established seven years ago
have been resolved. The law on human rights that has
been passed with the aim of ensuring the equality of
women and gender equality, preventing, eradicating and
punishing violence against women, and strengthening
their political participation, in addition to other laws
that the Parliament has approved with regard to the
rights of the child and persons with disabilities, are also
encouraging.

We know that the Government will and must
continue along the path of ensuring the rule of law,
strengthening security institutions and taking measures,
as other colleagues have said, to resolve the high level of
youth unemployment. Sustained economic growth, the
proper use of natural resources and the establishment
of conditions conducive to investment will undoubtedly
lead to the creation of decent jobs and reducing poverty,
improvements in health and education, and inclusive
conditions for the people of Sierra Leone. We know that
those are Sierra Leone's challenges, but they are also
challenges in our own countries and as members of the
international community.

In conclusion, we believe that it is critical that the
ongoing distrust among the most important political
parties be overcome. While we recognize that the
electoral cycles are coming to an end, we welcome the
initiative of President Koroma to meet with the leaders
of the political parties that are legally registered.

We celebrate the successful handing over of power
from UNIPSIL to the United Nations country team,
according to the plan established for the transition.

In conclusion, I wish to mark this noteworthy and
exemplary moment. It reflects a key part of the success
of the mission. The capacity that has been developed
by UNIPSIL to break the vicious cycle fear in society
and uncertainty among people that we have seen when
most mandates of United Nations missions come to an
end is praiseworthy. I wish to emphatically recognize
how UNIPSIL approached the issue of finding work for
local staff so as to ensure that it was able to ensure jobs
for half of its local staff.

We again thank the United Nations country team
for its assistance to the Government in very different
areas. We agree with the Secretary-General that the
assistance of international partners is still needed,
and we reiterate his call to shore up the funding for
the poverty-reduction strategy in Sierra Leone, the
Agenda for Prosperity for 2013-2018. Congratulations
are also in order for the work that has been carried out
by the Peacebuilding Commission and for Executive
Representative Toyberg-Frandzen.

We fully endorse the draft presidential statement
before us.

