Mr. Van Shalkwyk (South Africa): Let me start
by thanking Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and
Lieutenant General Ngondi for their briefings. It is
good to see a fellow brother from Africa speaking to us
today. I would also like to thank Major General Pearce
for her briefing.

Let me also extend condolences to the families
of all peacekeepers, men and women, who have made
the ultimate sacrifice in their duty to keep the peace
and help communities and societies achieve peace
and find a way forward. We appreciate their sacrifice
and acknowledge the difficult circumstances in which
peacekeepers work and the challenges they must face
and overcome.
My delegation would like to reaffirm the
importance of peacekeeping as one of the most effective
tools available to the United Nations as it promotes and
maintains international peace and security. The briefers
gave us quite a challenge - coming here without
prepared statements and fielding questions. We really
appreciate that.

As we have stated before in the Chamber, we remain
of the View, especially with regard to the two missions
represented here today, both for the Sudanese people
and the people of Cyprus, that the solution to their
problems lies with the communities themselves. In our
view, peacekeeping operations create an environment to
find the peace they need to find. It would be helpful to
hear from our colleagues whether or not they think that
that approach plays a positive role in specific missions.
We are referring to the drawdown and withdrawal of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID). It will be interesting to hear the
perspectives of Lieutenant General Ngondi about that
issue. With regard to Cyprus, it is one of our longest-
running peacekeeping missions. It is one we think of as
"business as usual". As we know, things are not always
that easy. It would be good to hear her perspective.

Much has been said about trilateral cooperation.
We would like to hear from our briefers about the value
of trilateral cooperation. As members of the Council,
we always provide our views regarding how important
it is. Could we perhaps have a practical example of how
it works in both missions, because the two missions are
very different?

As an African member of the Council, the situation
in the Sudan is very important to us. We are also well
aware of the operational and financial challenges being
faced. Funding is constantly an issue as it pertains to
ensuring success and that peacekeepers are safe and
peacekeeping operations effective. It is vital to ensure
that, with respect to peacekeeping operations, there is
no reversal in the gains made. The Force Commanders
are probably well aware ofthe decision that the African
Union Peace and Security Council made regarding the
drawdown of UNAMID and some of the concerns that
have been raised, such as, in particular, not leaving
a vacuum and, as some of the other members have
already mentioned, the handover of sites. How is that
kind of situation managed, especially as it pertains to
agreeing with the host State, when a certain decision
runs counter to the original view, for instance the
handover of sites to civilians? How is that situation
managed? What assistance is needed from the Council?

As we have just done, we extend condolences
following loss of life. However, there is a trend. We
believe that, with regard to the safety and security of
peacekeepers, they are increasingly coming under
fire. It is becoming increasingly dangerous. What does
Lieutenant General Ngondi think could be done to
ensure the safety of peacekeepers? What do we need to
enhance their safety and security? It is technology or
equipment? We know that situations differ in terms of
how dangerous they are, but what is his View with regard
to what we can do to try to curb the rising death toll and
the increasing number of attacks on peacekeepers?

Turning to Major General Cheryl Pearce, South
Africa is a great supporter of women in peacekeeping
operations. We are very glad to see her here, in
particular as a woman in a leadership role. Since most
of the other questions around the topic on which the
President asked us to focus have already been asked,
I will take a slight liberty and request, from her
perspective, an understanding of the challenges faced
by women in uniform, especially those in leadership
positions, and we hope to see an increasing number of
those positions going to women. We are very proud of
our own progress, for example, with regard to the Force
Intervention Brigade in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Some of her perspectives in that regard would
be much appreciated.

