Mr. Volmer (Estonia): Estonia thanks the Kingdom of Belgium for organizing today's open debate, as well as all the briefers for their interventions. If we intend transitional justice mechanisms to truly heal grief-stricken communities, the measures taken need to be comprehensive, coherent, locally owned and based on international law. Based on our own national experience - and indeed we have been there - in order overcome the harmful legacy of mass atrocity crimes, it is vital to build strong institutions capable of preserving the rule of law and ensuring human rights for all. After regaining independence in 1991, Estonia re-established the rule of law and reinstated democratic institutions, in conformity with international legal standards and obligations, while bringing to justice the perpetrators of war crimes and crimes against humanity that were committed during the occupation by the repressive regime. Estonia has been active in sharing the experience and lessons learned in this process, including by providing capacity-building in the Eastern Partnership region of Europe and programmes relating to good governance, in particular e-governance and cybersecurity, in all regions of the world. Estonia has further assisted women in gaining livelihoods and worked to provide children with educational opportunities in various conflict and post- conflict situations through development cooperation initiatives. Today we can hardly imagine a community being whole without the empowerment and full and equal participation of women at all stages of the rebuilding of societies. We also have to ensure the engagement of children in justice and reconciliation processes. If we want communities to be peaceful and resilient, it is critical to acknowledge past violations and to have redress for victims. No one can remain above the law. If authorities are unable or unwilling to fulfil their primary responsibility of bringing the perpetrators of the most serious crimes to justice, and there is no other criminal accountability mechanism setup, it is the International Criminal Court (ICC), as a complementary judicial institution, that assists States in bringing about justice for past crimes. Estonia welcomes recent reports of the Sudan's commitment to cooperate with the ICC and its readiness to hand over all five suspects to the ICC to face charges of crimes against humanity, war crimes and genocide. That would clearly constitute a significant step in the pursuit of justice, since the Security Council's first-ever referral of a situation to the ICC, in March 15 years ago. As the road to justice may be long and winding, it is also vital to collect and preserve evidence of atrocities committed during conflict and ensure their usefulness for possible future justice mechanisms. In that regard, Estonia strongly supports international independent fact-finding and evidence-preservation efforts, including in Syria and Myanmar. We acknowledge the role of the United Nations in enhancing the sustainability of transitional justice processes. In a post-conflict situation, the United Nations should be able to provide a smooth transition from humanitarian relief to reconciliation, from the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to the United Nations Development Programme. We further welcome the consolidation of accountability efforts with regard to country situations, so that all transitional justice mechanisms are able to work cohesively. At the same time, all United Nations activities need to systematically incorporate rule-of-law aspects. Weappreciate the work of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights as the lead entity of the United Nations on transitional justice issues. We would like to conclude by calling for transitional justice measures to be better examined and utilized in the area of the prevention of mass atrocity crimes as well. We underline the role of the Security Council in upholding and promoting transitional justice by responding decisively to early warning signs of grave violations of international law, including humanitarian law and human rights law, in order to prevent and mitigate human suffering. We look forward to a more consistent United Nations record on concrete action in the field of atrocity prevention.
