Mr. Mohd. Radzi (Malaysia): Let me begin by
thanking you, Mr. President, for convening this timely
and important meeting. We are pleased and honoured
to address the Council today under the presidency of
Greece.

At the outset, my delegation associates itself with
the statement delivered earlier by the delegation of
Kuwait on behalf of the Group of Arab States. My
delegation considers that the question currently before
the Council continues to be central to peace and
security concerns in the Middle East and throughout
the world.

Malaysia remains gravely concerned at the
continuing deterioration of the precarious situation in
the occupied Palestinian territory. There have been too
many deaths and injuries and too much destruction and
indescribable suffering for far too long, especially
among the Palestinians. We should not consider the
casualties and destruction on both sides merely in
terms of numbers or percentages. The life of each
human being - man, woman or child - is sacred and
precious and must be protected. We mourn the loss of
all innocent lives. Any act of violence inflicted in the
conflict upon innocent civilians, whether Palestinians
or Israelis, is unacceptable and deserves equal
condemnation by us all.

Malaysia has made clear its condemnation of
violence and terrorism. But we can fully understand the
despair and frustration of the Palestinians and their
responses to Israel's continued occupation and
annexation of Palestinian territories and to the
application of harsh and often inhuman policies and
practices, as well as the excessive and disproportionate
use of force by Israel against the Palestinians and other
Arabs in the occupied territories over the past 38 years.
It is incumbent upon both sides to transform the
reversible deadly cycle of violence and terror into an
enduring period of calm, peace and security in the
region.

The completed portions of the separation wall in
the occupied Palestinian territory, including in and
around East Jerusalem and its continuing construction
by Israel seriously endanger the prospects for peace in
the region and undermine the implementation of the
road map. The adverse impact of the wall on all aspects
of Palestinian life is overwhelming. The wall as it
stands - and more so once it is completed - could
have serious ramifications, inter alia, for the peace
process, negotiations on final status issues and the
creation of a viable and contiguous Palestinian State, as
envisaged in Security Council resolution 1397 (2002)
and upheld in the road map. The construction of the
wall is a clear violation of international law, including
international humanitarian and human rights law. The
continuing construction of the wall signifies a
deliberate act of blatant disrespect by Israel for the
advisory opinion rendered on 9 July 2004 by the
International Court of Justice (ICJ), as well as of
General Assembly resolution ES-lO/ 15.

It is indeed very disappointing that Israel has
decided not only to continue but to accelerate the
construction and completion of the separation wall, on
the pretext of security and defence. We urge Israel to
dismantle the wall and to immediately discontinue its
construction. We also urge Israel to take all measures
necessary to ensure compliance with the ICJ advisory
opinion and resolution ES-10/15.

Furthermore, we urge the Security Council to
look into this matter seriously and expeditiously, in
accordance with its functions and powers under Article
24 of the Charter of the United Nations. It is
regrettable that one year has passed without the
Council having responded to the advisory opinion of
the Court - the highest judicial body of the United
Nations - on such an important question concerning
the maintenance of international peace and security.
We look forward to an opportunity to respond in due
course to the report submitted by Switzerland, in its
capacity as depositary State of the Geneva
Conventions, pursuant to paragraph 7 of resolution
ES-10/15 (A/ES-10/304, annex).

The planned Israeli withdrawal from the Gaza
Strip must be a full and complete withdrawal from that
area - including its land, sea and air space. That must
be followed by similar steps in the rest of the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. It would
thus be unacceptable for any other area of the occupied
Palestinian territory to be colonized by Israel in
conjunction with the completion of its withdrawal from
the Gaza Strip. Any withdrawal plan should be part of
the road map and should be carried out in full
cooperation with the Palestinian Authority. It will be
incumbent upon both sides to resume negotiations on
the final status issues immediately upon the completion
of a full withdrawal by Israel from the occupied
Palestinian territory.

The international community has a collective role
to play in finding a solution to the Palestinian question.
We must all work together to facilitate and intensify
efforts to attain a just, comprehensive and lasting
settlement to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The
United Nations, including the Security Council, has a
permanent responsibility towards the question of
Palestine until it is resolved in its entirety on the basis
of the Charter, relevant resolutions of the United
Nations and international law.
The continued plight and suffering of the
Palestinian people remain the tragic embodiment of the
consequences of the non-implementation of resolutions
and the non-enforcement of decisions of the Security
Council. There are ways by which the Security Council
can ensure compliance by Israel with its resolutions
and decisions. The Security Council must exercise its
role and responsibility in that regard. Malaysia calls
upon the Security Council to do so now, to ensure that
justice and the rule of law prevail in the occupied
Palestinian territory. The international community must
prevail upon Israel to respect its obligations under
international law and abide by Security Council
resolutions, just as other States are expected to do.

In conclusion, Malaysia remains convinced that
an independent and sovereign Palestinian State with
East Jerusalem as its capital will be the best hope for
lasting peace in the region, with both Israel and
Palestine living peacefully side by side within secure
and recognized borders. The international community
cannot afford to turn a blind eye or a deaf ear, and
claim ignorance to the plight of Palestinians. It must
express and maintain its solidarity with the Palestinian
people and work together to facilitate the attainment of
comprehensive peace in the region. The valiant
struggle of the Palestinian people against Israeli
occupation, against the injustices suffered by them and
against the inhumane treatment meted out to them must
be recognized and appropriately responded to without
further delay. The international community should
muster the necessary political will, wisdom and
courage to decisively respond to the need for a just,
comprehensive and lasting settlement to the conflict.
The long-suffering people of Palestine deserve nothing
less. Peace will remain elusive unless all parties
concerned, the region and the wider international
community are prepared to play their part responsibly.

