The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of South Africa.

South Africa expresses its appreciation to His
Excellency Sheikh Hamad bin Jassim bin Jabr
Al-Thani, Prime Minister and Foreign Minister of the
State of Qatar, and His Excellency Mr. Nabil Elaraby,
Secretary-General of the League of Arab States, for
their briefings to the Council today. We also thank the
Permanent Representative of Syria for his briefing to
the Council today.

South Africa is deeply concerned about the
deteriorating political, security and humanitarian
situation in Syria. We condemn the continued and
violent loss of life in Syria and call for maximum
restraint on the part of all the parties to the conflict. We
emphasize that there is an urgent need for the Violence
to cease immediately. It is our hope that this situation
will be resolved in a peaceful manner in accordance
with the will of the Syrian people. We reiterate that any
solution to the Syrian crisis should be Syrian-led, based
on genuine national dialogue, devoid of any form of
intimidation and free of interference from outside.

We urge the Syrian authorities to initiate an open,
transparent and all-inclusive political process with its
people to address their legitimate demands and in order
to guarantee their fundamental political rights and
freedoms, including their rights to freedom of
assembly and speech. We also encourage the
opposition to participate in this political process with a
View to ensuring sustainable peace in Syria.

A comprehensive political solution must be found
that will lead to political reform based on respect for
democratic principles, rule of law, justice and human
rights. It should also address the socio-economic
development needs of the people of Syria in order to
ensure long-term peace and stability.

We appreciate the League of Arab States' efforts
aimed at achieving a peaceful resolution of the crisis in
Syria. On 12 January, the Council unanimously
adopted resolution 2033 (2012), which focused
attention on enhanced cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations in the maintenance
of international peace and security. South Africa
therefore welcomes this engagement by the Council
with the League of Arab States, which, due to its
proximity and knowledge of the region, is able to play
a meaningful role in assisting the Syrian people to
overcome their challenges. We hope that this
engagement will lead to a peaceful political solution to
the conflict in Syria. We strongly believe that any
solution should respect the sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity of Syria, and at the same
time uphold the purposes and principles enshrined in
the United Nations Charter.

We thank the Secretary-General of the Arab
League for providing us with the report (S/2012/71, annex, enclosure 4) of the head of the League of Arab
States observer mission to Syria, General Al-Dabi. The
report, which is a first-hand account of developments
on the ground, provides us with an invaluable
assessment of the situation. As noted in the report,
Syrian citizens also believe that the crisis should be
resolved peacefully, through Arab intervention alone
and without international intervention, as it would
allow them to live in peace and complete the reform
process and bring about the change they desire. It is
imperative that there be an end to violence from all
sides, as it is apparent from the observer mission report
that the opposition is also armed. Consequently,
civilians bear the brunt of the violence perpetrated by
the Government and armed opposition groups.

The critical question at this juncture is what
positive contribution we can make as the international
community, and the Security Council in particular, to
assist the Syrian parties to resolve their conflict. Any
action we take should be geared towards bringing the
parties towards a peaceful resolution of their conflict
rather than widening the gap between them. We
therefore welcome the Arab League's and all diplomatic
efforts aimed at resolving the crisis in the country, and
we encourage Syrian parties to explore all opportunities
to find a political solution. We must avoid any action
that may run the risk of further polarizing the parties
and lead to an escalation of the violence.

Military intervention to resolve political conflicts,
as we have seen in other parts of the world - most
recently in the Libyan situation - has unintended
consequences not only for the country in question but
for the wider region. That is something the Middle East
can ill afford.

We welcome the consideration of the situation in
Syria through draft resolutions before the Council. We
call for all the commitments and principles expressed
by the delegations of the Arab League and others today
to be better and more fully expressed in future drafts.
South Africa shall engage constructively in those
negotiations.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I now give the floor to His Excellency Sheikh
Hamad bin J assim bin J abr Al-Thani to make a further
statement.

