At the outset, I would like to thank High Representative Mr. Valentin Inzko and Ms. Hasie for their briefings. We listened carefully to what Mr. Inzko has just said, and we carefully studied the written report (S/2020/345, annex). We regret to observe again that the quality of the High Representative's reports has not improved. Unfortunately, we regret to note that criticizing the Bosnian Serbs for everything that happens in Bosnia and Herzegovina has become a standard pattern of those reports. Serbs are blamed for all the challenges now facing Bosnia and Herzegovina. As aresult, the report does not give a balanced picture of the situation on the ground. The High Representative ignores the fact that the majority of issues in Bosnia and Herzegovina arise from the lack of consensus among the three constituent peoples. Instead of playing the blame game, the Office of the High Representative should encourage dialogue between the communities and provide good offices in order to help Bosnians resolve their disputes. The time for external governance is over. The Bosnian people deserve the right to determine their fate on their own. We do not share the report's assumptions on alleged stagnation and even rollbacks in the implementation of the General Framework Agreement for Peace, including the five objectives and two conditions for the closure of the Office of the High Representative. In our view, the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina is calm and stable and does not represent any threat to international peace and security. Nevertheless, the High Representative is still finding made-up arguments in order to preserve indefinitely the outdated international protection over this sovereign and independent State. We call on our colleagues in the Security Council and the Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council to take the necessary steps for the early closure of the Office of the High Representative. In his report, the High Representative refers to the need for the fulfilment of Bosnia and Herzegovina's so-called "standing obligations" with regard to NATO and notes that the authorities at all levels in Bosnia and Herzegovina are committed to a State that is "irreversibly on course for Euro-Atlantic integration" (S/2020/345, annex, p.4). We have to emphasize that there is no consensus in Bosnian society on this issue. The High Representative is not entitled in any way to promote the European or Euro-Atlantic integration of Bosnia and Herzegovina and should not abuse his mandate by doing so. His responsibility is to uphold the civilian aspects of the General Framework Agreement. We must recall that decisions of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina on foreign policy should be consensus-based. We call on the High Representative to pay more attention to the numerous pressing issues in the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, among them the pending appointment of a new Federation Government and the Constitutional Court, the incomplete collegium of both Houses of the Federation Parliament, the lack of progress on holding local elections in the city of Mostar, and the absence of the constitutional equality of Serbs in the Federation cantons. We are wondering why the High Representative almost demonizes the activities of the Republika Srpska Government-appointed Independent International Commission for Inquiry into Suffering of all Peoples in the Srebrenica region in the Period 1992-1995. As we understand it, these structures have been established due to the well-known flaws in the activities of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia and the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. We have expressed our concerns on this matter more than once. Documents from the United Kingdom archives, declassified and published in January this year, reveal important details of the events during the armed conflict in Srebrenica. It has been confirmed, in particular, that the Bosnian Serbs were subject to attacks from the region under the protection of United Nations Blue Helmets. We hope that the Independent International Commissions appointed by the Republika Srpska will help shed light on these tragic events. We call on all international presences in Bosnia and Herzegovina, including the Office of the High Representative, the Delegation of the European Union and the Mission of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, to align their activities in compliance with their respective mandates and the policy approved by the Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council to promote local ownership over international decision-making. As one of international guarantors of the Dayton Peace Agreement, Russia will continue to monitor to ensure that Agreement is strictly implemented. We support the inter-Bosnian dialogue based on mutual respect. We hope that all international partners who are genuinely interested in long-lasting stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina will promote cooperation between the Bosnian parties and refrain from biased or unilateral assessments, which would only exacerbate the situation. We urge Bosniaks, Croats and Serbs to use collective approaches to settle outstanding issues on the solid basis of the Dayton Peace Agreement, which guarantees the equality of the three constituent peoples.
