Sir John Weston (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland): Twelve months ago, this Council
adopted a resolution which helped set in motion the
largest and most complex operation to reconstruct a
shattered European country to be undertaken by the
international community for the last 50 years. Since then,
much has been achieved. The guns have stayed silent.
The armies are back in barracks. A quarter of a million
refugees have returned. Reconstruction has begun in
earnest. Sarajevo, so long under siege, has been
transformed. Elections have been held. The newly elected
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina has begun its
work. And last week in London, for the first time since
the Peace Agreement was signed, all members of that
Presidency, together with the elected leaders of the two
Entities, took part in an international Conference sitting
behind a single name-plate labelled "Bosnia and
Herzegovina" - a small but nevertheless significant step
in itself.

 

This is a good record and should be recognized as
such. The British Government acknowledges the efforts of
all those who have contributed and in particular, as other
have said, the exceptional dedication shown by the High
Representative, Mr. Carl Bildt.

But, of course, such progress is not enough in itself.
That is why the international community decided, at the
recent Peace Implementation Conference held in London,
to continue to devote very significant resources to help the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina re-establish their own
country. The United Kingdom, for its part, is contributing
up to 5,000 troops as part of the Stabilization Force, which
will involve the members of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) in partnership with 17 or more other
countries. We particularly welcome the participation of the
Russian Federation in that Force.

The United Kingdom will increase its assistance to the
United Nations International Police Task Force, including
the deployment of 30 police officers to assist in the
retraining of the local police forces, as well as providing
training for senior police officers in the United Kingdom
and on the ground. And the United Kingdom is
significantly increasing its financial support to the
International Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, including
the secondment of personnel to enhance the Tribunal's
ability to track the whereabouts of war-crimes indictees. We
urge others to join us in such undertakings.

Underlying the approach set out in the Action Plan
agreed with the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina last
week in London is the principle that responsibility for
promoting reconciliation lies with the authorities in Bosnia
and Herzegovina themselves and that the international
community's willingness to help them by devoting
significant resources will inevitably depend on the degree
to which those authorities shoulder this responsibility,
including implementing the Peace Agreement.

One key area in this respect is compliance with the
International Tribunal. The Peace Implementation Council
last week formally reaffirmed its strong support for the
work of the Tribunal. We particularly welcome the
emphasis placed on the surrender of indictees in the draft
resolution before us, of which my delegation is a sponsor.
It is now up to authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as
well as the Governments of neighbouring states, to respond.

