Mr. Mbabazi (Uganda): On behalf of the Government
of the Republic of Uganda, I wish to thank you, Mr.
President, and the other members of the Security Council
for this opportunity given to us to address the Council on
the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Uganda believes in, and is committed to, the peaceful
and negotiated resolution of the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Indeed, as the Council heard from
some of the speakers this morning, President Museveni has
been one of the leaders behind most of the initiatives to
find a diplomatic solution to the problems in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. President Museveni
initiated the very first meeting, which took place in Victoria
Falls, Zimbabwe, on 7 and 8 August 1998. When he met
his colleagues at the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) summit in Swakopmund, Namibia,
President Museveni requested President Mugabe to convene
a meeting of heads of State of friends of the Congo to try
to find a solution to the political tensions that were evident
in the Congo at that time. Unfortunately, by the time the
summit took place the political contradictions in the Congo
had exploded into violence. When it became obvious that
the Victoria Falls summit would not result in an immediate
solution to the conflict in the Congo, President Museveni
appealed to President Mandela to convene a wider
meeting of the SADC region and other affected countries
outside SADC, such as Uganda, to try to generate a way
of managing the crisis that had already erupted. As the
Council heard this morning from the representative of
Namibia, it was once again President Museveni who
initiated the Windhoek summit of January 1999,
comprising the core countries that are militarily involved
in the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

I am giving these few examples to show the
Ugandan commitment to a diplomatic and peaceful
solution to this problem. Uganda firmly believes that the
two main causes of this conflict can be resolved through
negotiations. Uganda has neither territorial ambitions nor
economic interests beyond the normal course of trade
between two nations. Therefore, my delegation has
essentially come here to seek the support of the Security
Council, the United Nations and the international
community as a whole towards the achievement of this
objective.

As I listened to this morning's statements, however,
it became apparent that I need to explain the events in
greater detail that I had intended, in order to give a sense
of balance with regard to the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
The crisis in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has two dimensions: an internal dimension and an
external, or regional, dimension. The external or regional
dimension began with the war that took place in Rwanda,
which resulted in the 1994 genocide. After the Rwandese
Patriotic Front (RPF) took power, the genocidaires -
those who were responsible for killing hundreds of
thousands of Rwandan civilians - and the former
Rwandan army and the interaharnwe militia crossed into
what was then Zaire with hundreds of thousands of
refugees. As everyone knows, they then proceeded to hold
those refugees hostage inside Zaire. The Mobutu
Government then helped these ge'nocidaires to reorganize,
retrain and rearm and gave them territorial support to
recapture power in Rwanda. The Government of Uganda
totally opposed this move and made its position very
clear.

In preparation for the intended recapture of power by
the ge'nocidaires in Rwanda, however, President Mobutu
forged an alliance with the National Islamic Front regime
in Khartoum, Sudan, not only to aid and abet the crime of
genocide in Rwanda but also specifically to destabilize

 

Uganda in the hope that Uganda would then not be in a
position to support Rwanda against that aggression.

In fulfilment of that plan, attacks were launched
against Uganda on two fronts: from Congolese territory -
Zairian territory, as it was then known - Uganda was
attacked in the north-west, near its border with the Sudan
and Zaire and further south-west, closer to Rwanda, in the
district of Kasese. At the same time as we were being
attacked in Uganda, the reorganization and rearming of the
ge'nocidaires had reached an advanced stage. The Ugandan
Government decided to act in self-defence by first
recapturing the territory those criminals had captured,
following them into Zairian territory in hot pursuit. It was
that act of self-defence against the then-Zairian
Government - an act of self-defence which had regional
and international understanding and support - that resulted
in the fall of President Mobutu and the rise to power of
President Kabila.

It was hoped that since President Kabila clearly
understood our security concerns and as he himself was a
by-product of our act of self-defence, he would address
those concerns once he assumed power. Unfortunately, that
did not happen. At an early stage we appreciated the fact
that President Kabila had inherited weak structures from the
Mobutu regime. Indeed, President Kabila pleaded incapacity
to handle the situation in his own country. That is why
President Kabila invited the Ugandan Government to deploy
the Ugandan People's Defence Forces inside the Congo to
flush out the Allied Democratic Forces, a rebel group that
had been infiltrated into Zaire by the Sudan, and that had
attacked us in Kasese, an attack to which I referred earlier.

A protocol to that effect was signed between the two
Governments on 24 April 1998. Uganda deployed two
battalions of troops at the invitation of the Kabila
Government, and by specific written agreement between us
and that Government, on 27 April 1998. In the meantime,
because of the internal political contradictions, the rebellion
broke out on 2 August 1998. President Kabila's reaction
was to look for foreign military assistance. It was given by
Zimbabwe, Angola and Namibia, which decided on a
unilateral military intervention instead of waiting for a
regional, concerted approach, as originally proposed by
President Museveni at the previous two summits. The
intervention was made on the pretext that the Democratic
Republic of the Congo had been invaded by Uganda and
Rwanda. I would like to inform this body that, as a matter
of fact, Uganda at that time had only the two battalions that
I mentioned earlier inside the Congo. While Uganda was
primarily concerned about the activities of the Ugandan
rebel groups in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the intervention by Zimbabwe, Angola, Namibia and, later
on, Chad and the Sudan, introduced a new dimension to
the conflict. To counter the perceived threat of the
increased destabilization of Uganda, especially by the
Sudan, using Congolese territory as they had done on
many previous occasions, Uganda deployed additional
forces.

I felt constrained to make that clarification in the
light of some of the statements that were made this
morning. As far as we are concerned, therefore, the
external dimension in the Congolese conflict, both in the
case of Uganda and - as I know - in the case of
Rwanda, has been prompted by activities hostile to those
countries emanating from the Congo. Uganda and Rwanda
acted in self-defence.

There is also, of course, the internal dimension. I do
not want to delve much into the internal politics of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. A few examples will
suffice to provide a picture of what happens there. The
political base of the Alliance of Democratic Forces for the
Liberation of the Congo (AFDL) - the political alliance
that President Kabila led - was narrow, because it was
composed of four political groups which all emanated
from eastern Congo. That is the alliance that assumed
power in Kinshasa. When President Kabila assumed
power, he failed - or neglected - to broaden his
political base in any way. His alliance of four political
parties remained the same; it was not broadened at all.
Subsequently, even the four-party alliance collapsed.
And now, as I speak, only one of the original four
constitutes the Alliance. Furthermore, President Kabila
suppressed the established and active political opposition,
as the whole world knows. Etienne Tshisekedi was
condemned to internal exile and was not allowed - I
believe that even today he is still not allowed - to travel
abroad. That provides an idea why, in reaction to that
political situation, the political forces inside the Congo
decided to rise up in rebellion. And that is precisely what
happened in August 1998.

As I said earlier, my original intention had been to
seek the Council's support for the regional efforts to find
a peaceful solution because, contrary to the pervasive
pessimism with regard to the prospects for reaching a
negotiated settlement which I heard in this morning's
statements, Uganda believes that a lot of progress has
already been registered.

 

Allow me to provide some examples. In the various
meetings that have taken place, it has been agreed by all
the parties that there should be a ceasefire.

The following positions have been agreed in order to
enhance the signing of this cease-fire agreement, whose
principles we have already adopted at the regional level, in
draft form.

First, all parties agree that there must be, as soon as
possible, a cessation of all hostilities and a troop standstill
in the Congo by all those who bear arms.

Secondly, it has been agreed that the security concerns
of the neighbouring countries and, indeed, of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo itself should be
addressed. That these concerns exist and are legitimate has
been recognized by the region. At the last ministerial
meeting we held in Lusaka, a committee was established to
work out a mechanism to resolve the question of the
destabilization of neighbouring countries from the territory
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. That committee
has met, its officials have received various
recommendations from the countries involved, and we are
just waiting for a formal report arising out of that
interaction.

Thirdly, it has been agreed that the rebels - the
Rassemblement Congolais pour la democratic (RCD) -
must be involved in the peace process and must be
signatories to the cease-fire agreement. This has been
accepted by all the parties involved.
Fourthly, it has been agreed that a neutral,
international peacekeeping force be deployed as an
interposition force in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and that the United Nations should manage this process.

Fifthly, it has been agreed that all foreign forces in the
Congo must withdraw in accordance with a time-table to be
worked out by the United Nations and the OAU and under
the supervision of the neutral interposition force.

Finally, consensus has emerged in the region that a
national conference involving all Congolese political
stakeholders should be convened in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo as soon as possible, with the
assistance of the OAU, to determine the political future of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The Uganda Government has noted with appreciation
the recent position taken by President Kabila to commit his
Government to this principle, because, although we had
agreed on this point right from the first summit, the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
had never accepted it. But I am happy to learn that
President Kabila and his Government have at long last
committed themselves to this principle of a national
conference for the determination of the political future of
the Congo by the Congolese themselves.

However, there are two sticking points on which full
agreement has not been reached.

The first is the question of whether the involvement
of the rebel RCD in the negotiations for the final cease-
fire agreement should be by direct participation at the
official and ministerial level or indirectly, through
proximity talks.

The principle of involvement has been accepted. The
debate now concerns the manner of involvement -
whether it should be by proximity talks or by direct talks.
Uganda's position is that it is better to have direct
involvement on the part of the rebels, because it is only
then that we can ensure their commitment to the terms of
the agreement. No third party can claim to act on their
behalf in the delicate give-and-take process required in
such negotiations.

The second area where there has not been full
agreement is on the question of whether the rebels should
disarm upon the signing of a cease-fire agreement while
the Government forces remain under arms. There has
been a suggestion that upon the signature of the parties to
the cease-fire agreement, the rebels should immediately
disarm and give up the territory they hold today to the
Kabila Government. Uganda's position on this is that
neither of the two sides should disarm, except in
accordance with an agreed position on, among other
things, army-building by the national conference.

In the meantime, both sides should be assembled in
camps under the control of the neutral interposition force.
They should register their personnel and arms, pending
the completion of the process of forming an army that
reflects the national character of the Congo.

One more point: these discussions have talked about
genocide, and these again brought agreement on the issue.
The Uganda Government, on the issue of genocide, would
like to appeal to the Council and to the international
community as a whole to stand firm against the
perpetuation of the culture of impunity in the region.
 

Measures to this effect must include the discouragement of
safe havens for the ge'nocidaires, and those who have
committed heinous crimes against humanity must face
justice.

As all present know, there is a constellation of these
criminal elements in the Congo. They have been
reorganized into fighting units, and indeed they form part
and parcel of the alliance that supports President Kabila in
the Congo. Recently - and I am amazed that I have not
heard much about it, as only one speaker mentioned it -
they managed to enter Uganda and abduct some tourists,
whom they killed in the same way they killed millions of
Rwandese in 1994, using machetes. This is a crime against
humanity. It has been condemned by the international
community, and we believe that it is the duty of the
international community to discourage anyone from giving
safe haven to such international outlaws.

In conclusion, I would like to register the appreciation
of the Government of Uganda at the positive and
constructive contributions made by the majority of speakers
this morning, and I feel more encouraged that the support
for the regional efforts will go a long way in overcoming
the few remaining obstacles to peace.

What we ask of the Security Council, the United
Nations and the international community is to give
unqualified support to the region's diplomatic efforts to
resolve the crisis. Uganda believes that this is possible, and,
with more active support from the United Nations, we are
very close to finding solutions to these problems which, we
believe, are not entirely impracticable.

