Mr. Al-Jarman (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in Arabic): I thank you, Sir, for convening this meeting to
discuss the situation in Somalia. I wish also to
welcome His Excellency Mr. Mohamed Abdullahi
Mohamed, Prime Minister of Somalia.

My country has closely followed the drawn-out
suffering of the people of Somalia over the past two
decades, including internal political divisions,
insecurity, ongoing conflicts and violent unrest
throughout the country, and the displacement of more
than 2 million Somalis to date. While we are deeply
concerned about the persistence of this unfortunate
situation in Somalia and the threat it continues to pose
at the regional and international levels, we also
emphasize our strong support for all endeavours and
joint efforts of the United Nations and the African
Union to enable the Transitional Federal Government
to pursue its plan in the areas of reconciliation and the
fight against extremism, within the framework of the
Djibouti peace process.

We call on the Somali parties, and their leaders in
particular, to bear the primary responsibility for the
restoration of peace and stability in their country. In
this context, we emphasize the need to develop a
genuine and comprehensive international strategy and
to establish a clear political and development road map
capable of helping the Somali people to overcome their
predicament and to restore peace, security and stability
throughout the territory and territorial waters of their
country.

The United Arab Emirates pledges to maintain its
full commitment to the United Nations resolutions,
especially those imposing an arms embargo on
Somalia, and to the ongoing provision of all forms of
assistance to the Somali people in order to enable it to
overcome the urgent humanitarian crisis. We also call
for strengthened international support for Somalia,
especially in the following main areas.

First is support for the political process and for
addressing the security situation in the country, which
requires the promotion of efforts to establish political
dialogue among all Somali parties and entities,
including within the Transitional Federal Institutions,
as well as among groups remaining outside the
framework of the Djibouti peace process, in order to
encourage them to join the process and secure the
cessation of all acts of violence in the country,
including acts of extremism and other acts targeting the
humanitarian workers there.

Second is the need to address the tragic
humanitarian situation in Somalia, which requires the
international community to strengthen its
humanitarian, financial and economic support in order
to enable the Transitional Federal Government to
overcome the consequences of the drought affecting
the country and to implement programmes for the
reform, rehabilitation and recovery of the Somali
economy, aimed at rebuilding the country and creating
legitimate alternative sources of income as a substitute
for mutual killing and piracy, which currently attracts
hundreds of young Somalis. In that connection, we
refer to the humanitarian assistance, comprised of
149 tons of food, provided recently by the United Arab
Emirates to Somalia. We hope that all States will
undertake similar humanitarian initiatives to alleviate
the current plight of the people of Somalia.

Third is to address the growing phenomenon of
piracy and armed robbery off the Somali coast, the
Gulf of Aden and the Indian Ocean. The threats posed
by piracy to international navigation and trade,
including the movement of humanitarian assistance to
the African continent, have exceeded international
efforts made to date to eradicate it. In addition,
according to reports from the International Maritime
Organization, piracy has resulted in huge annual
financial losses, approaching $12 billion.

Therefore, as an affected country and active
supporter of the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast
of Somalia and its four working groups, the United
Arab Emirates calls upon the international community
to develop a holistic long-term strategy to combat and
completely eliminate this phenomenon. Such a strategy
should also make it possible to bring to justice those
who are responsible, involved in or facilitating acts of
piracy, so as to ensure that we can fully prevent and put
an end to these acts.

In that context, we support the options and
recommendations contained in the recent report of the
Secretary-General's Special Adviser on this issue
(S/2011/30, annex). We also emphasize that anti-piracy
efforts must be an integral part of the overall strategy
of the Djibouti Peace Agreement.

In conclusion my country, which in the past has
hosted a number of forums on combating piracy at sea,
hopes that the high-level conference scheduled to be
held in Dubai from 17 to 19 April under the theme
"Global threat, regional responses: forging a common
approach to maritime piracy", will contribute to
supporting and strengthening current international
efforts aimed at combating this phenomenon.

Finally, we reiterate our position calling for full
respect for the sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of Somalia as part of any
international or regional efforts undertaken for
restoring the security and stability of that country and
relaunching its development.

