Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I would first like to welcome Mr. Tieman
Hubert Coulibaly, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of Mali, and to thank him
for finding the time to join our meeting. I also thank
Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA), for his informative briefing on the
situation in Mali, and our Swedish colleague, Mr. Olof
Skoog, for his thorough report (S/2017/1126). On the
whole, we share their concerns about the troubling
developments in Mali and believe that the dangerous
potential for conflict there remains. Unfortunately, the
geographic extent of terrorist and extremist operations
has been expanding, particularly recently. What can be
done to counter it?

First and foremost, all Malian stakeholders
should acknowledge the fact that the speedy and
comprehensive implementation of the 2015 Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali is in both their
individual and national interests. In that regard, we
welcome the promulgation of the updated road map for
its implementation agreed to on 22 March between the
Platform coalition of armed groups and the Coordination
des mouvements de l'Azawad. We hope it will give
new impetus to completing the process of distributing
authority between the country's centre and its regions
and to the successful and much-needed security-sector
reform. It will be particularly important to complete
as soon as possible the process of re-establishing the
civilian authorities and to use Government armed
forces and local volunteers to establish joint patrols
and military bases in the North, without which it will
be impossible to combat terrorist activity. At the same
time, of course, we must not lose sight of the country's
central areas, where extremists have once again reared
their heads.

The problem of ensuring security is also a major
issue with regard to the presidential, parliamentary
and municipal elections to be held this year. It is in the
interests of all those in the military and political forces
working within the legal framework to ensure that the
elections will run smoothly and be seen to be legitimate.

We believe the work of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali is very important. We firmly condemn last week's
attacks on its peacekeepers, which unfortunately
claimed several lives. Such tragic events should mobilize
us to finally bring the Mission up to full operational
readiness. We realize that MINUSMA's successful
implementation of its mandate depends in part on its
Blue Helmets being provided with essential equipment.
We urge the troop-contributing countries not to delay
honouring the commitments that they have made not
only regarding their deployment of contingents, but
also in providing all the necessary equipment.

It will be difficult to achieve domestic political
stability without normalizing the situation in the
region as a whole. In that connection, we support
the concrete steps taken by the Group of Five for the
Sahel in establishing its Joint Force to combat terrorist
groups and conducting their first successful operation
on the ground.

As I said, we have perused Mr. Skoog's report on
the work of the 2374 Committee with interest. I would
like to point out that in September of last year, Russia
responded to Bamako's appeal by supporting the
adoption of resolution 2374 (2017), establishing that
subsidiary body of the Council. We believe that the
direct use of sanctions should be a measure of last resort
and that rushing to impose restrictions will hinder the
entire settlement process.

I would like to touch on one other issue. Much has
been said about the reasons for the ongoing deplorable
situation in the region, but one is truly worthy of
special mention - the current state of affairs in Libya,
the result of the overthrow of the Government in 2011.
Because of it, a virtually unchecked flood of terrorism
and weapons has been pouring out from there into
West Africa. In that regard, we stand in solidarity with
the opinions repeatedly expressed at the international
conference on the Sahel, which concluded its work in
Nouakchott on 29 March, that the Libyan crisis was
not just the main trigger destabilizing the situation in
the region but has continued to be a persistent negative
factor in it. It is crucial that Member States remember
that lesson for the future.

