Mr. Liisberg (Denmark): It is a privilege to take
part in this open debate on youth, peace and security.
We welcome the progress study (see S/2018/86) and
would like to applaud the participatory process in
which thousands of young people have been engaged.
Denmark is a strong supporter of resolution 2250
(2015), and therefore part of the Youth Champion Group
on the resolution. We have also sponsored a United
Nations Development Programme study on youth's role
in supporting peace and stability, which has informed
the progress study we see before us today.

The reason for Denmark's strong support is simple:
we firmly believe that global youth has huge potential
as peacebuilders and agents of positive change, and we
find it crucial to unleash that potential. We also have
to look at risk, because if we do not listen to the youth,
they may be a source of instability and conflict.

Youth all around the world deserve a bright future
and to live in a safe, free and prosperous world in which
fundamental human rights are respected. Youth are
not only the leaders of tomorrow, they are also crucial
partners of today, as many have said. Engaging youth as
essential stakeholders in peace processes and in policy
development in general is a way to reinforce legitimacy
and effectiveness.

In November, C6te d'Ivoire was host to a summit
between the European Union and the African Union
with the headline of investing in youth. It was a very
successful summit. I think part of the reason for that
was that we managed to agree that the summit should
include youth in the discussions and in determining the
solutions to the challenges they face.

The adoption of resolution 2250 (2015) was a
historic milestone. The clear normative focus and
political strength of the resolution is crucial, but it is
not enough in itself. The true value lies in the success
of its implementation. Our goal today must be to build
a stronger common understand of how we can translate
resolution 2250 (2015) into action. We must ask
ourselves how we can create results on the ground for
the millions of young people who are affected by armed
conflict but are limited in contributing to the solutions.

Allow me to mention an example. In Mali,
Denmark supports a youth organization called Think
Peace. The organization works on anti-radicalization
and countering violent extremism. Based on a mapping
exercise, Think Peace has come up with concrete
recommendations to Governments, political parties
and civil society on how to mitigate conflict and violent
confrontations during the upcoming presidential
elections in Mali. We need more initiatives like that
one, where young people are meaningfully engaged in
finding the solution.

Let me conclude by repeating the main message:
youth are crucial agents of change. Together, across
generations, we must unlock that potential and
give youth the best possible conditions for them to
promote peace and security. That is our call for action
today - to ensure that meaningful youth engagement
in peace processes become mainstreamed simply
because it brings about change and because it can create
lasting peace.

