Mr. Gopinathan (India): We welcome you, Sir,
to the Council and would like to convey our deep
appreciation of the fine contribution that Ambassador
Kishore Mahbubani and his dedicated team have been
making to the work of Council. Your delegation's web
site for its work in the Council presidency merits
commendation. We hope that it will serve as an
example for other delegations, including ours. We
would also like to congratulate Ambassador Lavrov for
his stewardship of the Council during a particularly
demanding period last month.

We would like to place on record our appreciation
of Ambassador Jagdish Koonjul for the work done by
the ad hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention and
Resolution in Africa. Mauritius, a beacon of peace,
democracy, harmony and prosperity, is a shining
example not just for Africa, but for the rest of the
world. We are confident that under Ambassador
Koonjul's guidance the Working Group will make a
significant contribution to the work of the United
Nations, especially that of the Council, towards
resolving conflicts in Africa.

At the Security Council's open meeting on 29
January 2002, we made a detailed statement sharing
our perspective of what needs to be done for promoting
peace and resolving conflicts in Africa. We shall
therefore focus on only some of the issues that have
been listed in the guidelines.

There is the matter of enhancing economic
coordination with the Economic and Social Council.
While economic and social aspects may have a bearing
on peace and security, the interface between these two
elements, which are dealt with by the Economic and
Social Council and the Security Council respectively,
should be coordinated by the General Assembly, the
highest intergovernmental body of the United Nations,
to which both the Economic and Social Council and the
Security Council report. Further, the modalities of
cooperation between these two bodies need to be first
discussed within each so as not to repeat the situation
that occurred last year when efforts to hold a meeting
between the two Council's had to be aborted. We
understand that as yet there is no agreement in the
Economic and Social Council on the modalities of
cooperation with the Security Council, and that the
Economic and Social Council has also not yet set up an
ad hoc advisory group on African countries emerging
from conflict.

In our view, this issue needs further in-depth,
thorough examination, keeping in view the roles of the
two bodies as enshrined in the Charter. Post-conflict
peace-building does not fall within the purview of the
Security Council, but lies with other bodies and organs
of the United Nations which are better placed to deal
with this task. As and when these bodies require the
involvement and the cooperation of the Security
Council, they would invite it.

With regard to confidence-building in the region
of the Mano River Union, we welcome the Secretary
General's decision to establish the United Nations
Regional Office in West Africa. We are confident that
under the able stewardship of Mr. Ibrahima Fall the
Office will be able to contribute to the efforts of the
Mano River Union countries as well as other
subregional groups to prevent and resolve conflicts in
the region.

On the subject of election observation, we agree
that free and fair elections are crucial for promoting
and strengthening democracies. As the largest
democracy in the world, we are fully committed to the
democratic ideal. Indeed, election observation, where
requested by the concerned State, contributes to
confidence in the electoral process, particularly in
nascent democracies. The antithesis of elections is
usurping power by overthrowing elected governments.
By its presidential statement S/PRST/2002/2 of 31
January 2002, the Council expressed its strong support
for the Organization of African Unity (OAU) decision
to deny recognition to Governments that come to
power through unconstitutional means. Before the
Council indulges in assisting in election observation, it
must, in line with its position articulated in the
statement of 31 January 2002, take a very clear and
categorical position against military coups and
unconstitutional changes in the Governments, no
matter where they occur. Embracing military dictators
and considering them to be a part of a solution, rather
than the problem that they truly are, sends a very
wrong message.

Regarding the establishment of a group of friends
for specific conflict situations, we agree that this is a
useful modality that can play a positive role provided
such a group is the genuine friend of all the parties to
the conflict and enjoys their confidence as a legitimate
interlocutor. Otherwise, the group would be seen as
taking sides or interfering and would not serve the
cause of peace, but only complicate the situation
further.

As far as cooperation with OAU and subregional
organizations, we fully support the idea that the ad hoc
Working Group should establish close links with OAU
and subregional organizations. In fact, we would like to
take this opportunity to applaud the work done by the
OAU and many subregional groups of Africa with
limited resources and, often, without political and
financial support from outside. However, the
maintenance of international peace and security is first
and foremost the responsibility of the Council, from
which there should be no derogation in the name of
burden-sharing or division of work. The Council must
not transfer its responsibility or take a back seat.

Regarding invitations to representatives from
non-governmental organizations (NGOs), universities
and academia in the work of the Group, we agree that
NGOs and civil society can play an important role. We
do recognise this, and we support and encourage them.
But experience has shown that this works mainly in the
economic and social fields and in respect of
humanitarian assistance. Maintenance of peace and
security is far more complex and, by definition, more
difficult and mostly beyond their capacity. This is a
responsibility which devolves primarily on States or
intergovernmental organizations. However, if the
Working Group considers the need to draw on the
expertise of civil society in some specific areas, we
would not object.

Let me now come to a couple of areas that appear
to have been missed and which the Council may
consider adding to the programme of work of the ad
hoc Working Group. While there have been references
to inviting components of civil society to participate in
the work ofthe Working Group, there is no reference to
participation by non-members of the Council. This
must have been an inadvertent omission, as it could not
have been the intention of the Council to give civil
society a role more prominent than non-members in its
subsidiary organs. With this understanding, we believe
that the Council should now invite non-members to
participate in the work of other subsidiary bodies as a
matter of course. We welcome this as an additional
element in demonstrating transparency in the work of
the Council and commend this refreshing approach.

In the presidential statement of 31 January 2002,
the Council, bearing in mind the linkages between
conflicts in Africa and the illicit proliferation of small
arms and light weapons, reaffirmed its continued
commitment to addressing this problem. We do hope
that a clear and sharp focus will be given to this issue
by the ad hoc Working Group, as much devastation and
loss of life has been caused by illicit arms and
weapons. The Council must come out strongly against
illicit arms traffickers and countries that either
facilitate this trade or turn a blind eye towards it. It
must also take resolute action against the supply of
arms and weapons to non-State actors.
We share the feeling of many African and other
members of the United Nations that the Council does
not give the same attention or devote the same level of
resources to addressing African issues as compared to
problems elsewhere or where the interests of some
Council members are involved. This needs to be
addressed seriously, sincerely and squarely. The
message must go out to African countries that, for the
Council, Africa's problems are as important as, if not
more important than, other problems before the
Council. We support the work of the ad hoc Working
Group, which has the potential to substantially
contribute to promoting peace and resolving conflicts
in Africa. Its focus, therefore, should be on actions that
are within the mandate of the Council, so that its
recommendations can be acted upon by the Council
expeditiously.

