Mr. Norstriim (Sweden): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union. The Central
and Eastern European countries associated with the
European Union - Bulgaria, the Czech Republic,
Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania,
Slovakia and Slovenia - and the associated countries,
Cyprus and Malta, as well as the European Free Trade
Association countries members of the European
Economic Area, Iceland and Liechtenstein, align
themselves with this statement.

The absence of war is not the same as lasting
peace. A ceasefire is seldom the end of a conflict but,
at best, a first step towards the peaceful settlement of
armed conflict. We know, from often painful
experience, how difficult it is to sustain a peace that
does not rest on a solid base. Therefore, a long-term
and comprehensive approach is necessary to resolve
discord, consolidate peace and prevent the resurgence
of conflict.

We must all act to ensure that efforts to foster
peace and stability before, during and after armed
conflict are well coordinated and part of a coherent
strategy. This means linking together long-term efforts
of conflict prevention and peace-building with more
short-term efforts, such as peacekeeping and other
forms of crisis management.

The European Union welcomes today's debate as
a sign of an increasing awareness of the importance of
linking together the range of measures to build peace.
For example, the maintenance of peace requires that
the root causes of conflict be addressed. The European
Union welcomes the emphasis in the Brahimi report on
this aspect and appreciates in particular that the report
presents conflict prevention, peacekeeping and peace-
building as a continuum of measures aimed at building
a solid foundation for peace.

While acknowledging that there may be
differences in emphasis between preventive and post-
conflict peace-building, the European Union believes
that any sharp distinction overlooks the fact that the
tools deployed in both situations are broadly similar. In
fact, there is a circular effect, since measures that
effectively build peace also serve the purpose of
preventing conflict from recurring.

The European Union believes that the concept of
peace-building must encompass concrete measures
targeted at preventing disputes from turning into
violence. For example, combating illicit trade in small
arms or conflict diamonds can contribute to preventing
conflicts and building sustainable peace. Furthermore,
peace-building efforts should include confidence-
building measures and the promotion of national
reconciliation, as well as programmes for the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
former combatants. Such a comprehensive approach is
also needed to ensure an effective response to suffering
and insecurity caused by, for example, small arms and
light weapons and the use of child soldiers.

The European Union attaches particular
importance to integrated and effective measures to
achieve sustainable post-conflict repatriation and
reintegration of refugees and other displaced persons.
Attention must also be given to the effects on the
stability of the host country or surrounding areas of
refugees in temporary settlements.

The concept of peacekeeping entails long-term
efforts aimed at preventing armed conflict from
erupting in the first place by addressing its deep-rooted
structural causes. This includes broader measures in the
political, institutional, economic and developmental
fields, ranging from trade and environment to good
governance and human rights. Sustainable development
is clearly an essential factor in peace-building.
Combating poverty and promoting an equitable
distribution of resources are vital elements in
preventing conflict and consolidating peace.

The European Union is in the process of
reforming its external aid in order to make it more
coherent in its approach to third countries, more
focused on clear policy objectives, more flexible in
responding to a rapidly changing international
environment and more consistent in its implementation.
One of the features of the reform is closer coordination
with other international donors, as highlighted by
Commissioner Nielson's recent visit to New York.
Furthermore, the European Union has made substantial
progress in developing its capabilities for crisis
management. These capacities will be of importance in
the broader context of peace-building, through, for
example, the provision by the European Union of
civilian police in international missions as a form of
voluntary cooperation. Moreover, a programme aimed
at strengthening the preventive capacities of the
European Union will be considered by the European
Council in June 2001.

The pursuit ofjustice and reconciliation is pivotal
for effective peace-building. The rule of law, full
respect for human rights, democratic foundations for
political and judicial systems, and their democratic
functioning must be ensured. Good governance,
including the promotion of accountability and
transparency in public decision-making and the
effective participation of civil society and political
pluralism and legitimacy, is also a fundamental
component.

The European Union wishes to emphasize the
important role of international law in building peace.
For example, the International Criminal Tribunals for
Rwanda and for the former Yugoslavia have served
important accountability, reconciliation, deterrence and
peace-building functions. The European Union has
actively supported measures to ensure accountability
for criminal acts under international law. We wish to
underline in this regard the importance of the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court and renew
our call upon all States to become parties to the Statute.

We would also like to highlight the role played by
civil society, in particular at the local level, in fostering
reconciliation. Avoiding marginalization and
discrimination are cornerstones of effective peace-
building. Measures to promote equality and ensure
respect for human rights should therefore be included
in any strategy aimed at building sustainable peace. In
this context, the European Union wishes to underline
the central role played by the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the importance of
adequate support for effective programmes undertaken
by her Office.

The United Nations, with its Charter
responsibilities, global presence and broad institutional
framework, is uniquely placed both to tackle root
causes of conflict and to take short-term preventive
measures. But the challenges confronting the
international community in the promotion and
maintenance of peace are both numerous and diverse.
They thus require joint efforts and complex, integrated
policy responses that must be delivered by a broad
range of actors, including those with specific mandates
under international law.

It is well recognized that Security Council
peacekeeping mandates should incorporate, as
appropriate, peace-building elements, when called for,
to support a peace process in order to establish at an
early point the activities necessary for peace-building
and to determine the means of coordination and
cooperation, both between the various components of
the peacekeeping operation and with other relevant
actors. When a peacekeeping presence is reduced or
withdrawn, it is also important to ensure that peace-
building activities can be undertaken in an environment
that does not threaten peace. Thus, the Security
Council must not disengage too early. The smooth
transition from peacekeeping to peace-building and a
sound exit strategy are fundamental elements for
preventing a conflict from recurring. This was amply
emphasized in the Security Council debate in
November 2000 on the item "No exit without strategy".

The European Union recognizes the need for
close cooperation and dialogue, carried out in a
mutually reinforcing manner, among United Nations
bodies in support of effective peace-building, and it
notes in that context the important functions of the
General Assembly and of the Economic and Social
Council in the areas of rehabilitation and
reconstruction.

The role of the Secretary-General and of the
Secretariat is crucial. We particularly recognize the
importance of strengthening the information-gathering
and analytical capacity of the Secretariat. Adequate
resources and support must, furthermore, be ensured to
enable the Department of Political Affairs to perform
effectively its role as focal point in peace-building and
conflict prevention. The European Union welcomes the
establishment of the Post-conflict Peace-building Unit
in support ofthat role.

With regard to United Nations peace-building
offices, the European Union considers that, where
appropriate, they have a role in providing a focal point
and in enhancing partnership and coordination
arrangements in countries emerging from conflict. The
European Union furthermore recalls the paramount
importance of mobilizing, in a coordinated manner, all
actors responsible for peace-building, in particular
United Nations funds and programmes, the
international financial institutions and bilateral donors,
with the aim both of ensuring their full and early
participation in formulating comprehensive peace-
building strategies, and of avoiding financial gaps
between peacekeeping and peace-building activities.

Closer cooperation between the United Nations
and its regional partners in tackling the challenges of
peace is a key element. Successful peace-building
requires active support from and participation by
regional actors. The European Union is committed to
building more effective partnerships, notably with the
United Nations but also with other regional
organizations. We would like also to point to the
valuable contribution often made by civil society,
including non-governmental organizations and the
private sector, in the field of peace-building.

The United Nations and the regional actors
possess different strengths and capabilities in the area
of conflict prevention and peace-building. Their focus
should be on achieving greater complementarity as
mutually reinforcing institutions making use of
comparative advantages. The fourth high-level meeting
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
due to begin tomorrow here in New York, will provide
an excellent opportunity to promote both
complementarity and coordination.

Development activities and peace-building
measures are two sides of the same coin. There can be
no development without peace. The European Union
fully recognizes the importance of development aid as
a part of long-term efforts aimed at building prosperity
and durable peace.

