Mr. Akram (Pakistan): May I take this
opportunity to extend Pakistan's felicitations to Mexico
and to you, Sir, and your delegation on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council at this
crucial moment in global affairs. Your task will be
challenging, but we have no doubt that you will live up
to the high expectations that we have all come to have
of you. I also wish to express our great appreciation to
our brother Ambassador Mamady Traore of Guinea for
the excellent discharge of his responsibilities at a
critical period in the history of the United Nations.

Today we join others in expressing our warm
appreciation to the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) for the role it has played and especially to Sir
Jeremy Greenstock, Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom, for his outstanding and pioneering
contributions in that context. We are sure that
Ambassador Arias of Spain will be able to fill Sir
Jeremy's shoes admirably.

Humanity has faced the phenomenon of terrorism
in one form or another throughout history, but never
before has the threat of terrorism possessed such vast
potential or such universal reach. The events of 11
September 2001 have magnified, both in reality and in
perception, the threat of terrorism to the world. No one
can discount the danger of the use or the threat of use
by terrorists of weapons of mass destruction or of other
modern means of mass destruction. This is, indeed, a
challenge unparalleled in history.

Pakistan has suffered from terrorism for several
decades from various sources, internal and external.
This challenge has, however, only strengthened our
resolve to combat terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. Pakistan is proud of the role it has
played as the front line in the fight against terrorism
since 11 September 2001. We continue to interdict
terrorists on our border with Afghanistan. Our
successes in capturing more than 500 suspected
terrorists - including some of the most senior
members of Al Qaeda - have not come easily. We owe
them in large part to the heroic efforts of our military
and our law enforcement officials, many of whom have
paid the ultimate sacrifice in this endeavour. We are
grateful also for the international assistance and
cooperation that have made it possible to apprehend
some key suspects.

Pakistan has carefully noted the report of
Ambassador Greenstock on the work of the CTC since
its creation 18 months ago. We have also reviewed the
seventh 90-day work programme and have noted the
increased attention that the CTC is devoting to helping
Member States in a practical way in receiving technical
assistance to enhance their capacity for counter-
terrorism. I should like to underline that what is
important is that countries should take action against
terrorism and that they should be provided with the
resources and the ability to do so. We must not get
caught up in procedures, processes and reporting
requirements, which must be secondary to the actual
action on the ground that is taken by States. The CTC
has contributed by focusing on building the capacity of
States to pursue anti-terror goals. The signature
contribution of Sir Jeremy Greenstock and his able
team has been outstanding.

Today, I should like to look a bit at the future. We
believe that the United Nations should pursue its
counter-terrorism goals with a clear strategic vision
and within a comprehensive framework. The Security
Council's debate today can help in developing both of
them. A useful framework for United Nations action is
contained in the tripartite strategy proposed last year
by the Secretary-General's Policy Working Group on
the United Nations and Terrorism. The strategy
consists of, first, dissuading disaffected groups from
embracing terrorism; secondly, denying groups or
individuals the means to carry out acts of terrorism;
and thirdly, sustaining broad-based international
cooperation in the struggle against terrorism. We also
need to focus on both the operational measures and the
structural mechanisms required to succeed in the
counter-terrorism campaign.

Our work on counter-terrorism has proceeded
with moral clarity and despite legal ambiguity. The
absence of an agreed definition of terrorism is an
obvious impediment to both the operational and the
structural measures required to combat terrorism. In
particular, in the campaign against terrorism, we must
not allow any erosion of the fundamental principles of
the Charter of the United Nations - especially the
principles of equal rights and the self-determination of
peoples. Nor should we exclude from the ambit of anti-
terrorism the phenomenon of State terrorism, which is
often the worst form of terrorism in the degree of
suffering and destruction visited upon innocent people.
In that context, we feel that it is imperative that the
Security Council insist on the development of peaceful
solutions to outstanding disputes and conflicts among
States.

The philosopher Nietzsche one said, "He who
fights against monsters should see to it that he does not
become a monster in the process". Therefore, we
believe that the CTC must devote further attention to
the need to ensure the protection of human rights and
the observance of international humanitarian law in the
anti-terror campaign. The CTC could, for example,
convene an informal working group that would include
the participation of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, members of the
Human Rights Commission and concerned non-
governmental organizations as a useful way to identify
concerns and possible solutions in this context.

For the long term, there is a need to address the
underlying causes: the social and economic factors that
contribute to the most proximate causes of terrorism.
The existence of poverty, of course, does not directly
lead to terrorism, but poverty weakens States and
communities and creates the frustrations and
desperation in which extremist beliefs and the
proclivity to violence breed best.

The sixth preambular paragraph of resolution
1373 (2001) refers to acts of terrorism motivated by
"intolerance or extremism". Pakistan has taken legal
and political action against extremist groups within our
society in order to combat extremism and
manifestations of terrorism. But we have also noted -
and we welcome - statements which say that the war
against terrorism is not a war against Islam. This
assurance must be given greater credibility at the
political and operational levels.

There are at least three aspects which need to
addressed. First, we need to promote greater mutual
understanding among religions and cultures. Pakistan
made a proposal to that end in the General Assembly,
and we hope that this will contribute to this aspect.

Secondly, we must focus not only on Islamic
extremism but on other forms of religious and
ideological extremism which are manifested in various
parts of the world. Today, I would like to draw
attention to the terrorism which is promoted by certain
extremist political and other parties which have been
responsible for the massacre of thousands of
Muslims - thousands of women and children - in
areas adjacent to the territory of Pakistan. These groups
are at present busy raising funds through so-called
charities in richer countries, including this one. We are
afraid that such funding will be used to finance acts of
extremism and terrorism. We must try to find ways to
put a stop to that.

Thirdly, the focus so far on terrorism spawned by
extremists in the Islamic world should not be allowed
to suppress the legitimate rights and aspirations of
Muslim peoples and Islamic nations in various parts of
the world. This is clearly the case in the context of the
legitimate aspirations of the peoples of Palestine and of
Jammu and Kashmir to exercise their right to self-
determination, in accordance with the prescriptions of
Security Council resolutions. It is unacceptable that the
slogan of counter-terrorism should be used by the
Government in New Delhi as the most convenient stick
with which to beat back the rising tide of the Kashmiri
struggle for freedom.

In his statement of 20 January at the ministerial
meeting of the Security Council on combating
terrorism, the Secretary-General said:

"We are seeing too many cases where States
living in tension with their neighbours make
opportunistic use of the fight against terrorism to
threaten or justify new military action on long-
running disputes." (S/PV.4688, p. 3)

Last year witnessed the phenomenon of a terrorist
incident being utilized by one State to justify a large-
scale military mobilization and the threat of force. The
resulting military confrontation almost led to a major
war between two States which possessed nuclear
weapons. It is essential to devise some safeguard
mechanisms to prevent terrorist incidents and
unsubstantiated allegations from becoming a casus
belli for the use or threat of force, contrary to the
United Nations Charter. One safeguard mechanism
could be that, through the adoption of a decision by the
Security Council, any allegation by one State against
another that the latter was responsible for a terrorist act
or incident must be investigated impartially, perhaps by
a United Nations fact-finding mission or another
United Nations mechanism. States should not be
allowed to act as judge, jury and executioner or to use
allegations of terrorism for the purposes of propaganda
or, worse, for the threat of use of force or, worst of all,
the use of force.

