Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I would like to begin by
expressing my appreciation to Mr. Mohamed Khaled
Khiari for his briefing. I would also like to commend
the United States for this timely initiative to focus
on denuclearization and ballistic missile launches by
North Korea.

North Korea has launched more than 20 ballistic
missiles this year. As a number of Council members
have emphasized today, such launches, regardless
of their ranges, are in violation of relevant Security
Council resolutions. Japan believes that this is the right
time for the Council to resume its discussion of those
activities, which cannot be overlooked.

In the pursuit of upholding peace and security in
the region and beyond, I cannot emphasize enough how
extremely important it is to realize the dismantlement
of all of North Korea's weapons of mass destruction
and ballistic missiles of all ranges in a complete,
verifiable and irreversible manner in accordance with
the resolutions unanimously adopted by the Council.
Japan continues to support United States efforts in that
regard, including the diplomatic process between the
United States and North Korea. As support for that
process is critical, Japan finds it encouraging to hear
today that all participants share a similar view. Japan
strongly hopes that the voices from this Chamber will
be heard.

It should also be recalled that it is the obligation of
all Member States to fully implement relevant Security
Council resolutions. Japan believes that a unified effort
by the international community will provide additional
support for the diplomatic process to move forward.

The series of ballistic missile launches by North
Korea are a serious challenge, not only to Japan but
also to the entire international community. Those
provocations have taken place while the United States
has repeatedly called for the resumption of talks. It is
important that the agreement of both leaders, including
the commitment by North Korea towards the complete
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula, be fully
and expeditiously implemented, as set out in the Joint
Statement of the United States-North Korea summit
meeting.

Japan seeks to normalize its relations with North
Korea, in accordance with the Japan-Democratic
People's Republic of Korea Pyongyang Declaration,
by comprehensively resolving outstanding issues of
concern, such as abductions, nuclear weapons and
missiles, and finding a settlement to the unfortunate
past. That policy remains unchanged. Prime Minister
Abe has publicly stated his determination to meet
Chairman Kim Jong Un face to face without any
condition.

In conclusion, Japan continues to strongly urge
North Korea to heed the messages from the Council.
North Korea needs not only to refrain from further
provocations in violation of Council resolutions,
including launches that use ballistic missile
technology, but also to take concrete action towards
its denuclearization. Japan calls upon North Korea to
choose a path to a bright future. Japan will continue
to cooperate closely with the international community
and hopes that the North Korean issue will continue to
be appropriately addressed by the Council.

The meeting rose at 4.40 p.m.
