Mr. Voto-Bernales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this open debate on the protection of civilians in armed
conflicts. Likewise, I would like to express my
gratitude to the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. John Holmes, for his
briefing and to highlight the work that is being done by
his Office in order to improve the protection of
civilians in armed conflicts.

In this regard, we are concerned by his overview
on the situation of civilians in armed conflicts. Even
though the number of conflicts has declined compared
to recent years, Violations of human rights as well as
international humanitarian law have increased in some
of them, and the civilian population, in particular
women and children, are still the main Victims. In
many cases, it is precisely women and children who are
the direct targets of the attacks and sexual violence
because of their gender or their vulnerability in an
environment of almost complete impunity.

The risk situations that are faced by civilian
populations in conflict situations, for example, in
Somalia, Palestine, Iraq, Darfur, Chad, Afghanistan and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to mention but
a few, show that despite the good intentions of the
international community, the Security Council and
even the Governments concerned, the civilian
population is still largely defenceless. In this respect,
Peru believes that the Security Council must continue
to promote effective and feasible actions in order to
guarantee the protection of civilians in armed conflicts
as well as those of internally displaced persons and
refugees.

Taking into account the reports on this theme, we
believe that, first of all, in accordance with
international humanitarian law, the parties to a conflict
must allow and facilitate the unhindered access of all
humanitarian assistance for civilians who require it.
Regrettably, the reality on the ground shows us that
this access is far from being safe, timely and obstacle-
free, which means that millions of people are deprived
of assistance that is crucial for their survival.

That is why we support the practice of the
Security Council to receive reports on every situation
where there are serious access problems.

Secondly, we support the decisions of the
Security Council with respect to the mandate for the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) in
resolution 1794 (2007) and the measures adopted for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo in resolution
1807 (2008) to tackle the problem of the use of sexual
violence against women as a weapon of war. We hope
for similar actions wherever and whenever they are
necessary in order to prevent women and girls from
continuing to be the main victims of acts of violence in
armed conflicts.

Peru supports programmes and policies that
promote the prevention of Violence. In this context, we
must stress the need for the full implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). We reiterate that serious cases
of rape and other forms of sexual Violence warrant
being referred to the International Criminal Court.
Furthermore, States must assume, as a priority, their
own responsibility to bring to justice and punish those
who are responsible for crimes as part of an overall
approach to peace, justice, truth and national
reconciliation.

Thirdly, we must stress the need to systematically
include in resolutions references to the rights of
internally displaced persons and refugees to return
safely to their homes and places of origin, as well as
the rejection of the consequences of ethnic cleansing
and sectarian Violence. United Nations peacekeeping
missions and other missions must have mandates that
prevent the appropriation and the unlawful seizure of
land and property that has been abandoned by refugees
and internally displaced persons, and that support the
issuance of property deeds when these have gone
missing or have been destroyed.

Fourthly, the Security Council must urge the
parties to a conflict and multinational forces authorized
by it to comply with the obligations that concern them
in conformity with international humanitarian and
human rights law, and to report on the measures
adopted in order to guarantee the protection of civilians
during hostilities in the implementation of their
mandates.

Fifthly, we agree that it is necessary to put an end
to the terrible humanitarian consequences of cluster
bombs and anti-personnel landmines. The harm caused
by these weapons continues over time because they
continue to maim civilians long after a conflict is over,
preventing the return of internally displaced persons
and refugees to their homes and the socio-economic
development of the affected areas. It is necessary to
adopt a binding instrument that would ban cluster
bombs, which cause irreparable damage to the civilian
population. In this respect, we expect major progress
and a political commitment in the Dublin conference
this week.

It is important to seek the full implementation of
resolution 1674 (2006), which contains crucial
provisions for improving at the international system for
the protection of civilians in armed conflicts, including
the responsibility to protect populations from war
crimes, genocide, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity.

Lastly, we support the proposal of the Secretary-
General on the establishment of a working group of the
Security Council, which would specialize in the
protection of civilians and be made up of experts. That
idea should be studied very carefully on the basis of a
further developed and detailed proposal. For the time
being, we stress that reports on conflicts included in
the Council's programme of work must contain
information on the protection of civilians. Likewise,
the Council's warning mechanisms and that of the
Secretary-General must be activated in order to protect
civilian populations.

