Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom is pleased that the Security Council
has unanimously adopted the draft resolution before it
on Somalia. For the first time in 15 years, the Somali
people have a prospect of being governed by
representative institutions that will provide them with
security and stability. For its part, the international
community must lend its support to Somalia's
transitional federal institutions, to turn this opportunity
into a reality. This resolution is one small but
significant step in that direction.

My delegation would like to pay tribute to the
African Union for its decision to deploy a stabilization
force in Somalia, and to those countries providing
troops for that mission. Our common objective is to
promote reconciliation, peace and security in a country
that has known little but conflict and instability for so
long.

It was right that we requested the Secretary-
General to send a technical assessment mission to the
region to report on the political and security situation
and the possibility of a United Nations peacekeeping
operation following the African Union's deployment.
We look forward to the results of that mission.

As well as supporting efforts to bring security to
Somalia, we urge the international community to
provide additional humanitarian relief and
development assistance to Somalia. The United
Kingdom has, for example, substantially increased its
commitment to that country, and will provide £21
million in the coming year.

But the international community can only help
the emerging peace process in Somalia. Sustainable
peace and development will depend ultimately upon
the Somalis themselves. We encourage Governments
and peoples - in Somalia and the region - to grasp
this opportunity to ensure that Somalia's institutions
are representative and inclusive and enjoy the broad-
07-24434
based support of its people. We also call on them to
ensure that we bring this long conflict to an end. This
resolution indicates that the international community
will give its fullest support to efforts to those ends.

