Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Mr. O'Brien for his briefing.
We highly value the work being done conscientiously by
humanitarian workers in fulfilment of their mandate.

As a result of the memorandum of understanding
concluded in Astana on 4 May on the de-escalation
zones, the intensity of the armed clashes in Syria has
significantly diminished. This is a fact that has been
acknowledged by many within Syria and outside. To
assert the contrary is to intentionally undermine the
achievements of the Astana process, which is bearing
tangible results and is providing impetus in the political
negotiations in Geneva. We intend to pursue the
Astana process, and we are grateful to the leadership
of Kazakhstan for the political and organizational
assistance it has offered.

At the same time, we condemn the renewed mortar
shelling ofthe Russian embassy in Damascus on 22 May,
which was undertaken from the terrorist-controlled
J obar region. It is unfortunate that our Western partners
had nothing to say about this today. We would kindly
like to ask our partners to work with the people they
sponsor to make sure that they stop targeting Russian
diplomats.

We have not failed to notice the fact that the
humanitarian nature of the reports is being diluted.
Instead of an objective analysis of the humanitarian
situation, we are seeing calls for transferring the
Syria matter to the International Criminal Court and
the need for a discussion of the problem of assisting
a very questionable investigator mechanism. The
reports should paint a broader picture of the work
that helps to bring a peaceful life back. For example,
something should be said about demining, which is part
of a humanitarian action plan, and generally about the
efforts being made to normalize the situation in the
country. Also worth mentioning is the 2016 report of
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
on Syria, which very clearly sets forth the country's
needs in terms of making progress in its reconstruction
and describes how the United Nations can help and is
helping. Russia is one of the leading donors to UNDP
projects in Syria.

The approaches to the humanitarian situation in
Syria display a very serious methodological flaw. In
order to eliminate this flaw, one has to accept that the
issue of humanitarian assistance to Syria cannot be
reduced to the issue of blockages and hard-to-reach
regions. The reality is that most of the people who
need assistance live in areas that are controlled by the
Government. Special attention must be paid to regions
that have been liberated from fighters, in particular
those settlements where local truce agreements have
been reached. We cannot share the negative assessment
ofthis kind ofpractice. Those who criticize the practice
should not forget that as result of our efforts on local
truces, we have managed to save tens of thousands of
human lives. Furthermore, peaceful inhabitants are
returning to those regions.

The agenda is now focused on de-mining and on
ensuring that the infrastructure functions normally
and that social services and facilities are in place and
available. In order to improve the quality and volume
of humanitarian access, normal working contact
with Syrian authorities at various levels is needed, as
acknowledged by many United Nations personnel. We
have been very active to that end. However, Russia's
capacity in this area is not unlimited, especially since
as can be seen in today's meeting, we are not exactly
supported by everyone here. Others need to establish
normal working contacts with the Syrian Government.
We think that a special role could be played here by
the humanitarian troika of the Security Council since it
decided to work on this difficult matter.

The description of the incident that took place in
Khan Shaykhun cannot withstand scrutiny. The main
problem today is that neither the Technical Secretariat
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons nor the Joint Investigative Mechanism have
taken the steps necessary to carry out their mandate,
including by sending specialists to Khan Shaykoun
and the Shairat air base, even though we raised the
issue with them. Damascus is ready to work with them
but, despite the fact that it has been brought up, the
Secretary-General's report (S/2017/445) does not say a
word about the issue.

On another note, the report says that the last route
into eastern Ghouta was closed in late April, but we
were told long ago that this region had been completely
blocked. The difficulties with delivering supplies to
Damascus suburbs have been intentionally exaggerated,
following the direction of fighters associated with
terrorist groups and non-governmental organizations
that are at their beck and call, including the infamous
White Helmets, in order to exert additional pressure on
the authorities in Damascus.

But the activities carried out by the White Helmets
are very well known to the United Nations and in the
region. It turns out, for example, that the the hospitals
and clinics that many non-governmental organizations
have claimed to have been destroyed are intact and
working. The Al-Wafidin corridor has allowed for the
provision of food supplies, which has caused the prices
for foodstuffs at local markets to drop considerably. It
is the constant clashes among illegal groups that are
hindering humanitarian activity, inflicting suffering on
innocent people.

How long will we have to wait before those who
support and train the Syrian armed opposition can knock
some sense into those people? We cannot help but be
worried by the fact that we are seeing a rising number
of victims among civilians in the areas controlled by the
United States-led opposition. If they promote fairness
and justice, why did they fail to mention that?

We have pointed out the illegal nature of these
operations on many occasions. They violate the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria, which we
have strongly emphasized in many Security Council
resolutions. We cannot agree with the approach of some
of our partners to humanitarian situations in hot spots
of the Middle East. One set of ideas is applied when
considering Syria, a completely different set of ideas
when it comes to Iraq, and yet a third set for Yemen.
What does this mean? Does it mean that different kinds
of people live in Middle East? Are there three different
classes of citizens living there? Let us at least be honest.
I must state in conclusion that regardless of the
tenor of our meetings, whether it is an acute polemic or
legendary diplomatic politeness, our Western partners
exploit these public meetings to make unjustified
accusations against us, which verges on insulting. The
only question we hear is: What should Russia do about
Syria? What we are doing is obvious, overt and known
to all. We constantly inform the Council about what
we are doing. Why do our colleagues not report to the
Security Council about what their countries are doing
to bring a political settlement closer?

We call once again on Council members to refrain
from the kind of fruitless and inappropriate rhetoric
whose rules Council members have flouted when
flinging unacceptable provocations on us and other
countries. We propose instead that we concentrate
on making specific contributions to ending the war
in Syria and assisting in its reconstruction. We stand
ready to work together there.

