The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative
of Uruguay.

Once again I should like to convey the heartfelt
solidarity and condolences of my Government to the
families of the victims of the Manchester attacks, most
of whom were children and young people, as well as to
the Government and the people of the United Kingdom.
Uruguay emphatically condemns this terrorist act as
well as all attacks perpetrated by Da'esh, Al-Qaida,
Boko Haram, Al-Shabaab and other terrorist groups
whose recent actions have shocked the international
community. Their heinous crimes make clear their
profound contempt for human life and dignity, the
values of peaceful coexistence, and religious, cultural
and social tolerance.
The elaboration of a discourse countering narratives
that promote and motivate terrorist acts and help recruit
individuals to commit them is a key aspect of preventive
action in countering terrorism and violent extremism
when it leads to terrorism. These efforts are part of
the battle that is being waged in the field of ideas, to
which Uruguay attaches particular importance. For it
to be successful, it is necessary to seek and promote
channels for dialogue among Governments and various
non-State actors. We must also encourage cooperation,
promote tolerance and peaceful coexistence, and
respect international law, the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and fundamental freedoms.

We understand that resolution 2354 (2017), which
we have just adopted today and which Uruguay
co-sponsored, lays the foundation for the elaboration
of such narratives in accordance with the principles
and best practices contained in the document entitled
"Comprehensive international framework to counter
terrorist narratives" (S/2017/375, annex). We therefore
wish to thank the delegation of Egypt for its initiative
and its efforts in leading the negotiations that made
possible both the adoption of the resolution and the
realization of document S/2017/375.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my list.

The meeting rose at 10.45 am.
