Mr. Antonio: At the outset, I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, and through you the members of the
Security Council, for inviting the African Union to
participate in this meeting - further eloquent testimony
to the evolving strategic partnership that exists between
the United Nations and the African Union on matters of
peace and security on the continent.

(spoke in French)

I should also like to welcome the presence here
today of His Excellency Mr. Tieman Hubert Coulibaly,
Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Mali. I thank him for his eloquent
statement. I also welcome the statement just made by my
brother Ambassador Bamba, whose views the African
Union fully supports and who spoke of the elements of
the strategy we have espoused since our meeting here
on 5 December (see S/PV.6879).

(spoke in English)

When we met here on 5 December, our intervention
mirrored a collective sense of urgency and a unified
message for concrete and decisive action to resolve
the crisis in Mali. It is in that context that the African
Union welcomes the adoption today of resolution 2085
(2012) as a major step forward and clear recognition of
the primacy of the Security Council in the maintenance
of peace and security in all parts of the world.

We also wish to commend the high-quality wisdom
and political will shown through the decision of the
members ofthe Security Council to support the requests
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the African Union by authorizing the
deployment of the African-led International Support
Mission in Mali (AFISMA) for an initial period of one
year. I wish therefore to extend the African Union's
appreciation to all the members of the Security Council
for their tireless efforts, resolve and commitment,
which led to the adoption of resolution 2085 (2012).

Recent experience in Darfur and Somalia has
shown that an appropriate United Nations support
package that provides for sustainable and predictable
funding remains a critical element of the success
of any international support mission. We note and
welcome with appreciation the conscientious effort of
the Security Council to address that critical matter, as
reflected in the resolution, and we reiterate the African
Union's call on the United Nations to put in place a
support package for the International Support Mission,
to be funded through assessed contributions, and to
establish a trust fund to support the Malian Defence and
Security Forces, given the lead role they are expected
to play in addressing the security challenges in their
country.

In conclusion, the African Union Commission
wishes to recall the press statement issued by the
African Union Peace and Security Council at its 348th
meeting, held on 13 December, which, among other
things,

"reaffirmed the need for sustained efforts by
both the Malian actors and the international
partners, in order to expedite the resolution of the
multidimensional crisis facing Mali, recalling, in
this regard, the relevance of the strategic concept
for the resolution of the crises in Mali".

In the statement, the Council also stressed

"that issues of democratic governance, as well
as the negotiation process and the deployment
of AFISMA go hand-in-hand, and are mutually
reinforcing, and that determined efforts should
be made on these two tracks [and] appealed for
the mobilization of humanitarian aid to assist the
increasing numbers of refugees in the neighboring
countries and internally displaced persons within
Mali".

Finally, I wish to reaffirm the African Union's
continued commitment to working in partnership with
the United Nations, ECOWAS, the countries of the
region and other parners towards the speedy resolution
ofthe crisis in Mali.

