Mr. Eide: Let me first express my gratitude to the
Secretary-General for being here and for his very kind
words.

On this very day nine years ago, the United
Nations undertook its post-Taliban engagement in
Afghanistan, and I believe that, together, we have
achieved quite a lot in that time in the areas of
education, health, building State institutions and so on.
But I must also say that today, nine years later, I am
worried about negative trends. I am worried about the
growing impatience of public opinion in the donor and
troop-contributing countries. I am worried about
increasing frustration among the Afghan public over
what they see as expectations that have not been met.
And I am worried about the difficulties experienced by
the international and Afghan forces in putting the
insurgency on the defensive. If these negative trends
10-20219
are not reversed - and reversed soon - there is a risk
that they, in combination, will become unmanageable.

As the Secretary-General pointed out, the
political calendar has been set, with the London
Conference to take place in three weeks from now and
the Kabul conference later this year. Now, we have to
get the political agenda right - or rather, quite frankly,
return to the political priorities set in The Hague and in
Paris. We have lost valuable time, especially in the past
six months, when the protracted election process has
diverted energy from pursuing the priorities we had set.

The London Conference will focus mainly on
security issues. On 23 January, the Joint Coordination
and Monitoring Board in Kabul will decide on the
increase in the police force and on a reform programme
for the police. The London Conference should endorse
those decisions. It should also signal an acceleration of
the training and mentoring of the Army and a gradual
transfer of authority from the international to the
Afghan security forces. That will be the first step in a
new transition strategy that can allow Afghans to be in
charge of their future.

However, as the Secretary-General also pointed
out, this transition strategy must include key civilian
areas and the systematic build-up of civilian
institutions to enable the Government to deliver
services to its people, and the development of the
Afghan economy to enable the Government to pay for
those services when international aid is reduced. If we
do not take these civilian aspects of the transition
strategy as seriously as we do the military, then we will
fail.

What we need is a strategy that is politically and
not militarily driven. For years there has been a
consensus, at least in rhetoric, that this conflict cannot
ultimately be solved by military means. However, most
of our focus has nonetheless been on the number and
activities of military forces. The political strategy is
too often shaped as an appendix to military thinking.

For years there has also been a consensus, at least
in rhetoric, that the process of Afghanization must be
accelerated. However, structures that parallel the
Afghan Government have not been reduced, and
according to the last donor financial review from the
Afghan Government, 80 per cent of aid to Afghanistan
has been provided through bilateral projects, bypassing
the Government. Less than 10 per cent of total aid has
been provided to the Government, but only a quarter of
that amount is not earmarked for a specific activity in
the budget. The situation has improved somewhat over
the past year, but only somewhat, and remains
basically the same as I have just indicated. These
figures do not demonstrate a mindset whereby Afghans
are allowed to take the lead.

To me, the London and Kabul conferences
represent critical opportunities to agree on a politically
driven strategy in which Afghan ownership and Afghan
capacity stand at the centre of all our activities. The
military surge must not be allowed to undermine
equally important civilian objectives and the
development of this politically driven strategy. It must
not lead to increased pressure for quick results in
governance and economic development efforts, which
would divert resources from a long-term approach to
civilian institution-building and economic growth.
Furthermore, it must not lead the military to expand its
engagement in key civilian areas such as those I have
mentioned. That could result in a situation where the
international community becomes more entrenched
rather than one where the Afghans are more
empowered.

Let me outline what I see as the components of a
political strategy, some of which I have touched on
before around this table. First of these is a systematic
approach to the building of civilian institutions. This is
not only a question of not appointing corrupt officials,
although anti-corruption will be an important part of
the effort. It is a question of training and education, of
infrastructure and incentives. Soon the Civil Service
Institute in Kabul and 32 provinces will have the
ability to train 16,000 officials in key bureaucratic
skills. At the moment, 1,700 young men and women
from all provinces are being trained as future
administrators in the National Institute for
Management and Administration. Thus, the institutions
exist, but they are fragile and underfunded.

Furthermore, we need attractive incentives to
ensure that young people who are trained by the
Government also go to work for the Government, and
that young people who come from the provinces and
districts return to the provinces and districts. Today, a
district governor earns $70 a month. Half of them have
no dedicated office, and they normally have an
operating budget of $15 per month. It will cost
hundreds of millions of dollars to implement an
ambitious institution-building programme, but it is the
best investment we can make in Afghanistan's future.
Today, the Government lacks the delivery mechanisms
in terms of substantive national institutions able to
provide services. Our main challenge must be to
develop these tools and to expand the reach of the
Government, instead of continuing to rely on parallel
international structures that one day will be withdrawn.

Secondly, as to human resource development, the
education system is seriously unbalanced, as I think I
have also mentioned. I think I mentioned before that,
today, the number of young girls and boys in primary
school is 7 million, but there is room for only 60,000
of them in universities and 20,000 in vocational
education. These are serious imbalances, and we must
all take our share of the responsibility to correct them,
because it is important for the development of
Afghanistan's economy.

Thirdly, the critical sector of agriculture
continues to be seriously underfunded, in spite of the
fact that at least 80 per cent of the population is
dependent on that sector, and in spite of the fact that it
was identified as a key priority in The Hague and,
before that, in Paris. Some even say that, in light of its
impact on poverty reduction, job creation and revenue
collection, the development of agriculture will decide
whether the country fails or succeeds.

Fourthly, infrastructure remains a neglected
sector in spite of rich mineral resources that could be
exploited, provide huge income and employ tens and
perhaps hundreds of thousands of people. The country
has Asia's largest iron ore deposits and a number of
other exploitable minerals. The United Nations and the
Government have together identified transportation
networks and energy supplies as top priorities for
starting mining projects that would provide real
economic growth.

And, finally, a peace and reconciliation process
must be launched and become an integrated part of the
political agenda. It must be based on the Constitution
and be Afghan-owned and Afghan-led; and if the
insurgency were to agree to join a peace process, that
would significantly enhance the prospect of troop
withdrawals. However, by joining a peace process, the
insurgents must also distance themselves from the past
and embrace the future, as well as the progress that has
been achieved over the past few years. I have said
before that I am ready to meet anybody, anywhere, if it
can serve the purpose of peace. I believe that is the role
of the United Nations whenever the Afghan
Government seeks our support, and within the
framework of our mandate.

So these are, in my view, the key components of
the political agenda. The London Conference can
endorse a number of decisions, particularly in the
security sector. In other areas, the London Conference
should provide a road map for the time between
London and Kabul so that, at the Kabul Conference, we
can aim at having fundable projects ready in order to
give momentum to the strategy of transition and
contribute to turning the current negative trends
around.

With these challenges ahead of us, it is important
for all, and first of all the Afghan people, that a strong
and reform-oriented Government be put in place
without further delay. The parliament's rejection of
17 candidates last week was a setback because it
prolongs a situation where Afghanistan is without an
established and functioning Government. This is
particularly serious, of course, in a country in conflict,
with so many challenges that need to be urgently
addressed. At the same time, of course, parliament
demonstrated that it is far from a rubber-stamping
body. Soon the President will present new candidates,
and it is my strong hope that parliament will then be
able to consider those candidates as quickly as
possible.

The Secretary-General mentioned further
improved coordination mechanisms, which are
important. There has been some political progress over
the last few years. I believe the international
community speaks with one voice in important
political matters. The Joint Coordination and
Monitoring Board reforms that the United Nations
initiated in 2008 have yielded a more effective
coordination mechanism. Together with the Afghan
Government, we have also been able to identify key
priorities more clearly and develop critical initiatives
in areas such as agriculture and capacity-building.

The next challenge is to align donor resources
behind these priorities, and there are some positive and
promising signs that this is actually happening. But we
need stronger coordination instruments. I have
therefore, with the Minister of Finance, put together
proposals that we believe will be an important step
forward.
These proposals are based on a continued United
Nations coordination umbrella, with all of us working
more closely under Afghan leadership. This plan will
integrate officials of key donors into UNAMA's
coordination structures, thereby ensuring that we are
constantly plugged into donors' planning processes and
can influence them at an early stage. However, these
efforts must also be accompanied by greater efforts
within the International Security Assistance Force to
bring provincial reconstruction teams in line with
Government plans and gradually transfer civilian
projects carried out within the framework of military
institutions to civilian structures.

This coordination must now have a nationwide
perspective. I have repeatedly - boring some, both
here and in the capitals - emphasized the importance
of not concentrating resources only in the south and the
east, but also investing in the centre and the north of
the country. That has not happened, however. Before
leaving for New York, I asked a number of prominent
Afghan politicians why the insurgency has spread over
the last few years. There is no simple answer, but one
element mentioned by all was the neglect of stable
provinces in the allocation of development resources.
For that neglect, we now have to pay a high price.

However, with regard to coordination, I should
add that there are limitations. With hundreds of donors,
agencies and non-governmental organizations, there
are limitations in Afghanistan, as there would be in any
other country. Any institution, including the United
Nations, can go only so far in successfully coordinating
all actors.

The Independent Electoral Commission (IEC) has
announced that elections for the next parliament will
take place on 22 May, in accordance with the
Constitution. I certainly cannot criticize the IEC or any
of the prominent politicians who were consulted for
respecting the Constitution, which represents the
foundation for all orderly political activity. There are
technical reasons that will make it challenging to keep
this timeline. Security remains a major concern, and
the presidential elections demonstrated a need for
reform of electoral institutions.

Article 55 of the electoral law gives the IEC the
right to postpone elections on the basis of security,
financial or technical considerations. Should Afghan
authorities make use of that provision, then elections
could be held later in the year, but in a way that still
respects the Afghan legal system.

In terms of reform, the President has expressed
his intention to Afghanize the election process. I would
support that position - as long as it results in elections
that are considered to be fair and impartial by the
Afghan public. During the last elections there was
widespread fraud, which demonstrated the weakness of
electoral institutions and a difficult security situation.
There was also a perception of international
interference, which I will say undoubtedly also
occurred, before and after election day. Both must be
eliminated in future electoral processes.

Let me add a few words about the presidential
elections that are now behind us. The Secretary-
General's report explains in some detail the approach
that we took. But I want to emphasize here and now
how fragile the political situation was in the aftermath
of the first round. Significant economic resources left
the country in anticipation of political instability. The
number of visa applications rose dramatically for the
same reason. The possibility of serious instability and
violence was avoided through a careful handling of the
process until the very last minute. The international
community stood together, I must say, under United
Nations leadership, and the Afghan political actors
behaved responsibly and with respect for the
Constitution. Those were important achievements and
must not be underestimated.

Finally, since this meeting is my last before the
Council, I think it is important for me to emphasize a
fundamental aspect of our international approach to
Afghanistan. There is a tendency in the international
community to shape strategies, make decisions and
operate on the ground in a way that Afghans perceive
as disrespectful and sometimes arrogant. Afghans do
sometimes feel that their country is treated as a no-
man's land and not as a sovereign State. That
perception contributes to unnecessary and dangerous
tensions between the Afghan Government and the
international community. It fuels suspicions of
unacceptable foreign interference and breeds a sense of
humiliation. I cannot emphasize strongly enough the
need to bring this phenomenon to an end.

Military activities, civilian casualties, house
searches and detention policies are sources of
recruitment for the insurgency. In the Afghan context,
what affects one individual in a village affects
everyone there. I am pleased to see General
McChrystal's efforts to reduce the number of such
incidents and to demonstrate greater respect for Afghan

sensitivities. The military surge will certainly make
that challenge even more difficult. However, whether
we are military or civilian, we must better understand
the Afghan context and Afghan society. Even among
ordinary Afghans who want our presence - and they
are the majority - there are many who resent what
they see as disrespect for their religion, their culture
and their values. Success in our long-term partnership
will depend on consulting more, listening more and
demonstrating greater understanding for a society that
needs our assistance but also demands our respect. We
have to learn the pulse of Afghan society, which is very
different from our own.

UNAMA has been through some difficult months.
UNAMA's staff consists of dedicated, knowledgeable
and brave people. The terrible attack against the
Bakhtar guest house was traumatic and illustrated that
the United Nations is today more a target of attacks.
But it also demonstrated the strength and solidarity of
those who work for the United Nations in Afghanistan.
Every effort is being undertaken to ensure that we can
all continue our work, with safety and security for
United Nations staff. I am grateful for the support of
the Secretary-General and Member States in that
respect.

At the same time, we are facing a crisis in
recruitment that jeopardizes the future of the Mission.
When I took over UNAMA in March 2008, its vacancy
rate stood at 30 per cent. By working with the
Department of Field Support we were able to reduce
that rate to 12 per cent, which is very, very good.
Unfortunately, I have no such good news at this
juncture. The number of staff members who left the
Mission in the last six months of 2009 stands at 50,
mainly due to security concerns and understandable
fatigue. The number of staff members who have been
hired by UNAMA during the same time period is five.
The vacancy rate at the end of last year was around
25 per cent. On top of that come the new posts
provided through the 2010 budget, which will push the
vacancy rate even higher.

The new recruitment system put in place in July
2009 simply has not worked. In many cases it does not
offer the kind of staff that UNAMA needs. In every
case it has been far too slow. A11 vacancy
announcements have been closed, meaning that people
who have recently become interested in coming to
Afghanistan are not able to apply. This is, in my view,
a result of systemic flaws that affect not only UNAMA,

but all peacekeeping missions and special political
missions and, if not corrected, will threaten their
effectiveness and possibly even worse.

This is, as you said, Sir, my last briefing as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Afghanistan. I have set out a political agenda that I
believe is required to turn around the current negative
trends. I am convinced that these trends can be turned
around and that the conflict can be brought to an end in
a way that serves the Afghan people and stability in a
wider sense. But that will require discipline by all,
constant efforts to give Afghans more of the
responsibility for their own country and a commitment
to a long-term partnership with the people who will
continue to need our support.

