Ms. Sison (United States of America): As we
consider the Security Council's work in August, I
congratulate you, Mr. President, and your Mission on a
successful presidency.

I turn first to the issue of North Korea, which, in
a sense, has bookended the month. We saw a strong
example of Security Council unity in early August,
and then an alarming reminder of the North Korean
threat just this week. The Council came together on
the first Saturday of August (see S/PV.8019) for the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2371 (2017), which
sends a stark message to the North Korean dictatorship:
they will pay a price for the aggression and arrogance
of continuing their prohibited nuclear and ballistic
missile programmes. With our action, the Council also
reminded all United Nations States Memabers that they
must rigorously enforce this newest resolution, which
includes the single-largest economic sanctions package
ever levelled against the North Korean regime, as well
as all previous Security Council resolutions.

With its behaviour in recent days, however, North
Korea's leaders have made it crystal clear that they are
not yet ready to abandon their dangerous path. Twelve
members of the Council alone are within reach of their
missiles, and I would remind my colleagues that North
Korean has proven it is not beholden to friendships and
alliances. Even as we rightly celebrate the adoption of
resolution 2371 (2017), we must recognize that North
Korea will persist in its behaviour, as evidenced by
Monday's highly provocative launch over Japan.

Last night, the Council once again unanimously
condemned North Korea by adopting presidential
statement S/PRST/2017/ 16). There should be no doubt
in anyone's mind that the Council will not acquiesce,
but will continue to increase pressure on the regime and
seek to change North Korea's path.

Turning to the issue of sanctions more generally, I
commend your Mission, Mr. President, for its work this
month in holding a briefing (see S/PV.8018) to consider
the design and effectiveness ofUnited Nations sanctions.
We also held meetings on the sanctions regimes in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (see S/PV.8026),
Guinea-Bissau (see S/PV.8031) and Libya (see S/PV.8032). Taken together, those meetings show that,
when the Council speaks with one voice to implement
and enforce sanctions, we demonstrate our capacity to

promote and protect international peace and security.
When we do not speak with one voice we undermine
both the effectiveness of sanctions as a tool and the
credibility of the Security Council. However, Council
unity is not an end goal. When the Council is unwilling
or unable to enforce or enact sanctions, the United
States will take action, including unilateral sanctions,
to defend ourselves, our allies or our values. I urge
Council members to boost their efforts to effectively
use this important tool.

I also thank you, Mr. President, for holding in open
Chamber the briefing by the Chair of the Sanctions
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533
(2004), concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, which allowed the families ofMichael Sharp and
Zaida Catalan to participate. I encourage my colleagues
on the Council to support the Secretary-General in his
efforts to immediately establish, under his authority,
an independent investigation into the deaths of those
two experts.

Yesterday's open debate considered the issue
of peacekeeping operations in the larger context of
sustaining peace (see S/PV.8033), and we welcomed the
opportunity to discuss how that fits into a broader vision
for peacekeeping reform. Looking ahead, we will have
another opportunity to consider peacekeeping reform
at Ethiopia's Council meeting next month during high-
level week. I understand that a draft resolution will be
adopted at that meeting, and I urge Council members
to produce a strong text that reinforces peacekeeping
effectiveness and efficiency and allows us to better
assess performance. While we support the efforts of the
African Union (AU) to increase financial self-reliance,
I would remind my colleagues that the AU must take
more steps on that front before we are ready to enshrine
any decisions in a resolution.

I also wish to highlight the Council's upcoming visit
next week to Addis Ababa for consultations with the
AU Peace and Security Council. That annual dialogue
affords the Security Council an important opportunity
to demonstrate our commitment to the AU and to
further United Nations-African Union cooperation. In
that regard, I thank you, Mr. President, for your steady
and professional leadership of the Council this month.

Finally, I also wish to commend our Japanese
colleague for his Mission's excellent work on the
revision of the note by the President contained in
document S/2010/507, which was adopted earlier
today. The revision goes a long way to improving the
Council's working methods and contributes to the
Council's effectiveness, efficiency and transparency. I
congratulate Japan for its tireless and successful efforts
on this important matter.

In conclusion, we offer our support to Ethiopia as its
delegation takes up the gavel in the month of September.

