Mr. Bessho (Japan): Allow me to thank today's
briefers for their comprehensive updates on the
situation in Afghanistan. I would also like to thank you,
Mr. President, for Spain's contribution as penholder in
our discussions on Afghanistan over the past two years.
Japan will try to make a meaningful contribution as
penholder, starting in January, by seeking a broad range
of opinions from our Council colleagues, Afghanistan,
the countries of the area, donors and civil society.

We witnessed two crucial international conferences
on Afghanistan this year. At the NATO Summit in July,
the international community reaffirmed its commitment
to standing with the Afghan people on security matters
by providing financial support to the Afghan National
Defence and Security Forces (ANDSF) through the end
of 2020 and sustaining the Resolute Support Mission
beyond 2016. At the Brussels Conference in October,
the international community pledged to continue
assistance to Afghanistan for the next four years based
on the principle of mutual accountability. We sincerely
hope that Afghanistan will soon achieve self-reliance
to the point where donors no longer need to announce
multi-year pledges.

We urge the National Unity Government to make
further efforts to implement its commitments regarding
the Self-Reliance through Mutual Accountability
Framework.I would like to note, however, that the role
ofthe Security Council is not to oversee progress on the
Framework. What we can do is monitor Afghanistan's
continued reform efforts and its initiatives to combat
the spread of extremism, and evaluate whether they
are contributing to international and regional peace
and security. The Council should remain united in
supporting Afghanistan as it endeavours to overcome
its many challenges.

Sadly, the Secretary-General's most recent report
on Afghanistan (S/2016/1049) reveals harsh realities.
Few improvements have been seen in terms of political
developments and security. A positive note can be seen
in the frequent meetings between President Ghani and
Chief Executive Abdullah, as well as the lessening
of public demands to replace the National Unity
Government. We have listened carefully to the briefing
by Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Yamamoto in order to determine what the Council can
do to further support Afghanistan and bring peace and
stability to the region.

Today's briefing by the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) reminds us that
comprehensive solutions are required for Afghanistan.
Japan has been cooperating with UNODC on counter-
narcotics, and we are encouraged by its integrated
programme approach to addressing narcotics from
a variety of angles. Afghanistan is at its core an
agricultural nation. We are providing support to allow
Afghanistan to fight poverty not with poppies, but with
the revival of its legitimate agricultural sector. We
envision regional cooperation in which Afghanistan's
expanded agricultural productivity allows it to export
products to neighbouring countries and to become
a hub between Central Asia and the Indian Ocean.
That approach is in the spirit of the recent Heart of
Asia Conference.

Afghanistan possesses the potential for self-
reliance, making its dire security situation all
the more unfortunate. The unstable environment
impedes opportunities for development, while we see
dangerous signs of growing extremism. Japan provides
$130 million in security assistance each year, but the
increased capacity of the ANDSF will depend not
only on international support but also on strengthened
governance by the National Unity Government, built
on a foundation of economic development. Most of
all, we firmly believe that an Afghan-led peace and
reconciliation process is the determining factor in
achieving a sustainable resolution to the conflict

The many countries that gathered for the Brussels
Conference are eager to witness concrete progress in
development. Similarly, the Council is eager to witness
concrete progress in security. Both the international
community and the National Unity Government
must translate their commitments into action in
order to achieve those concrete results. If security is
strengthened, it will provide a vital foundation for
regional cooperation and economic development. Japan
will deepen dialogue with various stakeholders and
seek progress in the Council going forward.

