Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): On the Security Council's handling of the
question pertaining to Security Council resolution
1044 (1996), our position has been made amply clear.

First, the Chinese Government vigorously opposes
and strongly condemns all forms of terrorism. We hold
that terrorist activities not only wreak havoc on life,
property and social stability, but also threaten
international peace and security. We therefore have
expressed our strong indignation at the attempted
assassination of President Mubarak of Egypt and believe
that terrorists involved in this attempt should be brought
to justice. In this context, we fully understand the concern
of Ethiopia, Egypt and others.

Secondly, we are of the View that this act of
terrorism, like any other international question, should be
addressed by the Council in accordance with the purposes
and principles of the United Nations Charter. It is
necessary to base ourselves on facts, making sure that we
stand on legal ground, pay attention to evidence and deal
with this question in a fair, objective and serious manner.

Thirdly, in principle, we are against frequent
recourse to sanctions under Chapter VII of the Charter.
No matter how complex the question may be and how
difficult it is to resolve it, we should always insist on a
peaceful solution through dialogue, consultation and
mediation. Facts have shown that sanctions are often in
the way of a settlement and, worse still, they might even
exacerbate tension, bring suffering to the countries and
peoples of the region and have serious adverse effects not
only on the target country, but also on the neighbouring
countries.

Although the draft resolution before us talks about
diplomatic sanctions only, diplomatic sanctions are still a
form of sanctions. And by invoking Chapter VII of the
Charter, the draft resolution also makes reference to
further measures to be taken by the Council, thus paving
the way for possible strengthening of the sanctions. We
are of the opinion that imposing sanctions on the Sudan
before incontrovertible evidence is in hand will set a bad
precedent for the future work of the Council. Our position
was made clear by our delegation when Security Council
resolution 1044 (1996) was adopted by the Council. I
would also like to reaffirm once again our reservation on
the part of the draft resolution that calls on the Sudan, in
accordance with Security Council resolution 1044 (1996),
to refrain from engaging in activities of assisting,

 

supporting and facilitating terrorist activities. Accordingly,
we will abstain in the voting on the draft resolution.

Ever since the failed attempt on the life of President
Mubarak in June last year, the United Nations, the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) and others have all
made tireless efforts in trying to resolve this question as
early as possible. Egypt, Ethiopia and others have also done
a great deal of painstaking investigative work in seeking to
establish facts and track down the suspects. The
Government of the Sudan has also publicly condemned
terrorism and clearly stated its willingness to continue
cooperation with the OAU and other States concerned, in
order to have this problem properly resolved. It has also
held consultations with these countries for this purpose. We
appreciate and support all these efforts. We hope that the
parties concerned will, through dialogue and consultation,
and taking full advantage of the role of the OAU, continue
their efforts in this regard.
