Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): We
are pleased to see the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Australia presiding over this debate on small arms.
The importance and significance of this discussion
are highlighted by the presence of dignitaries, foreign
ministers and other high-level individuals here today.
We also note the participation of the Secretary-General
and welcome his report (S/20l3/503). We thank the
Vice-President of the International Committee of the
Red Cross for her statement.

Argentina welcomes the adoption of the first
resolution on small arms (resolution 2117 (2013)), which
crystalizes the objectives promoted by my country
during its former presidency of the Security Council, in
March 2006, as you so generously mentioned, Madam
President. The fact that Australia has undertaken
this initiative speaks to the shared convictions and
the fact that there is no room in this Organization for
monopolized agendas or privileged positions for anyone.
It is obvious that the essence of true multilateralism is
working together. It is a shared responsibility, one that
has to do with solidarity, that is strategic: to build, for
everyone, a more just, secure and peaceful word.

It is the duty and responsibility of the international
community to intensify and multiply the efforts to
eradicate the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons, as they pose a challenge to the maintenance
of international peace and security. It is important
that the measures taken are aimed at more control and
transparency in the stockpiling and transfer ofweapons,
an improvement of international cooperation, including
the exchange of information and confidence-building
measures, and capacity-building assistance to States
in order to establish effective arms control and
regulatory measures and to enable them to implement
their commitments under the relevant instruments,
both regionally and internationally, including the arms
embargoes established by the Security Council.

The stockpiling and uncontrolled spread of small
arms and ammunition have severe implications for
human development, sustainable economic growth
and peace. As mentioned previously, armed violence
erodes the fabric of society; diverts investments in
infrastructure, health and education; promotes political
insecurity; increases crime; and foments political
instability and a climate of impunity.

We know that throughout the world violence in
conflict and post-conflict situations is carried out
mostly with conventional weapons, especially small
arms and light weapons, which are available because
of the very lucrative business of smuggling, as well as
regulations and controls that are really insufficient or
nonexistent. It should be clear that the uncontrolled
proliferation of these weapons has a devastating impact
on civilians, especially women and children. That
is why Argentina believes it a priority to strengthen
existing mechanisms to prevent, combat and eradicate
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons.

Argentina approaches the problems arising from
small arms in the context of a comprehensive strategy
that includes elements related to international security,
defence, non-proliferation and domestic security.
This strategy includes both domestic and foreign
policy actions through our participation in efforts
at the international and regional level. The premise
on which we base ourselves is that the fight against
the proliferation and illicit trafficking of small arms
depends largely on the policies that countries are
willing to adopt in the domestic arena, such as periodic
reviews of control measures for arms exports. However,
efforts to prevent and combat the illicit trafficking in
and irresponsible transfers of arms will be effective
only if appropriate regulation and controls exist at the
regional and international level.
In that conviction, Argentina participated actively
alongside other countries in the negotiation of the Arms
Trade Treaty, in the establishment of the United Nations
Register of Conventional Arms, and in the meetings of
the United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, among others.
The Southern Common Market has been working to the
same end.

It is estimated that the worldwide traffic in
small arms and light weapons amounts to more than
650 million, that 1,500 people die every day as a result
of armed violence, and that 60 per cent of all human
rights violations are committed with small arms. In
Syria, to cite but one instance, the horror of chemical
weapons, whose use is a war crime and a crime against
humanity, should not overshadow the need to remember
that 99 per cent of victims have been claimed by
conventional weapons, including small arms and light
weapons.

We emphasize that resolution 2117 (2013), which
we have just adopted, recognizes the link between the
unregulated circulation of small arms, on the one hand,
and sexual violence and violence against children, on the
other, in situations of armed conflict, although examples
of this link also abound in peacetime. Various studies
show that in any region of the world the possession of a
small arm in the family space increases by 41 per cent
the risk of a family member being murdered, while for
women this risk increases threefold. The danger is only
heightened in situations of armed conflict.

We note that, in the context of measures to
prevent the proliferation of weapons, the effective
implementation without double standards of the
sanctions imposed by the Security Council is essential.
Sanctions are not an end in themselves, but strict
compliance with them - on the part not only of those
against whom they are addressed, but also the rest of
the membership, especially the producers and exporters
of weapons - is a significant factor in reducing the
availability of weapons and conflict. At the same time,
it is necessary to prevent targeted transfers to a country
in conflict or where they can be used to commit
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights and disrupt communal security.

Through you, Madam President, we commend the
focused and committed work of the Australian Mission,
led by Ambassador Gary Quinlan. As is emphasized in
the concept note drawn up for this meeting (S/2013/536),
armed violence is not only a cause ofendemic poverty but
also a consequence thereof. We hope that the resolution
which the Security Council has adopted today, based on
the broad agreement that the international community
achieved in adopting the Arms Trade Treaty, will open
a new phase in which, to paraphrase the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Korea, the merchants
of death will be displaced by the peacemakers.

