Mr. Mayr-Harting (European Union): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU)
and its member States. The acceding country Croatia;
the candidate countries the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Montenegro, Iceland and Serbia; the
countries of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidates Albania and Bosnia and
Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, Armenia and Georgia,
align themselves with this statement.

We are grateful to Pakistan, as President of
the Security Council, for organizing today's timely
and important debate looking at counter-terrorism
measures from a comprehensive perspective. I would
like to thank you, Madam, for chairing this important
meeting in person.

International terrorism poses a very significant
threat to peace and security, as Pakistan only recently
had to experience once again, sadly. I would like to
express my heartfelt condolences on that terrible event.
That is why the fight against international terrorism
remains one of our highest priorities and should
continue to be a priority for the United Nations. We
are convinced that an integrated approach, combining
prevention of terrorist threats and attacks with the
response to them, is essential.

The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy is central to the European Union and its
member States in both their national efforts and their
worldwide partnerships. In accordance with the relevant
international legal framework as it evolves, we work
hand in hand with the United Nations on implementing
the Strategy, and we attach great importance to the its
global counter-terrorism framework, which prescribes
a holistic approach to tackling terrorism that includes
not only law enforcement and other security measures
but also respect for human rights and the rule of law.

Preventing terrorism by addressing and stopping
terrorist radicalization and recruitment is a priority
for the European Union and its member States. We
agree that more emphasis must be placed on preventing
terrorism by examining and addressing the conditions
conducive to its spread. In order to achieve that goal, we
must consider new approaches with a variety of tools
and look beyond traditional actors at the governmental
and law-enforcement levels, while engaging with,
among others, civil society, social networks,journalists,
women, youth organizations and media. In addition,
assistance to victims of terrorism and their families
should also be an element of counter-terrorism efforts.
We believe that victims and their associations can
contribute to preventing terrorist radicalization and
sending messages of non-violence and reconciliation.

Countering the financing of terrorism is a core
component of the EU's strategy. As terrorists and their
supporters constantly modify their ways to raise, move
and gain access to funds, we must adapt instruments and
measures to deprive them of the possibility of engaging
in criminal activity. The EU has developed a range
of measures aimed at cutting off terrorists' access to
funding, and we are committed to the implementation
of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF). We
contribute actively to the Task Force's work, as well
as to the implementation of its recommendations in
the European Union. In addition, we highlight the
fact that the relevant United Nations resolutions and
Council of Europe instruments play an important role
in countering terrorist financing.

The active involvement of civil society is a key
element in effectively countering terrorism and
violent extremism. Non-governmental organizations
represent a valuable resource in that context. With a
view to safeguarding the integrity of non-governmental
organizations against abuse by, for instance, terrorist
networks, including in the field of terrorist financing,
the sharing of relevant best practices among Member
States and with civil society could be of great value and
should be encouraged.

We take this opportunity to stress yet again that
counter-terrorism measures can only be effective when
consistent with a judicial approach and within the law.
Counter-terrorism measures need to be carried out
in full accord with fundamental democratic values,
human rights and the rule of law.

In the framework of the pledges made at the
General Assembly High-level Meeting on the Rule
of Law on 24 September 2012, the European Union
pledged to develop operational guidance to ensure the
consideration of human rights and, where applicable,
international humanitarian law in planning and
implementing counter-terrorism assistance projects
with third countries.
The European Union will continue to support the
consolidation of State institutions, justice, police and
customs in order to strengthen security and the rule of
law with a view to reducing the threat from terrorism,
kidnapping and cross-border criminal activity, such as
the trafficking of drugs and human beings. It is therefore
important to strengthen international cooperation
and the criminal justice systems of United Nations
Members in order to enable them to prosecute terrorist
suspects effectively. In this context, the European Union
welcomes the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum rule of
law group and will actively take part in establishment
of the institute for justice and the rule of law in Tunis.

Although the core of the action on counter-
radicalization and recruitment is and should remain at
the national level, regional and international cooperation
is needed to help coordinate national policies and
share good practice. In this context, we welcome the
establishment of the International Center of Excellence
for Countering Violent Extremism in Abu Dhabi.

We also take this opportunity to welcome, as other
have done, the recent adoption of resolutions 2082
(2012) and 2083 (2012), introducing some important
changes to the Al-Qaida and Afghanistan sanctions
regimes, in particular extending the mandate of the
Monitoring Team and the Ombudsperson in order to
make their work more effective and transparent.

I would like to conclude my intervention by
stressing that we have no doubt that no act of terrorism
can be justified or sanctioned by any religion, belief,
ideology or culture, and that none of these should be
associated with terrorism. We must continue efforts
to foster understanding among people of all cultures,
religions and beliefs, and in this regard we stress our
commitment to the aims and work of the United Nations
Alliance of Civilizations. As a counter to extremism
and terrorism, we must stand firmly behind the values
that unite us, underline the shared profound respect for
people of all religions and beliefs, and discourage the
language of prejudice, hatred and intolerance, as well
as violence.

