Mr. Rohland: I am very pleased to have this
opportunity to address the Security Council. On behalf
of the World Bank, I would like to express our sincere
gratitude to the President of the Security Council for
our invitation to this important meeting. I would also
like to put on record our appreciation for the report of
the Secretary-General, the briefing of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the
valuable analysis just provided by the Administrator of
the United Nations Development Programme.

The United Nations and the Secretary-General
have shaped the historic process that we are about to
witness and shown the way into East Timor's future as
an independent, sovereign nation. The Bank pays
tribute to this important historic undertaking.

East Timor is also very special to the World
Bank. We have been involved in working with the East
Timorese and their leadership and the United Nations
Secretariat on economic issues since before the ballot.
As a matter of fact, we started working with them as
early as February 1999. We were there immediately
after the violence. Many members know that resolution
1272 (1999) was approved by the Council on 25
October 1999, and we were out there with our joint
assessment mission on 26 October 1999. We have
followed the transition process and have worked
closely with the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) and the East
Timorese ever since.

I think it is fair to say that the transitional process
in East Timor has seen many successes. Most
importantly, the country has a high degree of internal
security and there are particularly good relations
between the international peacekeeping force and the
population. I pay tribute to the work of the
peacekeeping force and its predecessor, the
International Force in East Timor (INTERFET), in this
regard.

We have succeeded in restoring core Government
services. We have started long-term reconstruction
programmes, and that more quickly than in any other
post-conflict situation that we have witnessed in the
past. For this we owe most to the East Timorese
leadership and the East Timorese people and their
commitment to build a new nation. But we also owe a
lot to Sergio Vieira de Mello, working on behalf of the
United Nations, and to the cooperation of the
international donor community and our colleagues in
international financial institutions and United Nations
agencies. Again, I would like to put on record our deep
appreciation for this.

I think this process, which started with our joint
assessment mission in October 1999, has proved that
there is a great spirit of cooperation among the
Timorese people, international participants and the
international organizations. Yes, we have achieved a
lot. The process in East Timor was, by historic
standards, a very good one. We are on the road to
success. But we can improve, and we should improve.
We should take on the lessons of the last 18 months to
be even better on the road to independence.

With all the success there have been social and
political tensions. Reconstruction and restitution of
Government services have not always met the
expectations of the population; they have not always
met with the impatience of the population. Sometimes
the East Timorese themselves have not always felt the
degree of ownership of the process that is needed for
the transition to be successful. Let us build on our
experience. Let us grasp the opportunity to improve.

In the Bank we are reviewing our support
processes. We want to see where improvements can be
made, and we will be working with UNTAET and the
East Timorese and drawing lessons that can be fed into
both current operations and the planning of post-
independence support. This review will start in a few
days, and I am sure it will provide valuable lessons that
we will discuss at the next donors meeting at Canberra
in June, as Sergio Vieira de Mello mentioned.

Let me point to some of these preliminary lessons
that we see as critical, and let me try to give some
answers to the question before you today. I think that
first we need to develop a clear and structured plan for
the transition and the post-independence mandate. The
past year has seen rapid fire-fighting and reactions to a
crisis situation. This was - and let me be very clear
about it - the right thing to do, given the enormity of
the challenge that faced the Timorese and their
international partners in September 1999 and
thereafter.

Now we need to take on a longer-term view. The
UNTAET-World Bank process donor meeting
document outlines some strategy elements, but much
more work is needed to identify and to time out other
critical steps. These details will need to be developed
in the coming weeks, but I believe we can already
distinguish some key characteristics ofthat plan.

The plan needs to be in place as soon as possible
to enable mobilization of the right resources. It needs
to focus on a small number of key objectives, not to try
to cover everything under the sun. It needs to be a
collaborative effort with the participation of all the
development partners. It needs to be driven by the East
Timorese and supported by the international
community. It needs to be widely disseminated and
discussed among Timorese and international
Government staff, the Timorese population and the
development partners. Everyone needs to understand
the path being taken. Finally- and Sergio Vieira de
Mello has already alluded to this - the plan will need
strong management monitoring to turn papers into
results on the ground.

The area of administration, as previous speakers
have pointed out, will be crucial to the transition. In an
environment of devastated infrastructure and
communications and with the total collapse of the
State, the establishment of government functions has
taken more time than expected. This has involved
critical bottlenecks in procurement and recruitment,
bottlenecks that are about to be overcome.

UNTAET and the emerging East Timorese
administration needed some time to develop a way to
work jointly and to overcome difficult legal and
organizational issues to improve effectiveness. It is
crucial for the success of the first independent
Timorese Government that it inherit an administration
with efficient systems, capable human resources, clear
roles and lines of accountability, an administration free
of corruption and undue political interference. The
Timorese therefore must already participate fully in the
interim administration between now and independence
to ensure that the State being built is the same one they
want for the future.

A smooth administrative hand-over will require
concerted effort in recruitment and institutional and
human capacity-building over the coming months, as
well as good advance planning for post-independence
technical assistance.

We need to recognize that true independence is
not only political, but also economic. East Timor's
independence will need to be based on sound fiscal
management that balances revenues and expenditures
for long-term sustainable development. Its central
fiscal authority and its national planning and
development agencies are the key drivers through
which future support should be channelled to achieve
sustainability. This was the message of the donors
meeting in Brussels. Cooperation between the United
Nations, the national leadership, the Bretton Woods
institutions and bilateral donors is based on this
recognition. We need to integrate political,
administrative and economic planning even more
closely than was the case after the ballot.

East Timor needs a capable State, and it needs a
sustainable set of financial and public management
frameworks. Respecting the wish of the East Timorese
leadership to inherit a lean State is key in this period.
We must particularly take care to avoid undertaking
unsustainable capital projects which cannot be
maintained by the State in the future. We need to focus
on a clear set of Government functions, and agencies
should be appropriate to its development state. We
should not replicate the situation of the proliferation of
agencies, as in many richer and more developed
countries.

Economic independence applies to individuals as
well as to the State. When I go to the districts of East
Timor, East Timorese people from every walk of life
tell me that they do not want dependence on aid. They
want a chance to work, to start small businesses, to sell
their agricultural products. Private-sector recovery is
critical. It is also critical because the withdrawal of
many international personnel in the months to come
will cause some job loss in public agencies and in the
urban service sector.

We should take this seriously not only because of
the hardships for the individuals, but also because of
the links between security and economic development.
More jobs, higher agricultural output, a strong private
sector and a functioning public infrastructure will all
help to ensure a stable political transition. It will show
the population that they gain in an independent East
T imor.

On the downside, unemployment and a crumbling
infrastructure, in contrast, will act to destabilize the
political transition. To get the link between economic
development and political transition right,
synchronization is the key challenge for all players
around this table and in the international community.

We should work together with the Timorese
leadership and with UNTAET and our colleagues in the
International Monetary Fund to ensure that an
appropriate economic stimulus is applied before the
transition and to strengthen budget allocations to social
services and core economic infrastructures.

The coming month will be challenging, and we in
the World Bank stand ready to help in every way we
can. In addition to our continuing support, along with
other donors to the Trust Fund for East Timor, we will
offer assistance for a fiscally sustainable civil service,
wages and structures. We will offer assistance on anti-
corruption strategies, so vital for a sound public sector
environment. We will work with the central fiscal
authority in improving budgetary processes, and we
would like to see the Trust Fund for East Timor
involved in a mechanism to support a more integrated
and sustainable budget for the new Government.

In the coming months, we will be discussing
options in this regard with the Timorese, UNTAET, the
United Nations and, most importantly, the donors to the
Trust Fund for East Timor, whom I sincerely thank for
their support over the last month and on whom I call
for support for the month ahead.

I wish to thank you once again, Mr. President, for
providing us with this unique opportunity to address
the Security Council.

