The President (interpretation from Chinese): I thank
the representative of Poland for his kind words addressed
to me.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of China.

The Chinese Government has been following very
closely the peace process in Angola. The Angolan people,
who have suffered greatly from the scourge of war, are
looking forward to the final arrival of peace. To achieve
national reconciliation and peace in Angola represents not
only the strong desire of the Angolan people, but also the
common aspiration of the international community.

We are pleased to note that since the meeting
between President Jose Eduardo Dos Santos and
Chairman Jonas Savimbi in early March in Libreville,
Gabon, there has been some improvement in Angola's
political atmosphere. Particularly, progress has been made
in the military aspects of the peace process. We
appreciate and encourage any move that will help create
a favourable atmosphere for Angola's peace process, for
peace will benefit, while fighting will hurt, all. A final
settlement of the Angolan question will, in the final
analysis, rely on the political decision to be made by the
parties in Angola out of the fundamental interests of the
Angolan people.

Meanwhile, we are deeply worried about the
repeated delay in implementing the Lusaka Protocol. The
current slow progress in the Angolan peace process is
inconsistent with the spirit of the Protocol reached by the
parties concerned, nor is it what the international
community would like to see. The quartering of forces in
accordance with the Protocol is one of the key links in
the Angolan peace process. Any delay on the question
will seriously affect the whole peace process and will not
be conducive to mutual trust between the two sides in
Angola. Therefore, we urge UNITA to fulfil its
commitment as soon as possible by quartering its forces
within the fixed timetable.

UNAVEM. III has since its establishment made
important contributions in supervising the implementation

 

of the Lusaka Protocol and promoting and consolidating the
peace process in Angola. Today, UNAVEM. III has become
the largest United Nations peace-keeping operation, whose
ultimate success or failure will be a major test for the
United Nations. The Chinese delegation is very much
concerned about its deployment environment and the
implementation of its mandate. We call on the parties
concerned in Angola to earnestly ensure the safety of
UNAVEM. III personnel, and hope that they will closely
cooperate and work together with UNAVEM. III to bring
peace to Angola.

The Angolan question has now become the last hot
spot to be settled in southern Africa. We are in favour of
continued vigorous support for the Angolan peace process
by the international community in order to bring about
peace and tranquillity in the whole of southern Africa.

It was on the basis of those considerations that the
Chinese delegation voted in favour of the resolution just
adopted.

The Chinese Government and people have always
been concerned about the destiny of the African people
and sympathized with and supported the peace cause of
the African countries. It is a cornerstone of China's
foreign policy to attach importance to developing friendly
relations and cooperation with the African countries.
Chinese President Jiang Zemin is starting his visit to six
African countries today. This once again shows that the
traditional friendship between China and the African
continent is being further consolidated and strengthened.

I now resume my capacity as President of the
Security Council.

There are no further speakers on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage of
the item on the agenda. The Security Council will remain
seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 5.50 pm.
