Mr. Cevik (Turkey): I would like to extend our
appreciation for your invitation, Madam, to take part
in today's meeting. We also thank Emergency Relief
Coordinator Ms. Valerie Amos, High Commissioner
Antonio Guterres, and the Executive Director of
the United Nations World Food Programme (WFP),
Ms. Ertharin Cousin, as well as Special Envoy Angelina
Jolie Pitt, for their continuous advocacy for ending the
plight of the Syrians.

Last month, following the powerful call issued by
the heads of United Nations agencies, we all asked a
question: "What will it take to end the crisis and the
suffering in Syria?" The appalling conflict in Syria has
entered its fifth year. Hundreds of thousands of people
have died and millions have been displaced. Some, in
an attempt to flee the violence, try the Mediterranean
sea route and tragically lose their lives.

The situation in Syria has only gone from
bad to worse. Three Security Council resolutions
have been adopted on humanitarian access and the
protection of civilians in Syria. Sadly and frustratingly,
non-compliance with those resolutions goes unpunished.
The crisis has provided a fertile ground for the rise
of terrorist groups such as Daesh and caused the
deepening of sectarian fault lines in the region. The
grave situation in Yarmouk refugee camp, which has
been under siege by the regime, is one of the latest
examples of exacerbated suffering.

There can be no sustainable humanitarian solution
to the crisis without a political solution. A genuine
political solution is the only alternative. Thus, the
answer to the question "What will it take?" is crystal
clear. And it largely rests here, with the Security
Council.

In the absence of any progress on the political
front, millions of Syrians are trapped in a vicious cycle
of conflict and need for relief. We, as the neighbours of
Syria, have been bearing the brunt of this humanitarian
disaster. From the beginning of the crisis, Turkey has
put the Syrian people, regardless of their ethnic and
religious backgrounds, at the heart of its humanitarian
approach. This approach is based on three tracks.

First, we maintain an open-border policy and
comply with the principle of non-refoulement. More
than 1.7 million Syrians are now living in Turkey. Over
256,000 Syrians are registered in 25 shelters. All their
needs are provided for by the Turkish Government.

Secondly, we assist the Syrians who live in various
towns outside the shelters. We are taking measures
to provide them with basic services, including free
health care. The temporary protection regulation that
came into force last year reinforced our humanitarian
response by allowing Syrians to enjoy additional rights
to sustain their livelihoods.

The third track pertains to extending humanitarian
relief items to the northern parts of Syria, also through
the zero point of the border, in conformity with
our international obligations and in support of the
United Nations campaign. The total value of the aid
channelled to Syria through that type of operation is
almost $365 million. Also, our cooperation with the
United Nations to enable United Nations cross-border
humanitarian operations in northern Syria continues.
The financial burden of the crisis for Turkey has
exceeded $5.6 billion, whereas the total contributions
we have received bilaterally and multilaterally so far
stand at only $300 million.

The multifaceted effects of the crisis to Syria's
neighbours, including Turkey, which has become a
shelter for the highest number of displaced Syrians,
is increasing. It must be recognized that a just sharing
of the burden is the fundamental responsibility
of the international community. The gap between
the humanitarian and development needs versus
the contribution of the international community is
widening. The pledges made at the Kuwait conference
and elsewhere need to be mobilized in a timely and
sustainable manner. Innovative assistance mechanisms,
such as the World Food Programme's e-food card
voucher system in place in Turkey, requires urgent
international support. Scaling down the funding to
basic but effective United Nations programmes similar
to this one increases the strain on the shoulders of host
communities. If not even the most basic food needs
cannot be funded, then what?

Addressing the education needs of Syrian children
has to occupy a central role in our response. In Turkey
alone, there are 550,000 Syrian children of school age,
350,000 of them are awaiting international support for
their enrolment. Syria's future cannot lose a generation
of children to a cycle of violence. The international
community should support this cause.

Lastly, stronger action is needed to ensure
humanitarian access and the protection of civilians
against the crimes of the regime as well as terrorist
groups such as Daesh. Examples of the means and ways
to achieve that purpose, as depicted in a recent report
by Under-Secretary-General Amos, should serve as an
eye-opener.

Time and again, we have stressed at the Council
that the current situation is unsustainable, for Turkey
and for any other country in the region. The United
Nations regional response plans will only be as good as
their level of funding. Syrians and Syria's neighbours
should not be left alone in coping with the humanitarian
tragedy, which requires a genuine partnership by the
international community, including civil society and
the private sector. That partnership has to include
addressing the needs of forcefully displaced Syrians,
building the resilience of the host communities and
increasing resettlement efforts.

I particularly deny the Syrian regime's baseless
accusations. We will continue to stand by the Syrian
people, as once more acknowledged by the briefers and
others today. Syrians from all backgrounds are together
waging a struggle for survival and their future. The
members of the Council and all actors should keep
in mind that the ongoing atrocities and humanitarian
disaster in Syria can be overcome only by addressing
the root cause of the problem, that is, the regime's
Violent oppression of the democratic aspirations of
Syrians.

In an attempt to prolong its grip on power, the
regime continues to employ all kinds of force and
violence through all the instruments and measures
available to it, be they chemical weapons, barrel
bombs, ballistic missiles, targeted killings, systematic
abuse or torture. The international community should
increase its pressure on the regime without further
delay, so as to pave the way for a political solution,
which can be achieved only through a genuine political
transformation based on the legitimate demands and
aspirations ofthe Syrian people, in line with the Geneva
communique (S/2012/522, annex).

