At the outset, allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your country's assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for this month and to thank China for its work in March. I would also like to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Annadif for his briefing and for his leadership of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). We pay tribute to his commitment and to all MINUSMA staff for their unwavering efforts in support of peace and stability in Mali. Again, far too many victims have suffered violence, injury or even death since our most recent meeting in January (see S/PV.8703), and I would like to acknowledge their suffering. The implementation of the Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali has witnessed some positive steps in the past three months. The deployment of elements of the reconstituted army in Kidal and other towns in northern Mali is very encouraging. The same is true of the peaceful visit of the Prime Minister there to witness that new reality. The long-overdue workshop on improving the participation of women in the peace process is a first step in the right direction, in line with resolution 2480 (2019). I would like to stress and express my gratitude for the indispensable role that the Mission has played in making all three developments possible; it is probably safe to say that without MINUSMA, this positive evolution might not have happened. Intercommunal tensions in the centre remain of utmost concern. Whereas the situation has certainly improved from a year ago thanks to the efforts of the Government and MINUSMA, regular violence against civilians persists. We note with concern the increase in the number of improvised explosive device (IED) attacks against the Malian security forces and international peacekeepers. We welcome the counter-IED training already provided by MINUSMA to the national security forces, in cooperation with the European Union. We support additional efforts in this regard. We commend the recent military operations against terrorists in Liptako- Gourma. That fight is an integral aspect of the various efforts, international and national, to stabilize Mali and the region. However, the overall situation continues to be very fragile, and Mali remains a country that is struggling to emerge from crisis. Belgium is convinced that the way forward should include consolidating Mali's democracy by strengthening the legitimacy of the State and providing public services while strengthening the rule of law and respect for human rights. Impunity needs to be effectively tackled by holding trials in order to fight corruption and criminal abuses, including by security forces. The Mission's adaptation plan is crucial, and my country has already expressed its political support therefor. Belgium is currently assessing if and how it can contribute. Finally, I would like to express my encouragement to Mali and to MINUSMA to continue their efforts as safely as possible in the context of the ongoing pandemic. While this situation will inevitably complicate the achievement of meaningful progress in the short term, it could also be an opportunity to build the large front needed to pass the necessary reforms and curb insecurity. Fighting the coronavirus is of course a top priority for all of us, but that certainly does not mean that the implementation of the peace agreement and the consolidation of Malian democracy should be put on hold.
