Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): Thank you for convening
this very important meeting, Mr. President.

Ukraine aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union. I would also like
to make a few specific points in my national capacity.

I would like to take note of the briefing on military
helicopters in support of peacekeeping operations given
by the Secretariat in February, which my delegation
considered extremely important. We acknowledged the
progress we achieved last year, especially in increasing
the rate of utilization of combat helicopters to 70 per
cent. We are working with the Secretariat on reaching
our common goal, which is to close the current gap.
In that regard, we fully support the ideas of regularly
reviewing force requirements through mission
capability studies, improving letter-of-assist incentives
and continued synergies through inter-mission
cooperation.

Last year, at the Secretariat's request, we doubled
our military aviation unit in the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Having recognized the added
value of inter-mission cooperation in terms of military
advantages, cost-effectiveness and promoting regional
approaches to regional issues, Ukraine has been a
pioneer of this innovative form of peacekeeping. In
particular, my country has been a major contributor for
a number of years to this kind of cooperation between
the United Nations Mission in Liberia and the United
Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire.

The latest example of inter-mission
cooperation - aimed at filling critical gaps in the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan - has been a
good demonstration of the benefits and challenges of
such inter-mission deployment, which in general are
similar for both police and military components. We
believe that both the Secretariat and Member States
have drawn appropriate lessons from that example and
that appropriate measures have been undertaken for
improving future arrangements. At a time when threats
in regions of conflict are growing and United Nations
mission budgets are being downsized, we believe
that inter-mission cooperation, especially in military
aviation, can be one of the most effective instruments
for fast, appropriate responses by the United Nations to
new challenges at the lowest possible cost.

Turning to the issue of triangular cooperation,
a cornerstone of my delegation's position remains
the need for closer, more transparent and effective
cooperation in peacekeeping between all stakeholders.
We can only welcome the fact that United Nations
peacekeeping continues to figure prominently on the
Security Council's agenda, as both a general and a
country-specific issue. We have also taken positive note
of some fresh practical elements, but there is still much
room for improvement. In particular, we would like to
encourage the Council to make the practice and timing
of the adoption of peacekeeping mandates, including
the renewal of inter-mission support mechanisms,
more friendly for troop-contributing-countries
(TCCs). Whenever feasible, taking relevant decisions
well in advance of target dates would give TCCs and
police-contributing countries enough breathing space
to bring new or extended Security Council mandates in
line with their national legislation, thus facilitating the
timely deployment of their national units.

The growing contribution of and demand for
United Nations police assistance in post-conflict
environments is clear. The complexity of current and
anticipated future missions points to an immediate
need for enhanced strategic thinking and wider
political support for United Nations police activity. In
particular, my delegation notes positively the ongoing
development of a strategic guidance framework aimed
at promoting standardization within the United Nations
police and welcomes the preparation of the new vision
and multi-year strategy of the Police Division.

In line with the subject of today's debate, we would
like to stress the need for a more systematic response
on the part of United Nations police to the evolving
threats to international peace and security represented
by transnational organized crime, terrorism and
integrated border management. The Police Division has
already taken critical steps forward with its West Africa
Coast Initiative, which provides basic and specialized
training, technical and operational support, but further
strengthening of the police components' efforts in
this area is crucial. More intensive utilization of the
expertise of the standing police capacity in addressing
these challenges could be considered as an addition to
overall efforts in this area.

