The President: I shall now make a statement in
my national capacity before the vote.

The negotiating process on the draft resolution
before us illustrates once again that the Group of
Friends are not interested in genuinely negotiating with
the Security Council on the text that they produced.
Once the Group of Friends reach an agreement, they
are adamant that "it is cast in stone" and would not
change substantially. As has been our experience in this
matter in the Council, the Group of Friends have once
again failed to be receptive to any substantial changes
to the text that was initially agreed to by the Friends.
Unlike other Council outcomes, there was once again
no real attempt to reach a compromise on the
contentious paragraphs so that we could be assured of a
balanced text. Through this process the Security
Council, which bears the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security under
the terms of the United Nations Charter, is undermined
by a group of like-minded countries and individuals
who chose to determine the fate of the people of
Western Sahara.

On the text of the resolution, my delegation
would like to point out the following points.

The word "realism" would be interpreted as
implying that the Council endorses the view of the
Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General on political
reality and international legality. No State or individual
can bestow upon itself the right to deny the right of
self-determination to the people of Western Sahara.
That interpretation could set a precedent that could be
used in many other cases. Are we going to say to the
people of Palestine that they should be realistic in that
they cannot get their freedom because of the powerful
State of Israel? Indeed, are we going to say to the
people of Serbia that they must accept Kosovo as a
reality because of what has happened? This attempt
would set aside international law in favour of the
principle that "might is right".

We maintain that "realism" in the text of the
resolution is related to the negotiations and not to any
outcome. Following the report of the Secretary-
General, the resolution calls on both parties - the
Frente POLISARIO and Morocco - to show realism
and a spirit of compromise, as these are essential to
maintain the momentum of the process of the
negotiations.

The resolution welcomes Morocco's "serious and
credible efforts to move the process towards
resolution". The context and the relevance of retaining
this phrase have changed. This phrase has,
unfortunately, led to destructive ambiguity and has
resulted in some unfortunately interpreting the
Council's intention as favouring one proposal over the
other.

My delegation reiterates our understanding, as a
Council member that was part of the negotiations on
the text of resolution 1754 (2007), that the text of the
resolution is clear, that the Council takes note of both
proposals and that the Council called on the parties to
enter into negotiations based on both of these
proposals. Any attempt to place one proposal above the
other would undermine the negotiations process and
would be counterproductive to the spirit of future
negotiations based on these two proposals. The Council
and the Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General
should remain objective without pre-empting any final
status of the negotiations.

The sponsors have once again refused to include
any mention of human rights in the draft resolution,
despite the fact that the Secretary-General has
continued to report on the human rights situation in
Western Sahara. Additionally, both parties - Frente
POLISARIO and Morocco - have raised human rights
concerns in their recent letters to the Secretary-
General.

My delegation finds it extremely curious that
some Council members selectively are quick to
pronounce on the human rights situations in countries
that are not even on the agenda of the Security Council,
such as Myanmar and Zimbabwe, but refuse to deal
with human rights abuses in Western Sahara, which
this Council has been faced with for decades. This
double standard creates a clear impression to the
international community that the Council simply does
not care about the human rights of the people of
Western Sahara.

The resolution does, however, call on the
parties- Frente POLISARIO and Morocco - to
continue where the negotiations began after the
adoption of resolution 1754 (2007), on the basis of the
two proposals. It is for that reason that, despite the
serious concerns with the draft, my delegation will vote
08-32472
in favour of the resolution in the hope that through the
negotiating process and with the support of MINURSO
the people of Western Sahara can one day achieve their
right to self-determination.

I now resume my function as President of the
Council.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Belgium, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica,
Croatia, France, Indonesia, Italy, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Panama, Russian Federation, South
Africa, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Viet
Nam

The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1813 (2008).

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements following the
voting.


