Mr. De Santa Clara Gomes (Portugal): I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his latest report
(5/2004/888) on the situation in Timor-Leste and to
welcome the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa, back to the Council.

Portugal subscribes to the statement to be made
shortly by the representative of the Netherlands on
behalf of the European Union. I will only add a few
comments of our own.

The Secretary-General's report establishes clearly
that Timor-Leste has made significant advances
towards self-sufficiency. Nevertheless, major
challenges remain, and continuing international
assistance is essential. Portugal agrees with the
Secretary-General that, under the current
circumstances, we should refrain from making any
change to the composition or size of the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET), including those of its police and military
components. In that context, I want to take this
opportunity to add that a significant part of the
equipment utilized by the former Portuguese military
contingent of UNMISET - amounting to more than
$20 million - was donated by Portugal to the
Government of Timor-Leste.

Timor-Leste's relations with its neighbouring
countries continue to develop, but it is with concern
that we note that that has not yet resulted in any
concrete agreement on one major aspect: border
delineation. Stable relationships with neighbouring
States and timely access to natural resources are
essential in paving the way for the peaceful and
economically sustainable development of Timor-Leste,
but so is the settlement of both land and maritime
borders.

The justice sector continues to show serious
shortcomings; it remains an area that needs critical
assistance from the international community. In that
context, I would like to inform the Council that
Portugal has contributed $1.2 million to help the
Ministry of Justice, together with the United Nations
Development Programme and UNMISET, to launch an
institution called the Judicial Training Centre. Today,
the Centre provides standardized post-graduate
professional training to all judges, prosecutors and
public defenders as a condition for their permanent
appointment. We also note that, although drafts of a
criminal code and a criminal procedures code are
currently under consideration, it is important to move
forward in that process. Portugal believes that both
codes will complement the legislation on the national
police.

Portugal is also seriously concerned at the
Secretary-General's recognition that it may not be
possible for the serious crimes process to respond fully
to the need and desire for justice for all those affected
by the events of 1999. Like the Secretary-General, as
stated in his report, we believe that the perpetrators of
those serious crimes must be brought to justice. We
will support an initiative of the Secretary-General
aimed at exploring possible ways to bring about true
accountability in situations of human rights violations.

My final remarks relate to the responsibility of
the international community and of the United Nations
in this important final stretch in Timor's recent history.
It is important that UNMISET - a peacekeeping
operation - be terminated, as planned, in May 2005.
But it is even more important that Timor-Leste
continue to benefit from the organized and coherent
support of the United Nations system after that date.
We are all aware that, despite the gigantic steps that the
country has taken in institution-building and in
becoming a viable State, much more remains to be
done. International support, both bilateral and
multilateral, must be forthcoming. We have achieved
much, and we must safeguard that investment by
ensuring that Timor-Leste continues to benefit from the
assistance of the international community. Portugal
believes that we must begin to envision a smooth
transition for Timor, without peacekeeping, but with a
solid and coordinated United Nations presence to
support those who will remain to help Timor-Leste
after May 2005.

