Mr. Eler (Turkey): Today, while the number
and intensity of violent conflicts and asymmetrical
threats around the globe is on the rise, budgetary and
administrative constraints, coupled with increased
divisions within the Council and the United Nations,
impede the effectiveness of our response capabilities.
Civilians are losing their lives on a daily basis
in conflicts. Peacekeepers are operating in grave
danger, as exemplified by the latest attack on United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali on Saturday. These are combined
with the challenges of globalization, epidemics,
terrorism, cybercrime and beyond. Rising xenophobia,
discrimination, attacks on migrants, and intolerance
risk threatening the very nature of peaceful societies.

In those grave circumstances, a soul-searching
on our approach to international peace and security is
critical. In that respect, the various review processes
this year on peace operations, peacebuilding and
gender are very timely. We know that lasting peace
and stability require addressing the root causes of
problems. We know that our response should be
comprehensive and multidimensional to address the
interconnected nature of current global threats and
to prevent a relapse into conflict. But do we have the
time, will and resources to address today's challenges
while sustaining our interest in post-conflict countries?
Does the current peacebuilding architecture provide
a realistic and feasible response to conflict and post-
conflict situations? Are exit strategies well tuned
to prevent the recurrence of conflict? Those are all
questions the review processes should address.

One tool involves fostering coordination between
different conflict-response tools. There is a need to
build increased synergies among the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Peacebuilding Support Office, the
Peacebuilding Fund, the Security Council, the general
United Nations membership, regional and subregional
organizations and international agencies. We should
build strong partnerships with civil society and the
private sector. That way, the United Nations system can
better respond to security and development challenges
in a cost-effective and sustainable manner.

Capacity-building, which lies at the heart of
establishing peace, does not mean merely building
institutions and enacting laws; it also means fostering
a culture of democracy and development, in the spirit
of national ownership, as the path to viable peace.
Encouraging policies that lead to increasedparticipation,
inclusiveness and the economic empowerment of all
segments of society - including women, children,
young people, older persons, minority groups and
migrants - in peace and development processes is key.
We have a shared responsibility to embark on a path
to inclusive and shared prosperity in a peaceful and
resilient world where human rights and the rule of law
are upheld and no one is left behind.

Inclusivity breeds resilient societies. Sustainable
peace requires national dynamics that foster resilience.
I would like to touch upon the importance of promoting
tolerance and respect, while combating discrimination
against various religious and ethnic groups, minorities
and migrants in societies. Fostering the feeling that
all segments of society are included in all political
processes and economic development, enjoy their rights
and are respected is a crucial step towards combating
radicalization.

The priorities stated in the synthesis report of
the Secretary-General entitled "The road to dignity
by 2030: ending poverty, transforming all lives and
protecting the planet" (A/69/700) - dignity, people,
justice, partnership and prosperity - should guide our
peace and development work ahead. There is need for
a serious international debate about these matters to
narrow the gaps between diverging views on issues such
as stigmatization, stereotyping, intolerance, racism,
discrimination and the freedoms of expression, religion
and belief. The Alliance of Civilizations, launched
by Turkey and Spain, provides a vital framework to
overcome the artificial divides and build bridges across
cultures and religions.

A final issue is the importance of mediation.
Mediation is not only a tool to bring warring parties
to the table and sign peace agreements. Mediation
has to do with fostering a culture of compromise,
understanding and inclusivity. Building the mediation
capacities of conflict countries is a cost-effective way
to help them solve their issues through comprehensive
and inclusive dialogue.

The Group of Friends of Mediation, co-chaired
by Finland and Turkey, strives to increase the role of
mediation in the United Nations system, including
promoting the proper funding of mediation activities
and supporting national mediation capacities. Increased
interaction with regional and subregional organizations
in the area of mediation is another tool to foster
inclusivity at all stages of the conflict cycle.

In conclusion, I would like to mention the
importance of building synergies between the post-
2015 development agenda and peacebuilding. An
inclusive development agenda focused on combating
discrimination and fostering empowerment for all
segments of society, in a spirit of national ownership,
will inevitably help to tackle the challenges faced by
the United Nations peacebuilding architecture today.
We support all efforts to that end.

