The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.

Following consultations among Council members,
I have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf:

"The Security Council welcomes the 26 August
2015 signature by President Salva Kiir Mayardit
on the 'Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan' as well
as the signatures by Sudanese People's Liberation
Movement/Sudan People's Liberation Army in
Opposition Chairman Dr. Riek Machar Teny and
Former Detainees representative Mr. Pagan Amum
Okiech on 17 August 2015, and joined by other
stakeholders, and recognizes these signatures as
a commitment by the parties to implement the
Agreement as contained in the annex to 8/2015/654.
The Security Council expresses its concern with
any statement by any party suggesting a lack
of commitment to implement the Agreement as
contained exclusively in the annex to S/2015/654.

"The Security Council expresses its deep
appreciation for the work of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) in leading
the mediation since the onset of the crisis and
commends the recently expanded efforts of the
IGAD-plus configuration involving 19 nations and
organizations, including the United Nations and
friends of South Sudan from Africa and abroad, to
develop and achieve a comprehensive solution that
has now established a foundation to deliver a peace
to South Sudan. The Security Council urges the
continued close engagement of IGAD and IGAD-
plus partners in the critical period ahead.

"The Security Council acknowledges that this
Agreement is the first step in reversing the difficult
political and economic situation and humanitarian
and security catastrophe resulting from this crisis,
calls upon the parties, with support from the

United Nations and the international community, to
fully implement the Agreement, and reaffirms its
unwavering support of the people of South Sudan.
"The Security Council calls upon the parties
to immediately adhere to the permanent ceasefire,
confirms its intention to move swiftly to update the
mandate of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS) to support implementation
of key tasks in the Agreement, and expresses its
readiness to consider appropriate measures to
ensure full implementation of the Agreement as
contained exclusively in the annex to S/2015/654,
in full and Without exception, and address any
violations or failures of any party to implement its
provisions, including through the imposition of an
arms embargo and additional targeted sanctions.

"The Security Council notes the African Union
Peace and Security Council's 24 August 2015 press
statement warning that all those undermining
the lasting resolution of the conflict, including
implementation of the Agreement, would be held
accountable for their actions.

"The Security Council underscores the
pressing need to ensure accountability for serious
violations and abuses of human rights and serious
violations of international humanitarian law.
The Security Council takes note in this regard
of chapter V of the Agreement. The Security
Council further recognizes the work of the African
Union Commission of Inquiry for South Sudan in
independent and public human rights monitoring,
investigation and reporting, anticipates with
interest its findings and recommendations, and
encourages the public release of the final report on
South Sudan as soon as possible.

"The Security Council renews its deep
appreciation for the courageous actions
taken by UNMISS personnel and troop- and
police-contributing countries to protect hundreds
of thousands of civilians under threat of physical
violence and to stabilize the security situation
across South Sudan."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2015/16.

The meeting rose at 5.10 17.171.
