Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Sandra Honore for introducing
the Secretary-General's report on the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (S/2015/157) and offering
her assessment of the situation in the country.

Over the reporting period, the general situation in
Haiti continued to be marked by political ambiguity
against the backdrop of an interruption in the electoral
process and the expiration on 12 January of the mandate
of the previous membership of the Parliament. In that
regard, we welcome the key step taken by the President
of Haiti and the leading political parties, including
the opposition, to resolve that protracted problem by
establishing a time frame for the conduct of elections.
We hope that it will be upheld.

The conduct of fair and transparent elections is of
the utmost importance in solidifying the foundations of
the Haitian State. After all, in spite of the formidable
tribulations endured by many Haitians in recent years,
the key political players have succeeded, with the
help of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti, in improving a difficult situation. The number
of internal internally displaced persons following
the 2010 earthquake continues to fall. There are
signs of economic growth and a slight downturn in
demonstrations. The situation of organized crime,
while remaining tense, is stable. Work on the penal
code has been concluded. The Haitian National Police
is improving both in numbers and in performance. The
situation with respect to the spread of cholera is under
control, while the rise in the number of cases of the
disease is necessarily of concern. Port-au-Prince will
need to demonstrate particular caution in that respect.

The establishment of enduring national dialogue
will be critical to stabilizing the overall situation in the
country. The Secretary-General's report clearly notes
that, for the first time in many years, key political actors
were able to reach a number of important compromises
aimed at broadening and democratizing the political
space and at strengthening national accountability
for the state of affairs. We hope that the Government
and all primary political parties will not rest on their
laurels, especially since there will be a particularly
pressing need throughout the electoral period to resolve
many vital issues.

Against the backdrop of the planned drawdown of
the military component ofMINUSTAH, we welcome the
Haitian National Police's demonstration of its capacity
to address the rising security challenges. Nevertheless,
this hardly mitigates the imperative for painstaking and
maximally effective use, based on needs on the ground,
of the Mission's capacities and resources so as to fulfil
its mandate to provide stabilization assistance in Haiti
and overcome the backlog of many years of problems
in Haiti.

If the Haitian Government is to achieve full
political normalization, it will require the appropriate
and respectful support of the United Nations-led
international community. However, if that process
is to be effective and successful, a lead role will
undoubtedly have to be played by the Government of
Haiti, which has primary responsibility for the situation
in the country, its development and the sound use of
international assistance.

