Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive briefing.

It has been 70 years since the United Nations
was established and its Charter adopted, laying a
firm foundation for international cooperation in
the Organization's three main areas of work: the
maintenance of international peace and security,
development and the protection and promotion of
human rights. The Charter of the United Nations is not
merely a legally binding international instrument. It
was the product of harrowing human experience in the
wake of the Second World War. With that in mind, the
international community set out a series of purposes,
principles and basic rules that were ultimately
enshrined in the Charter, which soon became the most
important source of jus cogens and a rulebook for joint
international action.

The Charter entrusted the Security Council with a
mandate to address exclusively situations that represent
a threat to international peace and security, while tasking
other organs and entities, notably the General Assembly
and the Human Rights Council, with strengthening
States' commitment to human rights and developing
principles for addressing human rights situations in
Member States. In that regard, Egypt is troubled about
the Security Council's continuing encroachment on the
functions and prerogatives of the Assembly and other
United Nations bodies, and about attempts to expand the
Council's mandate by introducing issues that, according
to the Charter, come under the core prerogatives of
other bodies. We are also concerned about the fact that
there are some who insist on using our shared goal of
promoting human rights as a back door for interfering
in the internal affairs of States and adding items that
do not constitute a threat to international peace and
security to the Council's agenda.

That does not mean that Egypt denies the intrinsic
links between the three main pillars of the work of
the United Nations, indeed, our belief in them is as
strong as ever. However, finding ways to deal with the
profound challenges of today's world while achieving
the goal of promoting and protecting human rights
requires a comprehensive approach based on genuine
and constructive dialogue, international cooperation
and the exchange of experiences and best practices.
In that regard, we believe that the mechanisms and
capacities of the Human Rights Council, especially the
Universal Periodic Review, make it the best forum for
States to engage in such constructive dialogue.

At this time of critical junctures of international
challenges, we must work to strengthen the role of
the United Nations in settling conflicts and building
bridges to understanding and cooperation among
nations, so that it is a melting pot of coexistence and
mutual respect among different cultures. We believe
that by using the relevant mechanisms, and without
prejudice to the purposes and principles of the Charter,
the United Nations can play its part in promoting
tolerance and respect for diversity, while avoiding any
politicization, bias, lack of objectivity, double standards
or exploitation of the noble principles of human rights
as a tool for selective targeting and narrow political
interests. We therefore urge that all human rights issues
be addressed equitably and fairly and in accordance
with the relevant frameworks, so as to maintain the
credibility of the United Nations.

In conclusion, the problems of our times - including
polarization, decade-long conflicts, the spread of
terrorism, mass refugee crises and illegal migration- are
all the result of double standards, violations of the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
false interpretations of them that serve only narrow
self-interests. We wish to distance ourselves from any
attempt to implicate the Security Council in fomenting
that polarization, which could only undermine its
mandate under the Charter.

