Mr. Kubis: Last week, Afghanistan's first
international football victory in the South Asian
Football Federation Championship triggered exuberant
celebrations of a historic achievement, in a display of
national unity and national pride, and I congratulate
our Afghan friends. That achievement is in a way a
signal of a gradual return to normalcy in Afghanistan.

The three months since I last appeared before the
Council have seen progress in Afghanistan's political
and security transitions. Considerable challenges
remain and the situation is volatile, but efforts are on
track.

Since that time, security incidents have increased
compared with 2012, but not to the record levels of
2011. The campaign of bloodshed by anti-Government
elements has targeted mostly Afghans, both those
in uniform and civilians, including in previously
calmer districts. However, they have failed to achieve
a significant military victory. The majority of the
violence has taken place away from populated areas.

The Afghan army and police have shown courage
and an increased capability in rising to the challenge
of the security transition. They increasingly trust
themselves and work to earn the trust of the population,
despite heavy casualties in their ranks. We are requested
to trust them as well.

Yet the Afghan security forces' capabilities are
not yet fully developed or completely sustainable.
International Security Assistance Force Commander
General Dunford recently stated that international
support would be required for at least the next five years
in order to enable entirely independent operations.

I welcome the numerous bilateral partnership
agreements that now underlie the multilateral
commitments from Chicago. Those are a demonstration
of the seriousness and long-term nature of international
support.

The 2014 elections remain at the forefront of political
life in Afghanistan. More broadly, a stable leadership
transition through timely elections in accordance with
the Constitution is central to everything else to be
achieved.

President Karzai recently emphasized once again
that polls would be held, recognizing that "retaining
power without elections will raise questions about the
system's legitimacy".

The last three months have seen significant progress
in technical preparations. That includes the passage of
two key laws, appointments to the two independent
electoral management bodies and the rollout of the
district-level voter registration update. A six-week
extension of the registration effort will help ensure
maximum participation, including that of women.

The acceleration in registration that has taken place
since Ramadan means that more than 1 million new
voter cards have been issued, nearly 30 per cent ofthose
to women. The numbers continue to grow steadily.

I welcome the attention that Afghan authorities are
giving to securing the elections. Improved coordination
of security institutions; robust security assessments;
planning and implementing risk-mitigation measures;
and instilling greater confidence through public
awareness are necessary now. Again, President Karzai
has recognized that "any election is better than no
election. We cannot delay elections for security
considerations".

With the launch of candidate registration earlier
this week, the political contest is formally under way.
Clear visions for the future of Afghanistan need to
be articulated to allow voters to make their choices.
Direct or indirect appeals to narrow ethnic or factional
interests must be avoided. The democratic transfer of
political authority should contribute to national unity.

A level playing field, including equal access to
State resources as well as balance in media coverage,
will be important aspects of a fair process. There is
increasing concern over the slow progress in creating an
appropriate legal framework for the media, especially
in this election period, and over violence against
journalists, which is seen to be on the rise.

Across the region, there is a growing recognition
of the need for a constructive bilateral and multilateral
engagement with Afghanistan. The transnational
nature of the challenges, including instability,
terrorism, population displacement and narcotics, as
well as the opportunities - in trade, infrastructure and
connectivity - seems to be understood.

I welcome the positive initial signals and
engagements from the new leaderships in Iran and
Pakistan.

President Karzai's visit to Islamabad was of
particular significance. A new tone in relations seems
to be emerging, narrowing the trust deficit. That was
confirmed by the statements made by Sartaj Aziz, the
Pakistani Prime Minister's adviser, in which he placed
emphasis on genuine efforts to facilitate an Afghan-
led and Afghan-owned peace process. He stated that
Pakistan has no favourites in Afghanistan and that
the policy is one of non-interference. Afghan officials
are also reasonably hopeful, as they say, of better
cooperation with the new Government of Pakistan.
Confidence-building measures, including in the area
of economic development, can help build trust through
shared interests and prosperity.

The Istanbul Process remains a valuable regional
effort, placing Afghanistan at the very heart of Asia. I
welcome the People's Republic of China's preparations
to host the 2014 ministerial summit. Beijing's
seriousness of intent was highlighted during my recent
visit. The Shanghai Cooperation Organization is also
positioning itself to play an increasing role in support
of Afghanistan. At this month's Heads of State summit,
there was clear interest in moving beyond anxiety and
expressions of concern about the situation post-2014.
The emphasis was rather on shared responsibilities, with
Afghanistan and the broader international community,
in ensuring durable solutions, including through the
increased engagement of regional countries.

Indeed, throughout my regional travels, it was
clearly understood that political solutions will be
the key to sustainable peace, security and economic
prosperity in Afghanistan and the region. Most
immediately for Afghanistan, this means elections
resulting in a legitimate and peaceful transfer of power.
More broadly, this must include early dialogue on
peace and reconciliation, as was stressed in many of my
discussions with the neighbouring countries. The United
Nations continues to support the need for dialogue. We
hope that new, mutually accepted modalities for such
a dialogue on peace and reconciliation can be swiftly
agreed and implemented.

Narcotics remain a key problem in Afghanistan and
beyond. The annual survey conducted by the Ministry
of Counter-Narcotics and the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime found that there was a reduction in
cannabis cultivation in 2012, although higher yields still
saw increased production. I am extremely concerned by
assessments that this year will see a significant rise, yet
again, in opium cultivation and a continuing drop in
poppy-free provinces.

The United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, Ms. Navi Pillay, was in Kabul this week meeting
with President Karzai and senior officials, as well as
with civil society representatives and human rights
activists. Ms. Pi11ay noted commendable progress in
some areas of human rights and the commitment of
President Karzai and other key officials. However, she
stated her concern that the momentum of improvements
in human rights may not only have peaked but may even
be waning. She urged additional efforts on the part of
the President and the Government to ensure that justice
and human rights - in particular women's rights - are
preserved and consolidated rather than undermined

or sacrificed to political expediency. Issues of human
rights and accountability need to be mainstreamed
across all lines of effort - political, development and
security-related.

The rise in civilian casualties - the vast majority
of which are at the hands of anti-Government elements
and rogue or criminal armed groups - is of deep
concern. The targeted killings of civilians and the use of
improvised explosive devices are increasingly frequent
tactics. Deaths during this period include the head of
the Kunduz appellate court, the chief electoral officer
in Kunduz, a district education head in Parwan, and a
young woman taking part in vaccination campaigns in
Jawzjan, to name but a few.

Indeed, increasing attacks on women are of major
concern. Only last Monday, a courageous female
police officer in Helmand, Lieutenant Nigara, was
gunned down, as was her predecessor, Islam Bibi,
earlier this year. The Taliban movement continues to
assert in its public statements that anyone associated
with the Government or seen to support it constitutes
a target. This includes educators, judicial officials
and civil servants, in clear violation of international
humanitarian law.

A further effect of heightened uncertainty and
violence has been increased population displacement.
Half a million individuals have been internally
displaced, over 100,000 during the first seven months
of the year. At the same time, the number of refugees
returning to Afghanistan decreased by 41 per cent
compared to the same period in 2012. I am happy to
note that there is now agreement and commitment
from the international donor community to support a
common humanitarian fund for Afghanistan, which
should become operational in early 2014.

Clear progress has been made in vital elements
underpinning Afghanistan's transition processes.
At the same time, challenges persist in the security
and narcotics sectors in particular. More needs to
be done in meeting mutual commitments under the
Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework. A focus on
election preparations must not draw attention away
from such issues as combatting corruption, the rule of
law and economic growth. They are what will ensure
Afghanistan's ultimate institutional and financial
sustainability.

I welcome the signals of positive support to the
region and the ongoing commitment of the international
community in ensuring continued momentum in
strengthening Afghan institutions, Afghan sovereignty,
and Afghan solutions.

