Mr. Mahmoud: I thank the members of the
Council for this renewed opportunity to brief them on
the situation in Chad and the north-eastern Central
African Republic. As you mentioned, Sir, the Council
has before it the latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/529) on the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT).

During the period covered by the report, the
security situation in eastern Chad remained calm. The
exceptionally intense rainy season reduced all road
movements in MINURCAT's area of operations. It thus
noticeably curtailed opportunities for acts of banditry,
which, however, remain the main security threat to the
population and to aid organizations in eastern Chad.

The Chadian-Sudanese Joint Border Monitoring
Force can also be credited with this relative calm. With
the planned increase of 1,000 personnel, the Force will
reach a strength of 4,000 and offers, in my view,
concrete hopes for improved effectiveness of the three-
tier security system that the Chadian Government
outlined in the paper it submitted to the Council in
September. The Council may recall that the first tier of
this system pertains to the protection of the Chad-
Sudan border; the second covers the main villages
beyond the border and the third covers refugee camps,
internally displaced persons (IDPs) sites and
surrounding villages. It is this last level that has been
entrusted to the De'tachement inte'gre' de securite (DIS).
10-59402

Notwithstanding the improved security, the
humanitarian situation in Chad remains of concern. In
order to assist and protect 262,000 refugees from the
Sudan and 68,000 from the Central African Republic,
as well as 168,000 internally displaced persons, 48,000
returnees and an estimated 150,000 host community
members, there are eight United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes operational in Chad, as well as
70 non-governmental organizations, helping the
Government to address the situation.

Some IDP returns have been reported, mainly in
the Ouadda'i' and Dar Sila regions. The Government is
fully aware that the absence of basic services in areas
of return must be overcome to encourage further
returns. A national strategy for the safe and voluntary
return of IDPs is under preparation, with the help of
the United Nations country team.

The Government of Chad has pursued its efforts
to meet its international obligations in the area of the
protection of civilians, as outlined and detailed in the
Secretary-General's report. In the area of human rights,
the Ministry of Human Rights and Promotion of
Liberties, with support from MINURCAT, is
establishing mechanisms for the implementation of the
outcome of the Universal Periodic Review and the
Treaty bodies' recommendations. The Government is
also finalizing a human rights national action plan,
which takes into account the recommendations
emerging from the Universal Periodic Review. In
addition, the Government is leading the European
Union-funded Programme d'appui a la justice au
Tchad, which supports the construction and
rehabilitation of judicial infrastructure, capacity-
building activities and improved access to justice.

As is also outlined in the Secretary-General's
report, during this reporting period MINURCAT
continued the consolidation and gradual handover to
the Government of Chad of all administrative,
logistical and operational support to the DIS. By the
end of this month, all administrative tasks will be
transferred to the DIS. By the end of the year, the
ongoing recruitment and training of the additional 200
new DIS recruits will be completed, bringing DIS
strength to 1,000.

Meanwhile, earlier this month, the Government
of Chad updated the DIS sustainability plan it had
submitted to the Security Council in September. The
updated plan outlines the financial and other needs to
10-59402
enhance the Government's capacity to support the DIS
after MINURCAT departs. The Special Representative
of the President of Chad for MINURCAT is currently
in New York and will present the plan to potential
partners and engage in a conversation with them
concerning it.

In the meantime, Chad has initiated discussions
with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the United Nations
Development Programme on a successor arrangement
to the DIS trust fund currently managed by
MINURCAT, as well as for the provision of technical
support.

On 11 October, after the report was issued, the
Government of Chad organized the second
humanitarian forum, with assistance from MINURCAT
and the United Nations country team. The forum
deepened the discussion on the concept and practice of
the protection of civilians and the roles and
responsibilities of the main stakeholders. Participants
acknowledged that the physical, legal and social
dimensions of protection should all be equally taken
into consideration in the development of a national
strategy for the protection of civilians. Participants also
recognized the central contribution of the DIS. Five
other such forums will be organized before the end of
MINURCAT's mandate.

On 15 October, MINURCAT's military
component suspended all operational activities and the
Mission started its final withdrawal from Chad, as
mandated by resolution 1923 (2010). Every effort is
being made to complete this withdrawal by
31 December. In this regard, I wish to express my
appreciation to the Government of Chad for helping to
ensure that the withdrawal takes place in an orderly,
secure and dignified manner and with as few
impediments as possible.

To assist the Governments of Chad and the
Central African Republic to enhance their capacity for
the protection of civilians, MINURCAT is planning to
leave to the Governments camp sites in accordance
with standing United Nations rules and regulations.
These camps will be minimally operational, including
facilities for water and electricity.

The Government and the United Nations country
team are doing their best to take over as many possible
of MINURCAT's tasks relating to the protection of
civilians and early recovery in order to ensure their
3
continuity. It should be recognized, however, that they
cannot take on additional tasks within available
resources. Notwithstanding the withdrawal of
MINURCAT, it is essential that the international
community continue to provide and step up its support
to the Government and the United Nations country
team.

In an effort to assist the Chadian staff of
MINURCAT to find new employment within the
country after the Mission's departure and to mitigate
the negative impact on the country's job market of that
departure, the Mission organized a job fair from 4 to
8 October. A good number of United Nations agencies,
private companies, diplomat representations and others
interviewed nearly 550 of our staff.

(spoke in French)

As described in the Secretary-General's report,
the security situation in the north-eastern Central
African Republic remains volatile and worrisome.
Given MINURCAT's imminent withdrawal and the
limited capacity of the Government of the Central
African Republic to ensure security in that subregion,
the alleged or confirmed attacks by elements associated
with the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) are of concern.
Several additional attacks, allegedly also perpetrated
by elements associated with the LRA, have taken place
in the MINURCAT area of operations since the
Secretary-General's report was issued.

The most recent attack took place on 10 October.
Between 40 and 50 men attacked Birao, not far from
MINURCAT bases. They pillaged the village and
kidnapped 19 individuals. Among the kidnapped, four
children were immediately released, nine escaped not
long after have been seized, and six more escaped
during the 11 October clash between a local self-
defence group and the attackers. It is believed that four
adults currently remain captive.

In order to avoid a potential security vacuum
following MINURCAT's withdrawal, we must do our
utmost to help the Government of the Central African
Republic to deploy additional forces to Birao. For its
part, MINURCAT plans in mid-November to hand over
its camps in Birao and the airport to the national
authorities.

In conclusion, I should like to thank the countries
contributing troops and police to MINURCAT and to
commend the work of the men and women of the
Mission who, despite its drawdown, continue to do
their best to implement the mandate conferred upon
them by the Security Council.

