Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
the Secretary-General, Dr. Nabarro, Ms. Chan and
Mr. Niamah for their powerful and moving briefings
today. I extend my thanks to you, Madam President,
for convening this meeting on a health crisis that has
profound implications for us all.

The current Ebola epidemic has become a
humanitarian, social and economic crisis for the
three most affected West African countries and their
22 million people. It constitutes a threat to international
peace and security. If we fail to act now, it threatens
to become a catastrophe, which will destroy economies
and neutralize the post-conflict gains of recent years.

It is crucial that the international community
work together to fight and stop the epidemic, both by
assisting the three most affected countries, but also by
helping other countries in the region to be ready if the
disease spreads to them. It is important to remember
that Ebola is a preventable and containable disease, but
only if we all work together to stop it and confront the
fear and stigma associated with the disease. We must
not let fear dictate the response; instead, we must act.
We therefore welcome the initiative of holding this
meeting and wholeheartedly support resolution 2177
(2014), which injects new urgency into the fight.

The United Nations has a vital role to play in
bringing Ebola under control. We therefore welcome
the efforts made so far to coordinate the United Nations
system's response, in particular the announcement made
by the Secretary-General today on the establishment of
a special United Nations emergency response mission.

The United Kingdom is also playing its part. Work
has already started on a special $60 million health
centre in Freetown. The centre will give confidence
to health workers bravely joining the effort. British
military experts and staff from Save the Children UK
have already joined them on the ground to get the centre
operational.

Yesterday, my Foreign Secretary announced a
significantly increased package of support. At the heart
of the package is a commitment to lead and underwrite
the provision ofa total of 700 treatment beds for Sierra
Leone. More than 200 of those beds are already in the
delivery pipeline. We will now deliver a further 500
beds, working with partners to provide and train the
international staff needed to operate them.

There is simply no time to waste. Every day that
goes by means more Ebola cases and more Ebola
deaths. That is why we have joined the current effort,
by committing support to partners, including the World
Health Organization, the Red Cross, Medecins Sans
Frontieres, the International Rescue Committee, the
Ebola Response Consortium, UNICEF and other parts
of the United Nations system in their monumental
effort to scale up the response. We are also helping to
contain Ebola through our long-standing commitments
to multilateral institutions, such as the African
Development Bank, the World Bank and, in particular,
the European Union (EU), where we are working
closely with our EU partners to make the most of our
collective expertise.

As my Australian colleague has just recalled,
women are increasingly more at risk from Ebola than
men. We therefore need initiatives that promote practical
collective action at the community and national levels
to protect women. Women must also be central to any
discussions on the response to the outbreak.

We welcome announcements of support from
others, such as the generous new United States
assistance to Liberia, this week's announcement that
France will step up its support to Guinea, and pledges
of help from such countries as China, Canada and
Cuba. But we need a mammoth and sustainable global
effort if we are to beat this scourge. Current predictions
are that it could last for many months, even years, and
could impact the lives of millions of people. We must
not let that happen.

So today we call on all countries to join this global
coalition against Ebola without hesitation, without
doubt and with the determination that we will end this
terrible outbreak. Without an immediate and concerted
global push, Ebola will kill many thousands more,
affecting communities for a generation.

Now is the time for united action. I call on all
nations to join this clarion call without delay before this
crisis becomes a catastrophe.

