The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Pakistan in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Akram
(Pakistan) took the seat reserved for him at the
side of the Council Chamber

The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Cameroon.

Cameroon associates itself with the statement to
be made later in the debate by the Republic of the
Congo on behalf of the 11 States members of the
Economic Community of Central African States. I
should like, however, to make several observations in
my national capacity.

I should like thank the Under-Secretary-General
for Disarmament Affairs, Mr. Jayantha Dhanapala, for
his excellent introduction of the report of the
Secretary-General on small arms.

Cameroon has good reason to be interested in the
proliferation of illicit small arms, because it is located
in one of the regions that are probably most affected by
this scourge. This is not the first time that the Security
Council has taken up the issue of small arms and light
weapons. Because of the threat that the proliferation of
and illicit trade in small arms poses to international
peace and security, the Council has been actively
seized of the matter since 1998 and has been
considering it regularly.

Today's debate, based on the Secretary-General's
report, is a continuation of the work being done by the
Council. It offers us another opportunity not only to
further refine measures already recognized to combat
this worldwide scourge, but also to explore new
approaches and solutions. In the opinion of my
delegation, the Programme of Action adopted by
consensus by the United Nations Conference on Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons In All Its
Aspects, held from 9 to 20 July 2001, offers an
appropriate context for international action and for
strengthening the Security Council's actions.

Recourse to sanctions, particularly arms
embargoes in areas affected by conflict, is still the
preferred instrument for action by the Security Council.
However, looking at the experience of existing sanction
regimes, we see that the effectiveness of strict
implementation of arms embargoes depends, to a large
extent, on the cooperation of many players at the
national, regional and international levels. Their role is
a crucial one if we want regular, reliable and useful
information about trafficking networks, and if we want
to monitor them effectively.

At this point, I would like to stress the decisive
part played by States. Above and beyond the national
measures that need to be taken to contribute to
implementation of the embargoes imposed by the
Security Council, States must regulate the entire arms
sector in order to control, depending on their peculiar
situation, the movement of small arms. That is why we
support the efforts to encourage the drafting of an
international instrument on international arms
transfers, including tracing.

All efforts to control illicit flows of small arms,
particularly in Africa, will be futile without such
measures. The approach based on a moratorium on
arms imports comes up against this constraint. Such a
moratorium is not a panacea that can apply to all
affected regions of the world. Each region is different.

Given its powers, the Council becomes
answerable if it refrains from taking the necessary steps
against the States which deliberately violate arms
embargoes or contribute to violations by the way they
conduct themselves. The Council cannot impose
embargoes while at the same time it chooses to ignore
those other than the targeted State who are guilty of
violating the embargoes. Likewise, the Council must
also look into the sources of the illicit trade in small
arms in violation of its embargoes whether it be related
to the illegal exploitation of natural resources, drug
trafficking or simply international criminal networks.

As far as Cameroon is concerned, the actions of
the various bodies of the United Nations - each within
its own field of competence, of course - on the
question of small arms are complementary and must
lead to a coherent overall strategy. This is why we
encourage the Council, where appropriate, to include in
the mandates of peacekeeping operations activities for
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
former combatants and for the collection and
destruction of weapons. We also believe that the
Council should provide adequate financing for that
purpose.

We fully endorse the relevant recommendations
made in the Secretary-General's report. They will be a
useful supplement to the measures already advocated
and will certainly help to stop those interests that are
particularly sensitive, sometimes profit-oriented and
often criminal.

Views expressed during this debate complement
others in the report of the Secretary-General. Naturally,
they will be used to enhance the draft presidential
statement that will be presented in the next few days to
the Council members, once completed by our experts.

I now resume my function as President of the
Council.

The next speaker on my list is the representative
of the Republic of Korea. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.


