Mr. Rishchynski (spoke in French): On behalf
of all the members of the Sierra Leone configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), I should
like to begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to speak.

(spoke in English)

The Peacebuilding Commission recently conducted
a joint delegation visit to Sierra Leone and Liberia, in
late February. We are deeply grateful for the warm
welcome we received from the Government of Sierra
Leone, the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL) and the entire
United Nations family. We would also like to thank
the representatives of Australia, Bangladesh, Egypt,
Kuwait, Japan, Sweden and the United Kingdom for
their participation. We believe that the composition
of this delegation demonstrates the PBC'S continued
determination to sustain international support for Sierra
Leone. The timing of the visit was also opportune. The
Government of Sierra Leone in the midst of articulating
its priorities for the next five years. The arrival of our
mission soon after the recent United Nations technical
assessment mission also allowed for an informed
consideration of the forthcoming transition process.
We would like to offer five observations based on the
deliberations undertaken in the country.

First, Sierra Leone should be commended for the
very successful conduct of its elections in November
2012. The process was exceptionally peaceful,
technically well organized and characterized by a high
voter turnout. It demonstrated the growing capacity
of Sierra Leone's national institutions and marked
the crossing of a significant peacebuilding threshold.
In this respect, the Government's emerging priorities
for the Agenda for Prosperity also reflect a welcome
shift in emphasis towards fostering economic growth,
improving social services and building human capital.
Sierra Leone is developing a strategy to address its next
priority development challenges and can look to the
future with optimism.

Secondly, notwithstanding those positive
developments, several challenges remain. During our
visit, His Excellency President Koroma, all major
political parties, the relevant national authorities and
civil society actors raised with us concerns about the
winner-take-all nature of Sierra Leone's political
system and the clear regional divide produced by the
recent election. For this reason, President Koroma has
indicated his intention to undertake a much-delayed
review of the Constitution, as originally proposed by
the Truth and Reconciliation Commission. While this
politically sensitive process must be fully inclusive
and national in character, it also offers an important
opportunity to modernize a range of human rights and
civil provisions in that document.

(spoke in French)

Thirdly, several outstanding issues will require
effort over the longer term. Youth unemployment is a
major challenge, but generating economic opportunities
and rebuilding an effective educational system can only
come from sustained Government investment. Likewise,
the growth of Sierra Leone's extractive and agricultural
sectors offers great promise. At the same time, a wide
range of interlocutors expressed growing concern
about the potential for conflict at the community level
if large-scale investments are not managed carefully.
Like its neighbours in the subregion, Sierra Leone is
vulnerable to the destabilizing aspects of transnational
organized crime and drug trafficking. This leads us
to the evident conclusion that now is not the time for
the international community to turn away from Sierra
Leone. Our continued assistance will be required to
build on the gains achieved to date.

Fourthly, the United Nations is viewed in a positive
light in Sierra Leone. That is a testament to the central
role played by successive missions in the peacebuilding
process. It also speaks to the need for a measured
transition. Our visit corroborated the technical
assessment mission's findings that many of UNIPSIL's
current activities could be transferred to other actors,
but it also highlighted the need for continued dialogue
and political cooperation in a few specific areas.

Specifically, many stakeholders stressed the
importance ofUNIPSIL's assistance to the constitutional
review process and the need to continue providing
technical support to the security sector. Above all, the
pace of transition should match the needs on the ground,
especially given the potential for small investments at
this late stage to make a substantial contribution to
consolidating the hard-won peace. Without advocating
for any undue delay, the international community must
resist the temptation to prematurely declare victory.
Equally important, the nature of the United Nations
transition in Sierra Leone must be communicated
clearly to all national stakeholders.

(spoke in English)

Fifthly, there is a regional dimension to many of the
challenges facing Sierra Leone. The Governments of
the Mano River Union have invested new resources in
the institution, leading to a corresponding increase in
international cooperation and cross-border activities.
The relevant configurations of the PBC intend to
assess how they can further encourage those efforts.
This situation also points to the need for United
Nations political engagement at the regional level after
UNIPSIL has completed its mandate.

Finally, allow me to conclude with a few remarks
on the Peacebuilding Commission itself. In the near
term, the configuration for Sierra Leone will turn its
attention to supporting the transition process, including
by advocating for any necessary resources to fill gaps
created by UNIPSIL's drawdown. In the longer term,
the PBC will need to align its engagement with the
Government of Sierra Leone's new priorities in the
Agenda for Prosperity. As ever, those efforts will move
forward in close partnership with the Government of
Sierra Leone and the United Nations.

Rest assured that I intend to keep the Security
Council fully informed of the configuration's work. We
look forward to further opportunities for cooperation
with the Council.

