Mr. Cabral (Portugal): Allow me first of all to
thank Ambassador Agshin Mehdiyev of Azerbaijan
and his team for the efficient presidency for the month
of May. I also take this opportunity to convey to you,
Mr. President, the full support of my delegation for your
presidency for this month.

I wish to thank Mr. Moreno-Ocampo for his
participation here today, as well as for his report on the
situation in Darfur pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005).
As mentioned in the report, the cases of genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes presented to
the International Criminal Court (ICC) illustrate the
worst incidents that occurred within Darfur.

As we consider the fifteenth report, however,
we continue to see, with real concern, that the same
obstacles and difficulties reported in previous reports
still persist. Arrest warrants issued by the Court in two of
the three cases have still not been executed. Only in the
third case does justice seem to be under way, since the
trial of Mr. Banda and Mr. Jerbo, alleged commanders
of the rebel forces, is planned to start in July, following
the recent confirmation of charges by the Court.

Also, on the domestic front, no significant efforts
appear to have been undertaken to investigate crimes
that come under the ICC's jurisdiction. As highlighted
in the report, after more than seven years of instituting
several judicial mechanisms, the Sudan has conducted
no credible national proceedings relevant to those
crimes. That is despite the concerns clearly expressed
by the African Union High-Level Implementation Panel
regarding the lack of political will and the persistent
obstacles to domestic investigation and prosecution.

Moreover, the dire humanitarian situation on the
ground persists following the expulsion of humanitarian
organizations ordered by the Government. As reported,
there are fewer institutions now helping the victims of
rape because of the expulsion, or threat of expulsion, of
organizations working in the area of sexual violence.
However, as stressed in the latest report to the Council
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict (S/2012/33), today
such types of crimes continue to be perpetrated and
unpunished, as do other crimes of the same pattern
identified by the ICC judges, as recent reports of the
Secretary-General unfortunately testify.

With its independent judicial nature, the ICC
remains unique as a tool in conflict prevention, as well
as in ensuring both justice and peace in the region. To
achieve those goals, the international community, on
behalf of which the Security Council referred the case to
the ICC, has a strong interest in ensuring that the Court
plays its role fully. Cooperation is therefore essential.
Without the cooperation of all Member States, the Court
cannot fulfil that role.

However, we are concerned about the continuous
lack of cooperation displayed by the Sudanese authorities
on outstanding arrest warrants. We again stress the need
for all States to strengthen cooperation with the Court in
order to enforce those warrants.

Finally, we would like to thank the Prosecutor,
Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, for his efforts during his tenure at
the head of the Office of the Prosecutor. We also want
to thank him for the role he has played in strengthening
the Court and in promoting a better understanding of the
Court's potential, thus enhancing the awareness by the
international community of the Court's indispensable
contribution to the maintenance of peace and security.

