Let me start by thanking Nickolay Mladenov, United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his briefing. As always, he was very clear. I thank him for his tireless efforts. I carefully listened to his final remarks. It is very good that he continues to have the vision of 1994 as his point of reference. I do not have much to add to what I have said over the last two years. Things have not become any better. Germany has a principled position. As members of the Security Council know, we defend the rules-based international order. Conflicts should be resolved politically and based on international law, including resolutions adopted by the Security Council. From our perspective, resolutions are not a menu a la carte. One cannot pick and choose and forget about the last parameter set forth in resolution 2334 (2016), or resolution 478 (1980) with regard to Jerusalem or resolution 497 (1981) with regard to the Golan Heights. We believe that the implementation of the landmark resolution 2334 (2016) remains the only viable way forward. With regard to the implementation of that resolution, we continue to be deeply concerned by the negative trends on the ground, which are increasingly threatening the two-State solution: annexation plans, settlement expansion, demolitions, seizures, evictions, plans to retroactively legalize illegal settlement outposts or to take over private Palestinian land by declaring it "State land". We are also deeply concerned about rockets that are fired into Israel, violence, incitement and the absence of a solution for Gaza. We condemn all attacks against Israel by Hamas, Palestinian Islamic Jihad and other terrorist groups. Over the past four years since the adoption of resolution 2334 (2016), plans for more than 28,000 settlement units have been advanced or approved in Area C and East Jerusalem. Tenders have been announced for some 12,000 units and the construction of more than 6,000 new units began in Area C. That leads me to a question for the Special Coordinator. Resolution 2334 (2016) already warned about "entrenching a one-State reality". Considering that Israeli settlement activities, including in sensitive areas around East Jerusalem, such as Givat Hamatos, Har Homa and Area E-1, effectively prevent a contiguous Palestinian State, does Mr. Mladenov still believe in a two-State solution? Is his thinking closer to John Kerry's when he was Secretary of State and was very frustrated at those kinds of developments? We have followed very closely the Israeli-Arab rapprochement. Kelly Craft, the United States representative, just outlined how many countries are now recognizing Israel, which is a most welcome development. While preparing for this meeting, I picked up a small but significant story in The Economist dated 12 December about an Israeli football club, Beitar Jerusalem. According to the article, Beitar Jerusalem is the most racist club in Israel. When Beitar Jerusalem signed two Muslim players in 2013, fans burned down the club offices. Just a few weeks ago, the cousin of the de facto ruler of the United Arab Emirates purchased, with the blessing of an Israeli rabbi, a 50 per cent interest in Beitar Jerusalem. I find that to be a spectacular Israeli-Arab accomplishment. There are other spectacular examples of cooperation. As Council members may recall, in April 2019, when Germany held the Council presidency, we invited the Israeli-Palestinian non-governmental organization EcoPeace Middle East to brief the Council on peacebuilding efforts through cooperation in the specific area of water conservation (see S/PV.8517). Having a non-governmental organization represented by an Israeli, a Palestinian and a Jordanian was one of the highlights of my time in the Security Council. We will continue our joint efforts with our European and Arab partners, France, Egypt and Jordan in facilitating a path towards credible dialogue and serious, meaningful and effective negotiations about all final-status issues and on the basis of the internationally agreed parameters. We support the efforts of the Middle East Quartet and explicitly wish to thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his active engagement in exploring and consulting with all relevant actors on the best path forward, including an international conference or any other multilateral format to enable the parties to resume meaningful dialogue and negotiations. I thank him for a job really well done. Finally, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) remains a major provider of stability in the region. Germany has therefore contributed $200 million in 2020 to the Agency. We call on other countries, in particular those from the Gulf, to provide more financial support in order to enable UNRWA to continue its critical work.
