Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2480
(2019), which renews the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) within its current scope for one
year. I welcome the presence of the Ambassador of
Mali among us here today.

The resolution we just adopted sends a firm
message with regard to urgently needed progress
in the implementation of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali. It defines five concrete
and achievable measures that the Council would like
to see fully implemented in a year's time, and the
implementation of which will be subject to an initial
mid-term assessment by the Secretary-General in six
months' time. The consequences of not meeting those
targets are also clearly established. Those who block
the implementation of the agreement will be faced
with sanctions. In that respect, we have just initiated a
designation procedure with respect to five individuals
responsible for obstructions, following the failure to
achieve the priority objectives defined by the Council
in June 2018 in the previous MINUSMA mandate. The
Council has also established that any person placed on
the Mali sanctions list will in practice not enjoy any
support from MINUSMA or the United Nations.

Resolution 2480 (2019) also draws conclusions
from the deteriorating situation in the centre of Mali.
It calls upon the Malian authorities to immediately
develop a comprehensive strategy to bring an end to the
violence and ensure the return of the State. It encourages
MINUSMA to strengthen its work in the region, which
is now elevated to the level of a second strategic priority.
Without questioning the primacy of support for the
implementation of the peace agreement in the north, the
resolution requests the Mission to ensure that sufficient
resources are devoted to its mandate in the centre,
building upon the efforts that have already been made
in recent months, notably through the development of
an emergency plan for the Mopti region and the creation
of a dedicated sector. The resolution also requests the
Secretary-General to conduct an assessment in six
months' time of the Mission's capacity to implement
all of the tasks that are assigned to it by the resolution
in its current configuration and to potentially make
recommendations in that respect.

Resolution 2480 (2019) also outlines a clear view of
MINUSMA's future by establishing that its withdrawal
strategy is based on the redeployment of the Malian
armed forces across the territory of Mali as well as the
full operationalization of the Joint Force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel (G-S Sahel), without in any way
jeopardizing the concerted efforts that have been made
thus far to stabilize Mali and the Sahel. In that respect,
the Security Council continues to promote partnerships
among the various security presences deployed on the
ground in keeping with each of their mandates. Notably
in that respect, it extends the geographic perimeter of
MINUSMA's support for the G-5 Sahel Joint Force in
the framework of the technical agreement, provided
that any delivery beyond Mali's borders is carried out
by a third party and that there is a commitment from
the Council to reconsider the provision put in place by
resolution 2391 (2017) in a year's time. It is for all actors
involved to demonstrate that this is useful in the months
ahead. The Council also calls on the European Union
and the United Nations to strengthen the coordination
of their actions in support of security sector reform
and the restoration of the presence of the State in the
centre, including, if necessary, through the signing of
new technical agreements between MINUSMA and the
European missions.

All the security presences deployed on the ground
are, lastly, encouraged to ensure that their actions are
complementary, through regular consultation within
the national coordination body. In accordance with the
recommendations made in the context of Action for
Peacekeeping, resolution 2480 (2019) gives MINUSMA
a clear, practical and concise mandate. It supports the
implementation of the adaptation options presented in
the latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/454)
that will allow it to continue to increase the Mission's
efficiency and effectiveness. It welcomes the measures
taken in recent months to strengthen MINUSMA's
posture and encourages the continuation of efforts to
strengthen the security of its personnel.

I would like to reiterate our unstinting support
for the irreplaceable role played by the International
Criminal Court for peace and security in Mali.
Resolution 2480 (2019) recalls the importance of Mali
respecting its obligations under the Rome Statute.
That is an absolutely essential step on the path
towards lasting stability. I would also like to recall our
conviction that in the Sahel more than anywhere else it
is important that the actions of the United Nations and
local Governments fully take into account the impact
of climate change and other environmental factors on
security. Resolution 2480 (2019) recalls that, but we
would like to continue to work with our partners with
a view to going even further to develop the climate and
security agenda within the Council.

I will conclude my statement by warmly thanking
all the members ofthe Security Council for the open and
constructive spirit that they demonstrated throughout
this negotiation. The unity that is traditionally
characteristic of the Council on the Malian dossier is
a major advantage, allowing us to continue to play a
decisive role in the promotion of peace and security in
the country. We must do everything we can to maintain
that and to derive the maximum benefit possible from
it. That is the rationale on which the resolution we
adopted today is predicated.
As this is the last time I will participate in a Security
Council meeting, I would like to express my gratitude
to each Council member for the partnership and the
friendship that we have established and developed over
the past few years. Allow me also to very sincerely
congratulate my team sitting behind me, who are a
credit to public service and do France great honour.

