The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the representative of the Russian Federation. At the outset, let me join the words of appreciation addressed to Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region, Mr. Huang Xia, for his substantial briefing. The security situation in the region is still defined by the state of affairs in the eastern provinces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which remains rather complicated. The Congolese army and its supporting peacekeepers have not achieved a qualitative change in the fight against illegal armed formations. A number of border incidents and the spread of the coronavirus disease pandemic have further aggravated the situation in the region over the past six months. Against this backdrop, we welcome the commitment of the regional States to enhance cooperation in order to overcome the emerging challenges. We note the successful settlement of the border dispute between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Zambia, facilitated by the Southern African Development Community (SADC). We specifically welcome the four- party summits aimed at normalizing relations between Uganda and Rwanda that have been convened under the leadership of the presidents of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Angola, the most recent of which was held in a virtual format on 7 October. We also findit very positive that, at the SADC summit in August, that regional organization reiterated its commitment to continue lending support to the Democratic Republic of the Congo as the country strives to stabilize its eastern provinces, inter alia, by sending contingents to the Force Intervention Brigade of the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We cannot fail to note the productive efforts of the regional organizations in responding to the effects of the pandemic. We believe that all these efforts deserve the strong support of the global community. We welcome the work of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General in that regard, in particular in terms of overcoming the deficit of trust by enhancing cooperation among the heads of intelligence and security bodies of the States of the region. We proceed from the assumption that it is imperative that all countries fully and unconditionally comply with the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes Region, which is the fundamental document and the tool for achieving stabilization in the region. We welcome the growing attention of regional players to the importance of upholding the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework. We believe that its full implementation will strongly influence the situation in the Great Lakes region. We expect that the regional strategy for the prevention of armed conflicts currently being drafted by the Office of the Special Envoy will give new impetus to implementing the provisions of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework. We share the concern expressed in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/951) over the humanitarian situation in the Great Lakes region, which has deteriorated during the pandemic. Against that backdrop, one positive development is the ongoing repatriation of Burundian refugees from neighbouring countries. We believe that this process clearly attests to the qualitative transformation of the situation in Burundi, which no longer poses a threat to international peace and security. We hope that the Security Council will soon be able to take a decision on removing that country from its agenda. In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm that Russia, as a member of the Group of Friends of the Great Lakes Region, intends to continue actively assisting the peace process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and promoting the stabilization of the region as a whole. I now resume my functions as President of the Council. I give the floor to the representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
