Ms. Power (United States of America): I
congratulate you, Mr. President, on Lithuania's
presidency of the Security Council. I also thank the
Secretary-General for his remarks this morning, in
particular the forceful comments he made on the subject
of the Central African Republic.

The United States welcomes High Representative
Catherine Ashton back to the Council and thanks her
for elaborating on the European Union's important
relationship with the United Nations. Allow me to say
that we appreciate her personal contributions and look
forward to working with her through the end of her
term. We also wish her well, of course, in her future
endeavours, but we hope and expect to achieve a great
deal more together on behalf of international peace and
security between now and the end of the year.

The Security Council's resolutions and statements
on cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations emphasize the importance of developing
effective partnership. In that context, we fully
support the adoption of today's presidential statement
(S/PRST/2014/4). We share the EU's conviction that,
in response to global challenges, the international
community requires an effective and efficient
multilateral system, and we appreciate the EU's focus
on effective multilateralism as a key element of its
external action. The EU is an indispensable partner
to the United Nations and, of course, to the United
States as well. Allow me to highlight several areas
in particular where the EU is making an important
contribution internationally to peace, security and
respect for human rights.

The European External Action Service is a young
organization, but it is already having a tremendous
impact in its neighbourhood. My Government
appreciates the EU's role in promoting European
stability - in particular High Representative Ashton's
ongoing leadership of the EU-facilitated dialogue
between Kosovo and Serbia, which led to the landmark
Agreement of April 2013 on normalizing relations.
I have had some experience in the region and would
have placed myself among the sceptics in the run-
up to the dialogue, but the High Representative's
tireless efforts - as we heard today, 226 hours of
meetings - and the courageous leadership of Prime
Ministers Thaci and Dacie have shown that, by sitting
face to face, hashing out differences and focusing on
the future, one-time rivals can achieve historic change.
They deserve our praise and our support so as to ensure
the full implementation of their pact. Much hard work
obviously lies ahead.

The EU's contributions to the goals of the United
Nations extend well beyond Europe. From its role as
a member of the Quartet on Middle East peace to its
engagement on Iran, the EU is working closely with
its partners to foster stability and security. In that
connection, we welcome the EU's announcement
in December that it will provide an unprecedented
package of political, economic and security support to
both the Israelis and the Palestinians in the context of a
final status agreement.

The EU role is especially welcome in Africa,
where the Council focuses a great deal of attention. My
Government commends the EU for its joint Africa-EU
strategy, which is striving to advance cooperation on a
range of issues, including peace, security, democratic
governance and the Millennium Development Goals.
We also applaud the EU's commitment to enhancing
the African Union's capacity through the African Peace
Facility to address conflict on the continent.

The Council saw the EU's real-world impact during
its recent visit to Mali. We had the privilege of engaging
with the Commander ofthe EU training mission to Mali,
Brigadier-General Bruno Guibert, to discuss the EU's
effort to rebuild the Malian army, which is critical to
lasting stability in the country. I was impressed by the
hard work of the 550 dedicated military personnel from
23 European countries, who are helping the Malian
armed forces to re-establish their ability to secure the
entirety of Mali and to implement needed and crucial
reforms that prioritize, among other things, the Malian
military's adherence to human rights and international
law.

As is well known, the EU is actively engaged
in supporting stabilization in the Central African
Republic, providing approximately €200 million
in humanitarian and security assistance to help the
people of that country. We welcome the EU's recent
announcement of an additional €25 million to assist the
African Union-led mission and its agreement to provide
up to 500 troops in support of that vital operation. We
are hopeful that those troops can be mobilized and
deployed very swiftly. In December, when I visited the
Central African Republic, I was deeply saddened and
struck by the terrible violence, which has spread along
religious lines and is fuelled by an almost total absence
of either security or accountability. We need urgently
to step up our support for the efforts of Christian and
Muslim leaders who are seeking to end the killing and
restore a basis for national unity. I applaud the EU for
its leadership at this critical time and look forward to a
continual dialogue with the EU, the African Union and
all the members of the Council regarding next steps.
We agree strongly with the Secretary-General that the
situation could not be more urgent.

My Government also shares the EU's concerns over
the crises in South Sudan and in the broader Sahel. We
endorse the EU's efforts to promote peaceful solutions
in the Sahel region, including its recent pledge of
€142 million in humanitarian aid this year to meet the
urgent needs of civilians.

The EU is also engaged on a variety of cross-border
issues, including combatting the scourge of piracy.
Accordingly, we welcome the EU's chairmanship of
the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia,
established pursuant to resolution 1851 (2008). We
share the EU's commitment to bringing the number
of piracy attacks and hostage-takings down to zero.
And we note the EU's focus on prevention and regional
maritime capacity-building, its increased engagement
with the industry and its efforts to trace financial flows
resulting from piracy.

Finally, we welcome the EU's commitment, as
expressed in the Foreign Affairs Council conclusions
issued on Monday, to remain a vocal advocate for
human rights at the United Nations. The United
States shares that dedication to promote and protect
fundamental freedoms by working to oppose the global
crackdown on civil society that is currently under
way, eliminate gender-based violence, speak out on
behalf of the human rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual
and transgender persons, and by fighting attempts to
restrict the freedom of expression. The United States
stands with the EU in upholding the values enshrined in
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.

