I will focus today on four main areas: first, the support that humanitarian agencies are delivering to people across Syria; secondly, the economic situation and its humanitarian consequences; thirdly, the protection of civilians; and, fourthly, funding for the humanitarian operation. Humanitarian aid operations across Syria are reaching an average of 6.8 million people each month. The economic crisis is deepening poverty and pushing more people into humanitarian need. In all, 4.6 million people are receiving monthly food assistance, more than 8.9 million medical procedures have been conducted and more than 1.6 million children have received help with their education. With the adoption, on 11 July, of resolution 2533 (2020) to extend authorization for United Nations cross-border aid delivery into north-west Syria, we are working to address the operational challenges arising from the Council's decision. The United Nations is also helping tackle the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) in Syria. The problem is now country-wide - cases have now been confirmed in all but one of Syria's governorates, and United Nations staff working in Syria have also been struck by the disease. The number of confirmed cases remains in the hundreds, a relatively low level. The true number of cases is certainly higher, as the limited testing capacity, compared to what is available in neighbouring countries, and a reluctance among some people to acknowledge the infection masks the real scale of the outbreak. My second point today is on the impact of the economic downturn. The Syrian economy, devastated by nearly a decade of conflict, has entered a period of extreme fragility, marked by exchange-rate volatility, high inflation, dwindling remittances and lockdown measures to contain COVID-19. The economy is expected to contract by more than 7 per cent this year. Initial estimates suggest that, due to job losses in recent months, unemployment has risen from 42 per cent last year to close to 50 per cent today. Remittances from abroad, a lifeline on which many Syrians depend, have fallen. Estimated remittances from Gulf States alone are now $2 million a day, down from $4.4 million in 2017, and $7 to $12 million in 2010. After falling to its lowest recorded informal rate in June, at 3,200 Syrian pound to the United States dollar, the pound has been regaining value, but so far that has not translated into price reductions and the cost of essentials continues to rise. Market monitoring by the World Food Programme recorded a 48 per cent increase in the average price of a standard reference food basket between May and June. Food prices are 240 per cent higher than in June last year. That means that families across the country can no longer afford the very basics, as clearly reflected by food security and nutrition indicators. In addition, some 9.3 million people are food insecure and more than 2 million are at risk of becoming food insecure. In all, 86 per cent of households say they are buying lower quality food or less food or skipping meals. In some parts of the country, recent surveillance data show that chronic malnutrition among children under 5 years old is now at 29 per cent, as compared to 19 per cent around this time last year. My third point is on the obligation to respect and protect civilians. The ceasefire reached in March in the north-west between the Russian Federation and Turkey is largely holding, but some air and ground-based strikes have been reported in recent weeks. The Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights recorded at least five civilian deaths, including two children, and 26 civilians, including seven children, injured as a result of shelling and air strikes this month. Another 34 civilians were killed, including 15 children, and at least 98 were wounded by attacks using improvised explosive devices in residential areas and local markets, and in incidents involving landmines and explosive remnants of war. We are also monitoring with concern the increased level of violence and attacks in Dara'a. In Rukban, the lack of regular humanitarian assistance or basic service access has created a critical situation for the 12,000 people thought to remain there. I reiterate the urgency of delivering assistance to the remaining civilians and of supporting continued voluntary departures. In the north-east, the water supply from the Allouk water station was again disrupted this month, affecting 460,000 civilians in Al-Hasakah governorate. Low water levels in the Euphrates River are adding to the water shortages and disrupting the electricity supply. Among the areas affected and facing significant water shortages is Al-Hol camp, which accommodates around 65,000 people. Children make up two thirds of the camp population and more than half - 35,000 children - are under the age of five. Aid agencies need better access to the camp to help those children. Let me conclude with some words on the funding situation for our humanitarian operations. On 30 June, the fourth Brussels pledging conference resulted in total pledges of $7.7 billion, of which $5.5 billion was pledged for 2020. Those pledges covered funding for humanitarian, resilience and development activities in Syria and across the region. The highest amounts were pledged by the European Commission, Germany, the United States, the United Kingdom, Canada, Japan, Norway, the Netherlands, France and Denmark. The humanitarian response plan for Syria, with a funding requirement of $3.4 billion in 2020, is 32 per cent funded halfway through the year, making it one of our better funded operations. I would like to thank donors for their generous contributions, without which we would be unable to help people throughout Syria. I also urge others to contribute so that the financial burden is shared more fairly. Another $384 million is needed for Syria under the COVID-19 Global Humanitarian Response Plan, of which 28 per cent has been received. In my statement to the fourth Brussels conference, I urged donors to give greater priority to education in their pledges. The education requirement in the humanitarian response plan for Syria is currently just 24 per cent funded. I want to reiterate my appeal to invest in the education of Syria's children. A third of school-aged children in Syria - 2.5 million children - are out of school. Another 1.6 million are at risk of dropping out of school. The number of out-of- school children has increased by 16 per cent since last year. With school closures due to COVID-19, that number is very likely to increase further. I briefed the Council last month (see S/2020/635) on thousands of school children crossing, or attempting to cross, lines of control to take their national exams. Amid simultaneous and seemingly insurmountable crises, they are not losing sight of their future. Neither should we.
