Mr. Petrella (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish): I should like first of all to congratulate the
delegation of Slovenia on its dedicated and outstanding
work while presiding over the Security Council during the
month of August.

I should next like to thank you, Sir, for the initiative,
taken under your presidency, to take up again the question
of protection for humanitarian assistance to refugees and
others in conflict situations, an issue that was raised by the
Republic of Korea last year. Its relevance is undeniable.
Since September 1997, over 30 civilians dedicated to
humanitarian tasks in the field have died - one of the
highest figures ever recorded in a 12-month period. We pay
sincere tribute to these personnel from the United
Nations, the International Committee of the Red Cross
and other agencies.

There is a further reason to consider this issue: the
competence conferred by the Charter on the Security
Council gives it an indispensable role in such crises.

Provoking humanitarian crises has become an
additional tool available to the parties to a conflict. Events
in recent years have led us to conclude that the creation
of a humanitarian emergency, with concomitant attacks
against the personnel sent out to deal with it, often ends
up benefiting the party that provoked it. In our opinion,
that is the main factor to be taken into account in
analysing the causes of such crises. We therefore
understand that the action of the United Nations in
general, and of the Council in particular, must be geared
towards increasing the political and military cost to the
parties to a conflict of violating the norms of
humanitarian law, human rights or the rights of refugees.
We also believe it necessary to emphasize that this
problem did not originate in the conflicts of the past two
decades. The countries that appear from time to time on
the agenda of the Security Council are not the only ones
responsible. Making civilian populations the target of
military action is one of the scourges that have only been
increasing since the beginning of this century.

As a first step, it is fundamental to ensure adherence
to and compliance with the relevant international norms.
Argentina is a party to both the Geneva Convention and
its Additional Protocols, and we participated actively in
drafting the 1994 Convention on the Safety of United
Nations and Associated Personnel and, recently, in the
negotiations to establish an International Criminal Court.

For several reasons the International Criminal Court
represents unprecedented progress in efforts to improve
the situation of personnel providing humanitarian
assistance. Categorizing attacks against personnel
participating in peacekeeping operations or humanitarian
assistance missions as war crimes constitutes explicit
recognition of the gravity of such acts. Furthermore, the
Convention not only defines these unlawful international
acts, but provides for the means necessary to bring to trial
and sentence those who commit them. Lastly, since the
basis of the measure is the individual accountability of the
people who commit the crimes, there is no advantage to
non-State actors, whose accountability is not clearly
defined in any other international instrument.

 
All the statements that we have heard, both today and
in May last year, have emphasized that it is vital to bring
to trial and sentence those responsible. The statement made
on 24 September by the Foreign Ministers of the five
permanent members of the Security Council is also
important in this respect. As the International Criminal
Court is the most appropriate means of dealing successfully
with this type of crime, we are confident that its Statute
will enter into force as soon as possible.

The excellent and forceful report submitted by the
Secretary-General in response to the presidential statement
(SPRST/l997/34) of 19 June 1997, and introduced this
morning by Ms. Frechette, constitutes an excellent
evaluation of United Nations action on this subject. We
fully support both the diagnosis and the course of action
proposed in that document, in particular with regard to the
comments in paragraphs 51 to 53. We would like to add to
those conclusions that, notwithstanding the Security
Council's competence with regard to humanitarian crises,
all the Members of the United Nations should be regularly
and immediately informed about such situations.
Ambassador Vieira de Mello has shown his great
willingness in this respect, and we are profoundly grateful
for that.

We hope that the Security Council will periodically
continue to consider, in public, issues of general importance
such as that before us today.

