Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands) (spoke in French): The Kingdom of the Netherlands thanks
Special Envoy Kafando and Ambassador Lauber for
their illuminating briefings. The Netherlands has been
closely following the political climate in Burundi, since
we are very concerned about the consequences of the
potential political tensions for the population of Burundi
and, in particular, for the security situation. I would
like to draw the Council's attention to three aspects:
first, the incidents related to the referendum; secondly,
the ongoing need for inter-Burundian dialogue; and
thirdly, the importance of the Arusha Accords.

Despite the absence of serious violence, the
Kingdom of the Netherlands has taken note of the
various incidents reported during the elections, such
as denying accredited opposition observers access to
polling stations or arresting them, and intimidating
Burundian citizens in and around polling stations,
including through the presence of members of the
ruling party's youth league at some polling stations.
We condemn such acts around the referendum process,
which may have harmed a climate conducive to free
choice. We expect the Burundian Government to ensure
that any action based on the referendum, including the
process of formalizing constitutional amendments, will
be conducted on the basis of a broad consensus on the
part of all stakeholders and in line with the relevant
provisions of the current Constitution.

Despite the current impasse, the Netherlands
continues to give its full support to the inter-Burundian
dialogue led by the East African Community. A political
solution developed through constructive and inclusive
dialogue remains the most sustainable and viable way
out of the political crisis in the country. We call on the
Burundian Government to allow the political arena to
be opened up in the post-referendum phase by ensuring
circumstances that are more conducive to peaceful
dialogue and contributing to positive efforts aimed at
helping Burundi and its partners combat the country's
persistent poverty. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
fears that the risk of violence in Burundi continues. In
that regard, we condemn the attack in Cibitoke province
that claimed the lives of 24 civilians, including 11
children. We call on all stakeholders to refrain from
violence and fully respect human rights.

The Arusha Accords, signed in 2000 after
three decades of conflict, remain the cornerstone of
stability in Burundi. All dialogue, political reform
and action undertaken in Burundi should be based on
the principles and spirit of the solid foundations laid
by Presidents Nyerere and Mandela. They created
a system of constitutional provisions to discourage
the concentration of power in a single party or
group and to form a unified army. We fear that the
proposed constitutional amendments will undermine
the achievements of the Accords. We recognize and
stress the importance and primary responsibility of the
guarantors of the Arusha Accords in safeguarding the
spirit that reigned at their adoption.

In conclusion, the Netherlands remains committed
to the development and stability of the people of
Burundi, while recognizing that only Burundi's
stakeholders have the power to bring about lasting
peace. We fully support the East African Community
and the guarantors of the Arusha Accords in their
efforts to find a peaceful and lasting solution to the
current crisis.

