Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I would like to express
my appreciation to the Bolivian delegation and to
you personally, Mr. President, for convening today's
meeting and raising such an important topic in the
Security Council. I also thank Mr. Zuev and Ms. Ochoa
Nifio for their informative briefings.

Ongoing conflicts and military activities in
States affected by instability are resulting in the
contamination of new territories by explosive remnants
of war. Improvised explosive devices are increasingly
being used by illegal armed and terrorist groups and
pose a significant threat to communities recovering
from conflict. That is why mine action remains
essential in enabling an effective humanitarian
response, the protection of civilians and freedom of
movement for communities, humanitarian personnel
and peacekeepers.

Ukraine attaches great importance to these issues
and in recent years co-sponsored General Assembly
resolutions on assistance in mine action and on
countering the threat posed by improvised explosive
devices. We also supported the General Assembly
resolutions on the Ottawa Convention and on the
Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons.

As a State party to these two Conventions,
Ukraine acknowledges their fundamental character in
minimizing the risks stemming from landmines and
explosive remnants of war.

Despite the current significant challenges in the
security field caused by the hybrid war waged against
Ukraine, we are fully complying with our obligations
under these treaties. Indeed, since 2014, the issue of
mine action and explosive hazard threat mitigation has
acquired a whole new meaning for my country. The
explosive hazard threat is a direct result of the foreign
armed aggression and offensive actions carried out by
the hybrid Russian-terrorist forces operating in some
areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions of Ukraine.

Mines and explosive devices are scattered
throughout the conflict area, especially along the
contact line, and pose a severe threat to civilians,
including children. During the period from 16 February
to 15 May, 36 civilians died and 157 were wounded
in Donbas. This represents a 70 per cent increase
over the same period of the previous year. In 40 per
cent of cases, people died as a result of mines and
unexploded ordnance.

Such explosive remnants of war are often planted
by illegal armed groups in residential areas and along
communication routes, thus posing a greater threat
to the civilian population than to military personnel.
Recently a member of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Special Monitoring
Mission in Ukraine fell victim to one of these devices
when a patrol car carrying OSCE personnel was blown
up on 23 April near the city of Luhansk.

Unfortunately, the Security Council statement
condemning this horrible incident was blocked by the
Russian delegation, which is very telling with respect to
the perpetrators of this crime and their Kremlin patrons.

It is in these extremely difficult circumstances that
Ukraine is taking all possible measures to destroy and
dispose of explosive remnants of war on its territory.
The State emergency service of Ukraine and other
national authorities, in close cooperation with the United
Nations Mine Action Service, UNICEF, the OSCE,
NATO and other international partners, are actively
engaged in performing a range of demining actions on
the liberated territories of the Donetsk and Luhansk
regions, including providing mine-risk education for
Ukrainian citizens in conflict-affected areas. However,
humanitarian demining will be possible only after the
end of hostilities. So far, even repair of the critical
infrastructure damaged by persistent shelling by
Russian guns remains a major challenge.

In conclusion, I would like to underline the
importance of international cooperation in addressing
the threats posed by explosive remnants of war,
improvised explosive devices and landmines, as well
as in the implementation of the respective international
instruments. We hope that the adoption of the draft
resolution submitted by Bolivia will bring closer a total
ban on the use of one of the most inhuman weapons of
war ever created.

