Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): Like
previous speakers, I wish to thank the three Chairs of
the Committees established pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), 1373 (2001) and 1540
(2004) - Ambassadors Gary Quinlan, Mohammed
Loulichki and Kim Sook, respectively - for their
detailed briefings and for the efficiency and commitment
with which they steer the work of the Committees. I
thank Ambassador Kim Sook for his joint briefing,
which clearly illustrated the increasing cooperation
among the three Committees.

It is important to remember why the Council
regularly organizes these information meetings. The
news unfortunately shows that terrorism remains a
major threat to peace and international security. The
three Committees under discussion are at the forefront
of the efforts of the United Nations to fight that threat.
However, the Committees' work is effective only if
all Member States take the measures necessary to
uphold their obligations. Today's open briefings are
therefore important because they allow the Council to
transparently demonstrate to all Member States what
its subsidiary bodies are doing in the fight against
terrorism and to listen to the concerns of Member
States in that area.

I associate myself with the statement to be made by
the observer of the European Union.

In that regard, I wish to underscore that the fight
against terrorism must be guided by fundamental
democratic values and respect for the principle of
the rule of law. We commend the measures taken by
the Security Council in recent years to ensure the
implementation of clear, fair and transparent procedures
in the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated
individuals and entities. Resolution 2083 (2012) brought
significant changes to the sanctions regime, making it
more efficient and transparent. We must continue to
improve those procedures within the Council.

Luxembourg fully supports the Office of the
Ombudsperson created in December 2009, whose
mandate was enhanced and extended in December 2012
for a period of 30 months, until June 2015. We thank
Ms. Kimberly Prost for the exemplary manner in which
she carries out her mandate. We call on all Member
States to continue to fully cooperate with the Office of
the Ombudsman in all cases.

The events of recent months in Mali and the Sahel
have demonstrated the evolution of the terrorist threat
and the need for ongoing updating of the sanctions list
in order to maintain the relevance and effectiveness
of the regime established by resolution 1267 (1999).
Given the threat of Al-Qaida and its affiliated groups
in Africa, the Security Council has adapted its response
to effectively fight the terrorist scourge, making
use of all the tools at its disposal. In its resolutions
2085 (2012) and 2100 (2013), the Council reaffirmed
its determination to punish individuals, groups,
enterprises or entities that will not break their ties with
Al-Qaida and its affiliated groups, such as Al-Qaida
in the Islamic Maghreb. The 1267 Committee applied
Al-Qaida sanctions to the Mouvement pour l'unicite
et le jihad en Afrique de l'Ouest and Ansar Dine, as
well as to the leaders of those groups and individuals
associated with it. We also encourage cooperation
between the 1267 Committee and the Monitoring Team
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, pursuant to paragraph 31
of resolution 2100 (2013).

Luxembourg also attaches great importance to the
work of the 1373 Committee and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED), particularly
to their outreach role. Given the current state of the
terrorist threat, it is necessary to strengthen programmes
for capacity-building of the Sahel States. In that
context, we welcome the Rabat conference on border-
control cooperation in the Sahel and the Maghreb,
jointly organized by CTED, the United Nations Centre
for Counter-Terrorism and the Government of Morocco,
which was held from 13 to 15 March. We also welcome
the fact that the Committee will organize again this
year a special meeting on cooperation and technical
assistance to States in the Sahel region in order to
strengthen their capacity in the fight against terrorism.

I would also like to underscore the important
in-depth analysis work done by the Executive Directorate
with regard to Member States' implementation of
relevant Security Council resolutions. Work reviewing
the assessment tools has been under way for several
months to improve the quality and the clarity of the
analyses provided by CTED. We note with satisfaction
that the Executive Directorate has introduced a new
mechanism, which was presented to Member States
at an open meeting of the Committee on 2 May. We
are confident that it will further improve the work of
the Committee by better identifying the problems
faced by Member States and thereby better targeting
technical assistance to help Member States in solving
their problems. I take this opportunity to express our
sincere thanks to the Executive Director, Mr. Mike
Smith, whose term ends on 30 June, for his work at the
head of CTED.

The risk of the proliferation of nuclear, chemical
and biological weapons continues to pose a serious
threat to international peace and security; no State can
solve that problem alone. The possibility of weapons
of mass destruction (WMDs) falling into the hands
of non-State actors or terrorists is a real danger that
concerns us all. With the presence of chemical weapons
in Syria being confirmed, we are extremely concerned
about the security of those stockpiles and about the risk
of uncontrolled proliferation, which would be disastrous
for the stability of the region. In that regard, it is urgent
that the commission of inquiry set up by the Secretary-
General travel to Syria and that it be provided with
full access so as to enable it to investigate all credible
allegations of the use of chemical weapons.
Resolution 1540 (2004) plays a key role in preventing
the risk of proliferation, but its effective implementation
requires the commitment and cooperation of all States.
In that respect, the work of the 1540 Committee is of
particular importance. We urge all Member States to
report to the Committee on their efforts. We support the
objective of the Chair of the Committee to achieve by
next year, if possible, the universality of reports, so as
to mark the tenth anniversary of the 1540 Committee.

Cooperation, the exchange of information and
outreach and support activities all are important factors
in building the capacities necessary to counter the risk
of the proliferation of WMDs. The Committee, with the
support of its new panel of experts, is in a good position
to provide assistance and technical advice.

In concluding, Mr. President, I should like to
congratulate your country, Togo, on having taken the
initiative to convene on Monday a debate on the com,bat
against terrorism in Africa. The threat of terrorism
should indeed be a matter of priority for the Council.
While we have seen significant progress in the fight
against that scourge, we must remain vigilant. We must
continue our collective efforts so as to better combat
and eventually eradicate the terrorist threat, which is
constantly evolving.

