Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from French):
Allow me to say once again how honoured we are that you,
Sir, are presiding over this debate. It is a useful debate. For
almost seven years now, the Security Council has been
seized by three Governments, including that of France, of
the attacks against Pan Am flight 103 and UTA flight
772. Four hundred and forty people lost their lives in
these attacks. We paid tribute earlier at this meeting to
the victims, whose family members participated in that
tribute. Following the investigations carried out by the
competent authorities, the Governments concerned became
convinced that Libyan nationals were involved in these
acts, which clearly were terrorist acts.

In its first resolution on this matter, the Security
Council urged the Libyan Government to provide a full
and effective response to the requests for cooperation in
order to establish responsibility for the two attacks in
question. This request was not satisfied and the Council
therefore decided in resolutions 748 (1992) and 883
(1993) to impose sanctions on Libya. These sanctions are
tough but limited to specific areas. A Security Council
Committee was established to authorize exemptions to the
Councils proscriptions in order, in particular, to allow
urgent medical evacuations and to accommodate the
religious obligations of the Libyan population.

This debate is useful because, after so many years,
it helps us recall the fact at the origin of the Council's
decisions: the deliberate murder of 440 people chosen at
random. Terrorism is a cruel and cowardly weapon.
France has been its frequent victim and will fight it
tirelessly.

Seven years after the adoption of the first resolution
on these two attacks, this debate also allows us to assess
the situation.

With regard to the UTA incident, the French
Government, on 6 November 1997, transmitted to the
Secretary-General of the United Nations the text of a
letter addressed to the French Minister for Foreign Affairs
by the Examining Magistrate, Mr. Jean-Louis Bruguiere.
In his letter, which was distributed as an official
document of the Security Council, the Judge indicated
that the investigations conducted following the attack led
to the issuance of four international arrest warrants
against Libyan nationals. Despite requests contained in
resolutions 731 (192), 748 (1992) and 883 (1993), the
Libyan authorities showed no real desire to cooperate
with the French judiciary until 1996.

However, the French magistrate subsequently noted
that in March 1996 the Head of State of Libya informed
the President of France of his commitment to meet the
French requests for judicial cooperation. In July 1996

 

magistrate Bruguiere visited Libya, where he was well
received by the competent judicial authorities and where he
witnessed, under satisfactory conditions, the execution of
international letters rogatory. The magistrate was thus able
to deem that the judicial cooperation he obtained largely
met the French requests, even though some were not met.
This cooperation allowed him to put on record that
significant progress had been made and to issue two
additional arrest warrants for Libyan nationals. The way
was therefore open for a trial in absentia of the six
suspects. In due course, the Libyan authorities must bear all
the consequences of a conviction of their nationals.

The Government of France believes that on the whole
judicial cooperation with Libya has made it possible to
progress towards establishing the truth in the UTA case.
This progress will not make us forget either the suffering
of the families or the gravity of the crime. It will make it
possible, though, for justice to be done in this painful case
so that the perpetrators are identified and convicted.

The case of the attack on Pan Am flight 103 has,
unfortunately, not witnessed such developments. Pursuant
to the resolutions, the suspects in this case must appear
before a competent United States or United Kingdom court.
This demand has not yet been satisfied, and France, in
keeping with the tripartite letter of 20 December 1991,
expects Libya to meet the requests addressed to it.

My Government took note with great interest of the
two Judgments rendered by the International Court of
Justice in the Lockerbie case. The Court, under the Charter,
is the principal judicial organ of the United Nations, and it
is therefore natural for the Court to decide on the petitions
submitted to it. France notes, nevertheless, that these
Judgments are basically procedural in nature; the Court has
recognized its competence to hear the matter put before it
and will rule on the substance of the case later. These
decisions do not affect the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council.

The Government of France also took note, in
November 1995, of the letter in which the United Kingdom
Government deemed that the information received from
Libya concerning its links with the Provisional Irish
Republic Army, though incomplete, did meet its
expectations. We also noted the more general commitment
by Libya to renounce terrorism.

France notes that for several years now a number of
States and regional organizations have taken the initiative
of putting forward proposals to resolve the current impasse
over the Lockerbie case. We believe that these States and
regional organizations have been acting in good faith,
with a sincere desire for justice to be done in the
Lockerbie affair. The perpetrators must be punished, and
the families of the victims must know the truth and obtain
the compensation due them. We note that the Government
of Libya has officially accepted some of these proposals.
We note also the positive conclusions expressed in the
report commissioned by the Secretary-General on the
Scottish judicial system.

Once again, we know that no trial and no
compensation will ever erase the suffering of those who
lost a loved one in the attack on Pan Am flight 103.
Under the Charter, States must fully and immediately
implement Security Council resolutions, and Libya must
comply with the demands of the Council. We believe that
in order to resolve the impasse any proposal compatible
with the resolutions and acceptable to the Governments
most directly concerned deserves consideration.

In the meantime, my Government intends to be
sensitive to the humanitarian consequences of the
sanctions in force. In the Security Council, as in the
sanctions Committee, France acts to see to it that the
exemptions regime is applied generously and effectively.
A number of steps have been taken towards that end,
such as authorizations for flights transporting Libyan
pilgrims; other exemptions are envisaged, such as the
replacement of aircraft used for medical evacuations. In
this connection, if it appears that new aircraft need to be
acquired, we hope very much that a positive decision will
be taken quickly to ensure the continuity and safety of
medical-evacuation flights.

Having considered the report of Mr. Petrovsky
requested by the Secretary-General and the letter
addressed on 19 January last by Libya to the sanctions
Committee, France believes that in addition to these
measures other exemptions may be considered in a
positive light. I refer, for example, to the air transport of
urgently needed medicines and the maintenance of aircraft
used exclusively in the agricultural sector.

The point of this debate is not whether to maintain
sanctions; the sanctions were very recently renewed, and
we know that there is no agreement within the Security
Council to amend the current regime. However, this
debate enables us to hear Member States, and we must
listen, because anything that could bring us closer to a
just settlement is worthy of support and interest.

 

We have said that we believe that after many years of
inertia, significant progress has been made in the UTA
case. We hope that the cooperation we managed to obtain
will also be forthcoming in the Pan Am 103 case. The point
of sanctions, as many speakers have recalled, is not to
punish a population but to ensure compliance with
international law. The punishment for the perpetrators of
these attacks can be decided on only if they appear before
a competent court. France hopes that everything possible
will be done so that justice can be done.

