Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I too would like to thank Mr. Herve' Ladsous,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
and each of the Police Commissioners for their concise
and very useful message, which allows us to take
stock of the importance of the role played by police
components in peacekeeping operations, a message that
we also understand relates to the challenges we face.
Through them, I would also like to pay tribute to the
women and men who make up these police components.
I pay tribute to them for their commitment and devotion
in the service of the cause that we are defending at the
United Nations.

I would also like to thank you, Madam President,
for organizing today's debate and for the first Security
Council resolution 2185 (2014) on United Nations
police, a resolution that recognizes a major evolution in
peacekeeping operations.

That transformation can be explained by
the transformation in the international strategic
environment and the evolution of conflicts, which have
led to systematizing the presence of police components
in peacekeeping operations. Police components are
today making a vital contribution, and I think that
has been clearly acknowledged in the stabilization of
situations.

I wish to emphasize three major aspects of the
increased role of police in peacekeeping operations.

First, in qualitative terms, the effective contribution
of police components to civilian protection, together
with other components of peacekeeping operations,
requires that police and gendarmes be well equipped,
not only for their own protection but also when it comes
to the necessary communication resources for a strong
chain of command and to serve as responsive mobile
units. They need to be trained for specific missions,
notably in combating violence against women and
children, as many of us have stated. The deployment
of women police officers is an essential aspect
for reassuring vulnerable victims of human rights
violations. Achieving that goal is vital, as local police
will help to progressively rebuild trust between the
population and local police forces.

Secondly, these changes require more staff and
expertise - a message that the Police Commissioners
have related. Apart from traditional public security
tasks, United Nations missionpolice components are also
being asked to participate in rebuilding and developing
the policing capacities of host countries. In liaison with
host countries, police components of peacekeeping
missions now need to be further supported through
more specialization, based on specific recognized
expertise as well as the ability ofpolice to speak the host
country's languages. The great success of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti team, which
is responsible for training Haitian police to combat
sexual violence and gender-based violence, I believe is
a good example. Robust mobilization by Member States
should make it possible to further deploy such teams
for peacekeeping operations in host countries. On that
issue, we should also focus on the need to transfer
to host countries standardized norms, not national
police expertise, to facilitate national ownership. I
welcome in that respect the work already done and
under way by the Police Division of the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, which for several years
has been establishing operational guidelines and
standards, notably the Strategic Guidance Framework
for International Police Peacekeeping.

Thirdly, the fight against organized crime to
support the host country and to rebuild its capacities
should be an integral part of policing activities during
peacekeeping operations. Transnational organized
crime is sometimes associated with terrorism, and
a global response is needed. We believe that greater
cooperation among the Secretariat, host countries,
regional and subregional organizations, INTERPOL
and regional police organizations could be achieved
through training and the sharing of operational
information and expertise. Of course, that should be
accompanied by ever-closer cooperation between the
police and justice sectors that is in line with the same
final objective, that is, rebuilding the population's trust
and neutralizing criminals, thereby making it possible
to rebuild the rule of law. In that regard, following on a
question raised by other delegations, I would like to ask
Police Commissioner Carrilho if he could tell us a bit
more about the joint task force in Bangui, particularly
its role in civilian protection. We believe that to be a
very interesting development that could perhaps serve
as a model for other United Nations policing activities.

In conclusion, I would like to underscore that United
Nations policing challenges remain numerous. They
include the need for good coordination between police
components and civilian and military components, the
requisite ownership on the part of host countries of the
efforts carried out by peacekeeping operations, the use
of modern technologies to protect personnel in carrying
out their tasks and, as I already mentioned, the ability
to speak the host country language in order to restore
confidence between the local population and State
institutions. All of that should enable us to have United
Nations police who are more professional and effective.

The recommendations of the panel of experts on
the strategic review of peacekeeping should provide
useful proposals in that regard. France looks forward
with great interest to receiving those recommendations,
and reiterates its readiness to contribute to this debate.

