Mr. Seenz Biolley (Costa Rica) (interpretation from Spanish): Let me begin by expressing to you, Mr.
President, the appreciation of the Costa Rican delegation
for your visionary decision to include the question of the
impact of armed conflict on children on the agenda of the
Security Council for this month.

I would also like to take this opportunity to express
Costa Rica's full support for the work being done by the
United Nations, led by our Secretary-General and with the
inspiring work of Ms. Graca Machel, to prevent and
mitigate the deplorable impact of armed conflict on
children. In particular, my delegation would like to hail
the tremendous and courageous efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ambassador
Olara Otunnu, who, through his daily, tireless work has
displayed a profound sense of human solidarity in his
inherently difficult undertaking.

Seldom has this principal organ of the United
Nations had the opportunity of holding an open debate on
a topic such as this, one of highest concern to all Member
States, but also one that touches the moral conscience of
international society and, more generally, that of all
humankind. The Council need not devote its time to a
lengthy discussion of ethical values, because there can be
no doubt that all Member States of the United Nations
have repudiated time and again the use of force. All of
our leaders have agreed that human beings should reject
armed conflict as a means to resolving their differences.
In this intellectual exercise, at least, we all agree, and
what is much more significant, we concur on the subject
of the impact of armed conflict on the most vulnerable
social sectors: women, the elderly and, in particular,
children.

Nevertheless, this agreement in political discourse is
adversely affected by a sorry fact that undermines all the
values of human coexistence. Day by day, more and

 

more, these vulnerable social groups are the object and the
subject of the wars of the new international order. In most
of today's armed conflicts, women, the elderly and
particularly children are selected in a perverse way and
without any moral scruples, as targets and tools of combat.

These assertions are more than mere diplomatic
rhetoric. According to Ms. Machel's report, we see that in
recent years more than a quarter of a million children have
taken part in 30 armed conflicts around the world, that 2
million children have died in those wars, and that these
wars have left between 4 million and 5 million children
disabled, 12 million homeless and 1 million orphaned.
These figures starkly portray a state of affairs that offends
our conscience and deals a severe blow to all the political
and legal efforts of the international community in favour
of children. What is more, this is reliable and documented
evidence that we need, as quickly as possible, to tackle the
matter with wholehearted determination to identify specific
measures designed not to prevent and alleviate, but to
eradicate once and for all this disease that so deeply
offends our conscience.

In this respect, I wish to refer to certain specific
aspects. First of all, this problem must be viewed as what
it is, with full awareness, from the standpoint that it
represents a violations of human rights. In this regard, we
stress that the Security Council should incorporate the
human rights dimension in its Vision of conflicts that affect
international peace and security, and in particular those in
which vulnerable groups, especially children, are the target
and the tool of the hostilities.

Of course, this is closely bound up with the question
of the vital need for international society to punish those
responsible for violation of the human rights of vulnerable
populations. The question of impunity must be resolved in
the only possible way: by punishing those responsible.
Costa Rica hopes that this vision will be clearly reflected in
the negotiations currently under way in Rome with a view
to establishing an international criminal court. In the same
vein, Costa Rica believes it is indispensable to draw up
urgently international legislation that would explicitly
prohibit the recruitment of children under 18 years of age
by combatant forces. My delegation lends its full support to
the earliest possible conclusion of an additional protocol on
the Convention on the Rights of the Child.

Secondly, from this standpoint of the protection of the
human rights of children affected by armed conflict, my
delegation takes the View that it is essential to strengthen
the preventive action of the Security Council and the United
Nations system in general. In other words, we need a
clear-cut approach aimed at establishing a permanent
comprehensive monitoring system, under the leadership of
the Secretariat and with the participation of the agencies
and bodies specializing in human rights and humanitarian
questions, that would facilitate the detection of possible
situations of armed conflict that could affect children.

Thirdly, Costa Rica takes the view that the Security
Council, whenever it adopts resolutions establishing
sanctions regimes, should include measures for
humanitarian safeguarding and protection designed
specifically to protect these vulnerable groups. My
delegation also believes that advance studies of the impact
of possible sanctions on the most vulnerable populations,
particularly children, should be required in advance. Of
course, my delegation believes that in the field of
peacekeeping operations, the Secretariat should strengthen
operational capacity for addressing humanitarian
situations. It is clear to everyone that the activities of
members of peacekeeping operations are increasingly
directed towards humanitarian protection and assistance,
thus making it essential to define specific measures
governing training and activities in this area. This, of
course, also includes the overriding need to strengthen the
mine clearance component in these peacekeeping
operations.

Fourthly, from the standpoint of internal functioning,
Costa Rica would like to suggest that the reports that the
Secretariat presents to the Security Council for its
consideration on conflicts that are a threat to international
peace and security should include, of necessity, a chapter
on the impact on vulnerable groups, particularly children.

Fifthly, from a more general standpoint, although
still related to the Security Council, I would like to refer
to questions of disarmament. There is a need quickly to
establish international legal regulations designed to
resolve once and for all the problem of small and light
weapons, which are the instruments used in combat by
child soldiers.

Today the Security Council, under your presidency,
Sir, is sending a clear signal by holding this public
debate. The question of the impact of armed conflict on
children is part of the agenda of international peace and
security. Today the Council will also be issuing a
statement that reflects without any doubt our common
perception of this matter. Costa Rica hopes that the
tireless efforts being made in the Secretariat and in the
specialized agencies will be strengthened and bolstered by

 

this expression of the political will and awareness of the
international community on this matter, which, as I have
said, deeply offends the conscience of humankind.

