Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to congratulate the delegation of
the United Kingdom on its assumption of the presidency
of the Council for this month. I also thank the Spanish
delegation for its able leadership of the Council last
month.

The main problem facing Iraq today is a complex
amalgam of military, humanitarian, economic and
security challenges. More than 3 million Iraqis from
all communities remain internally displaced due to
their cities and towns having fallen under the control
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). The
Iraqi Government is making every effort to take the
appropriate measures to protect the internally displaced
persons, including children, women and members of
religious and ethnic minorities, and to prepare and
establish conditions conducive to their safe return.

We thank all the countries participating in the
Global Coalition to Counter ISIL, the European Union
and its member States, and the neighbouring countries
for their fight against terrorism and their military and
logistical support for the Iraqi security forces. Our
thanks and gratitude also go to the Security Council
for urging the international community to expand its
support to Iraq in fighting ISIL. We call on the States
of the region to suppress, weaken and disable the
terrorists. We confirm that terrorism can be countered
and defeated only through the concerted efforts of all
international and regional organizations and the States
of the region concerned.

My country pays tribute to the valiant security
forces, the popular mobilization forces, the Kurdish
Peshmerga and the tribal volunteers operating under a
single, central command, for their military successes in
Diyala, Salah al-Din, JurfAl-Nasir, Amerli and Kirkuk;
the liberation of Baiji and its refinery, the entire town of
Al-Siniya, and some towns of Anbar governorate; and
the completion of the siege of all of Anbar town and
Ramadi as a prelude to driving out the terrorist entity
ISIL. We are pursuing our efforts to enhance relations
with neighbouring countries, particularly the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Iran and Turkey, in addition to
our ongoing cooperation with Syria.

We take this opportunity to pay tribute to the State
of Kuwait for postponing our payment of reparations
until 2017, and we underscore our commitment to
making progress on the issues of missing persons and
the Kuwaiti national archives. We are using state-of-
the-art technology to expedite our search for the missing
Kuwaiti citizens. We are also making constructive
efforts to update our maps ofthe Kuwait-Iraq border.

We are committed to protecting the inhabitantts
of Camp Hurriya. We are implementing strict security
measures to secure their protection. We have also been
conducting investigations into the most recent missile
attack on the Camp.

In closing, we wish to express thanks and
appreciation to Mr. Jan Kubis and his team, who have

been providing advice and humanitarian assistance
to Iraqi internally displaced persons. We also thank
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq for its
capacity-building and other tasks in Iraq.

