Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I would like to thank the Chairs of the Committees
set up pursuant to Security Council resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1989 (2011), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004),
namely, the Ambassadors of Australia, Morocco and
the Republic of Korea, for introducing the reports on the
activities of their respective Committees and for their
significant contributions to the fight against terrorism.

I would also like to commend the Ombudsperson,
Ms. Kimberly Prost, for her delicate investigative work,
as well as the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate and the Monitoring Group, which have
been carrying out their tasks in an exemplary manner.

I wish to focus my statement on two main points:
the financing of terrorism and combating money-

laundering; and technical cooperation and assistance
aimed at countering those scourges. In the institutional
framework established by the United Nations for
combating terrorism, the three aforementioned
Committees are key elements. Cooperation among
those bodies not only contributes to the best possible
implementation of the relevant legal instruments in
that area, but also plays a major role in improving the
effectiveness of Security Council action.

In that regard, the growing synergy that exists
among those various bodies, on the one hand, and
between them and States, on the other, has been
extremely useful in enabling coherence in the efforts
of the various stakeholders and in the utilization of the
very limited resources at their disposal.

Togo welcomes in particular the ongoing
cooperation among the Committees when it comes to
outreach, country visits and cooperation with other
regional and subregional institutions, all of which
enable the Committees to grasp the specific needs of
States and institutions and to provide them with the
appropriate assistance.

One of the most effective means of fighting
terrorism is to prevent terrorist groups and actors from
accessing funds that allow them to perpetrate such acts.
Unfortunately, national authorities are ill-equipped to
detect such funds at their origin, for the simple reason
that they shift and mutate, flowing through both formal
and informal financial channels. One solution that
we believe would help rectify that situation is greater
cooperation among States, since many States continue
to act alone on that front, and, worse still, encounter
major difficulties in implementing Security Council
resolutions, which call for appropriate measures to
be taken, such as the freezing of assets and stopping
the illegal exploitation of natural resources, and
travel bans. A number of reasons can explain those
shortcomings, including fear of the threat posed by
terrorism, the lack of financial resources, the lack of
appropriate infrastructure, porous borders, the absence
of appropriate human resources and insufficient
inter-institutional cooperation.

With regard to States' efforts to combat money-
laundering and the financing of terrorism, despite
the multifaceted assistance States receive from the
specialized bodies, including the three Security
Council Committees, shortcomings persist, not owing
to a lack ofwill, but because it is often difficult for such
States, especially the least wealthy ones, to incorporate
in a comprehensive approach both national priorities
and international requirements. In that regard, it is
important that the three Committees continue to provide
all the aid and assistance required by States and fragile
regional institutions, which are nevertheless thoroughly
committed to the fight against money-laundering and
the financing of terrorism. Nonetheless, we believe
that the approach used by the Committees to build the
capacities of States should go further and engage civil
society and, in particular, private financial institutions
in the countries concerned, which participate on a
daily basis with States in the regulation and control of
financial flows.

If we want all States to develop mechanisms to
prevent and combat acts of terrorism in a way that
meets United Nations standards, such institutions and
States must be provided adequate support.

Given that the world is plagued by a proliferation of
terrorist acts and abductions for ransom, in particular
in Africa, it is important to take stock of the actions
already taken, so as to determine the actions and
initiatives that should be focused on how to strengthen
the fight against terrorism.

The celebration next year of the tenth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1540 (2004) provides an
excellent opportunity to evaluate the actions taken.
However, that cannot be done without collaboration
among the Committees, between the Committees and
States, among States themselves and between States
and financial institutions. It goes without saying that
the struggle must be pursued with full respect for
the rule of law and human rights, without which the
participation of all of us in the struggle to preserve
human life will be difficult to achieve.

