Mr. Logar (Slovenia): Allow me to start by
thanking Chile for its initiative to convene this meeting
at a time when the United Nations will undertake
several important review processes and as we negotiate
the post-2015 development agenda. I also express
my great appreciation to Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon; the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission,
Ambassador Antonio Patriota; and Nobel Peace Prize
Laureate Ms. Leymah Gbowee for their comprehensive
statements.

Slovenia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union. We would like
to recall the requirements for sustainable peace and the
notion that the best way to prevent conflicts remains
supporting democratic governance, respect for human
rights and economic development. I also wish to say that
Slovenia aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the representative of Austria on behalf of the members
of the Human Security Network. I would like to make
some additional remarks in my national capacity.

The interconnectedness ofpeace, good governance,
the rule of law and sustainable development is not a
new subject. Addressing all of these issues may not fall
fully under the responsibility of Security Council, but
the results of failing to address them can be seen across
the agenda of the Council. We believe that a strong
focus must be placed on addressing the socioeconomic
inequalities that are major drivers of conflicts and
organized crime, generally rising from and nourishing
political exclusion, human rights violations, injustice
and a culture of violence. These are all universal
challenges that require joint action.

In order to effectively address key drivers of
conflict, we also need strong institutions, especially
in fragile States, and enhanced mutual trust through
cooperation and dialogue. These are fundamental for
realizing freedom from fear and violence, freedom from
want and the freedom to live in dignity. Another key
component of maintaining durable peace and achieving
sustainable development is the rule of law. Justice and
reconciliation must be among the main focuses and
realizing these things by all means necessary, including
through international courts and tribunals, should be a
common endeavour for all countries.

When discussing the interlinkages between
development and peace and security, the third pillar
of United Nations should not be left behind. Human
rights violations hinder efforts to achieve peace and
security and the subsequent development of the affected
community, country or region. The international
community has seen many times that a human rights
situation can provide credible early-warning signs
of underlying conflicts. Respect for human rights
is therefore important not only for the prevention
of conflicts, but also for durable peace and inclusive
sustainable development.

I wish to point out the importance of gender
equality and the empowerment of women for both
inclusive development and durable peace and security.
The equal participation of women in all spheres of life
represents an advantage that will improve the lives of
all, in all areas.

Recovery and development in post-conflict areas
are directly related to the issue of landmines and
explosive remnants of war, which hinder post-conflict
rehabilitation and reconstruction. This human security
approach improves the daily lives of people, their well-
being, personal security and environment. Addressing
these issues also contributes to arms reduction. The
Slovenia-based ITF Enhancing Human Security has
broad and longstanding experience in managing
projects clearing landmines and explosive remnants
of war, assisting mine victims and providing capacity-
building.

Resolving conflicts and addressing their root
causes and their possible spillover effects into other
geographical areas will remain among the main
challenges to international peace and security over
the coming year. Conflict prevention is at the core
of Slovenia's foreign policy priorities and we pay
particular attention to the use of mediation as part of a
larger toolbox for preventing and resolving conflicts and
achieving sustainable peace. In this context, we believe
that no effort should be spared to strengthen conflict
prevention and the peaceful resolution of disputes,
including by enhancing United Nations mediation
efforts and further promoting the use of mediation
and capacity-building at the national, regional and
international levels.

In conclusion, the United Nations must remain the
ultimate comprehensive framework for addressing the
security-development nexus, and must turn challenges
into opportunities. The more inclusive that process
becomes, the more balanced and achievable will be the
goals that we can realize.

