Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, I would like to thank Indonesia for its initiative
in convening today's open debate during its presidency
of the Security Council for this month. I also welcome
your coming to New York, Madam Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Indonesia, to preside over this meeting.
My thanks also go to Secretary-General Guterres,
Lieutenant General Martins Filho and Mr. Holmberg
for their briefings.

Since their inception, more than 70 years ago, United
Nations peacekeeping operations have made important
contributions to the maintenance of international
peace and security. Over the past year, Secretary-
General Guterres has been actively advancing the
Action for Peacekeeping initiative. United Nations
Member States, the Secretariat and relevant regional
organizations have made shared commitments, and
those efforts have given new impetus to bolstering and
improving United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Training and capacity-building are crucial to enhancing
peacekeeping operations and have a direct bearing
onthe effectiveness of the implementation of Security
Council mandates. As such, they merit the full attention
of Council members.

China supports presidential statement
S/PRST/2019/4, which was adopted today at Indonesia's
initiative. I would like to make the following comments.

First, we must prioritize capacity-building for
troop-contributing countries (TCCs). TCCs are the
major actors of peace operations and make important
contributions to peacekeeping operations, and in doing
so their troops sometimes make the ultimate sacrifice.
The international community should pay attention to
the actual needs of TCCs, in particular those from
developing countries, enhance tcapacity-building in
the area of peacekeeping and ensure the availability
of targeted training and resources. Thorough and
effective training and capacity-building should be
conducted to continue improving the safety, security
and performance of peacekeepers.

Secondly, it is important to fully leverage the role
of the Secretariat. The Secretariat should continue
improving training policies for peacekeeping and
provide updated training materials in a timely manner.
It is necessary to carry out targeted training during
deployment in the light of the situation in the task
areas targeted in mission training. Based on its own
advantages, the Secretariat can play a coordinating role
between supply and demand in the area of peacekeeping
capacity-building.

Thirdly, it is essential to actively build partnerships
for peacekeeping capacity-building. Bilateral, regional
and international cooperation must be conducted in
peacekeeping capacity-building. Support must be given
to the African Union (AU), the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations and other regional organizations in their
efforts to enhance their regional peacekeeping capacity.
It is imperative to prioritize and support the significant
role of the AU and other regional and subregional
organizations in maintaining peace and security in
Africa and to assist the AU in its efforts for the early
operationalization of the African Standby Force and
Rapid Reaction Force.

China, a permanent member of the Security
Council, is a major troop-contributing country
(TCC) and financial contributor to United Nations
peacekeeping operations. It is a staunch supporter
of and major participant in such operations. At
present, more than 2,500 Chinese peacekeepers are
implementing mandates in eight task areas, working in
fields such as demining, medical services, engineering,
transportation and security. China attaches great
importance to the training and capacity-building of
peacekeepers. Chinese peacekeepers are well-trained,
well-equipped and disciplined. The Peacekeeping
Centre of the Chinese Ministry of Defence and
the Chinese Peacekeeping Police Training Centre
provide high-quality predeployment training for
Chinese peacekeepers.

China fully implements the commitments made
by President Xi Jinping in further supporting United
Nations peacekeeping operations. A peacekeeping
standby force of more than 8,000 troops and two
peacekeeping standby police contingents have been
established and have all passed United Nations
assessments and completed registration in the United
Nations Peacekeeping Capability Readiness System.
They can be put into operation at any time. In addition
to our efforts, China has also been actively helping
police-contributing countries that are developing
countries in their capacity-building since 2015, through
international workshops on peacekeeping, and by
sending experts and trainers abroad to conduct training.

China has helped other countries train more than
1,800 peacekeepers and has assisted countries in South-
East Asia in training more than 200 mine-clearance
personnel. China will continue to work actively on
providing the AU with gratis military assistance worth
$100 million and additional training worth $80 million
to help Africa advance its African Standby Force and
Rapid Reaction Force. It will continue to support Africa
in its efforts to enhance its own peacekeeping capacity.

Since its inception, the China-United Nations Peace
and Development Trust Fund has made peacekeeping
capacity-building a priority. Since 2016, the Fund
has supported more than 10 peacekeeping capacity-
building projects, including training for formed police
units, first aid and research on the safety and security
of peacekeepers. The Fund gives priority to funding
the peacekeeping capacity-building projects of African
TCCs. In 2018, eight training sessions were conducted,
benefiting more than 200 trainees. In 2019, the number
of training sessions will be increased to 15.

Last but not least, China wishes to reiterate that it will
continue to contribute to United Nations peacekeeping
capacity-building and honour its commitment to world
peace with concrete actions.

