Mr. Gomez Robledo (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Mexico welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General entitled "The rule of law and
transitional justice in conflict and post-conflict
societies" (S/2004/616). Our appreciation goes also to
the British presidency of the Security Council for the
timely manner in which he convened this second
debate on that topic.

We agree with the report that a consensus is
needed within the Organization on the definition of key
concepts such as the rule of law or transitional justice.
A proper orientation for the Organization's many
efforts in essentially complex and unique processes
depends on such a definition.

As the report suggests, we can understand that the
rule of law implies a principle of governance according
to which all persons, institutions and entities, public
and private, are subject to laws, which must be
compatible with international human rights norms and
must guarantee accountability, including procedural
transparency.

Today, the building or rebuilding of the structure
of a civil society is in fact sustained by respect for
international law. Also today, the law of inter-State
relations - ias gentiam - is at the service of the
individual. The building of civitas is not limited to the
establishment of peace; it must continue beyond the
formal cessation of hostilities. In short, international
law is an undeniable sign of civilization.

For its part, the notion of transitional justice - a
relatively new concept in the international sphere -
denotes above all a society's efforts to resolve the legal
and institutional challenges arising from a change in
regime, including, of course, the aspect of reparation
for victims, leading ultimately to a reconciliation
among the different national actors. Various societies
face such situations as a result of internal conflicts, but
also as a result of some profound change in their
political organization. Such is the case in Iraq or the
Sudan, where the clamour for justice represents a
challenge for the societies in those countries, but also
requires the assistance and support of the international
community.

Mexico is not in a post-conflict situation.
However, as a result of the change of administration,
we are undergoing a transition towards a democracy
that is daily growing in scope. In that connection, we
believe that our experience - reflecting the conditions
of an ongoing transition, but with the advantages
inherent in a long period of stability and economic and
social progress - can be shared with other societies.

The Mexican experience in building an
institutional framework for electoral systems that
inspire confidence in the electorate and confer
legitimacy on the authorities to be elected has been and
will remain available to the United Nations. We trust
that we will soon see in my country the materialization
of the United Nations electoral training centre project,
which was announced during the Secretary-General's
recent visit to Mexico.

Transitional justice has become a key element in
the work of the Organization. In particular, it is
increasingly present in the decisions of the Council.
The action of the Security Council in addressing
threats to international peace and security must entail
the obligation to ensure a sufficient measure of
stability and political and institutional reconstruction
after a conflict. Without that component, the work of
the Council is incomplete and weak, as we have seen in
Haiti, for example. A few years later, the same
episodes of violence and disruption of institutional life
are repeated.

Justice, democracy and peace must be closely
linked to ensure the stability and reconciliation of
societies. Undoubtedly, as recognized by the Secretary-
General, the Organization already has a respectable
number of experts in those areas, who can provide
timely advice. Some countries in particular contribute
or are in a position to provide valuable assistance on
those matters at the bilateral level. However, post-
conflict intervention efforts remain scattered in various
areas within the Organization.
On that and other aspects of the report, I should
like to make several observations.

First, my delegation believes that we must move
forward towards a process of institutionalization and
better coordination of United Nations interventions in
post-conflict situations. In that connection, my
delegation has received with interest the proposal of a
number of countries aimed at creating a specialized
unit within the Secretariat or a division within the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights.

Secondly, special tribunals of any kind are
undoubtedly one of the Organization's boldest
responses to the need to put an end to impunity and, at
the same time, to punish those responsible for crimes
that shock the social conscience. However, experience
in this area, as indicated in the report, is ambivalent.
Most assuredly, today we would not repeat many of the
mistakes we made a decade ago, some of which
Mexico noted at the time. On the one hand, special
tribunals - as in the cases of the former Yugoslavia
and Rwanda - represent an exorbitant cost, 15 per
cent of the Organization's annual budget. In the case of
the so-called hybrid or international tribunals - such
as that for Sierra Leone, to which Mexico has
contributed - voluntary contributions, as recognized
in the report, have proved to be an uncertain source of
financing. But, over and above those problems, Mexico
reaffirms its conviction that, above all, it is up to the
societies affected to initiate the establishment of such
tribunals and, in any case, to rely on international
advice, supervision and financing, depending on the
circumstances. In some cases, regional or subregional
organizations can and must supplement those tasks.

In that context, Mexico believes we must
continue to promote the strengthening of the
International Criminal Court. The Court must come to
be seen, above all, as the mechanism which the
international community has established to ensure that
the most serious crimes of international importance do
not go unpunished. As the Secretary-General indicated
in his recent address to the General Assembly,

"Those who seek to bestow legitimacy must
themselves embody it; and those who invoke
international law must themselves submit to it."
(A/59/PV.3, p. 3)

In that connection, Mexico welcomes the firm
commitment shown by the Secretary-General with
regard to strengthening the foundations, within the
Organization, of this renewed effort to promote the rule
of law and transitional justice.
