Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I join other Security
Council members in thanking you, Mr. President,
for convening this discussion on Afghanistan. I also
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Yamamoto, Ambassador Van Bohemen and Mr. Yury
Fedotov for their briefings. I also welcome and thank the
Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, Mr. Saikal,
for his statement and participation today.

The briefings we heard today mentioned a number
of serious challenges to the Afghan Government. The
escalation in the number of armed clashes, setting
yet another record level since the United Nations
began recording incidents in 2007, is worrisome. The
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) report on the protection of civilians, which
recorded 8,397 civilian casualties between January and
September this year, underscores the continued gravity
of the situation. Given this high figure, we are deeply
concerned about the significant escalation in the number
of child casualties, which increased by 15 per cent as
compared to the same period last year. Similarly, this
year also saw the highest number of newly internally
displaced persons, totalling more than 500,000 by
the end of November, according to the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. Children, which
make up 50 per cent of the total numbers, are again the
most disproportionately affected group. We reiterate
the call for all parties to undertake the necessary
measures to uphold their obligations to ensure the
safety, security and well-being of all civilians in the
country, particularly children, who remain the most
vulnerable group.

The continued horrific attacks, for which the
Taliban has claimed responsibility, remain a major
and persistent challenge to the security situation in the
country. Furthermore, the Government of Afghanistan
continues to engage in fighting with the Islamic State in

Iraq and the Levant and its affiliates and is challenged
by anti-Government elements. Malaysia strongly
condemns the horrific string of attacks that deliberately
target civilians. We also strongly condemn the recent
attacks on United Nations operations and staff members
in Afghanistan and urge the Government to conduct a
thorough investigation to ensure that the perpetrators
are held accountable.

Despite the persistent political, security and
economic challenges, we commend the Afghan
Government's continued resilience and commitment
under these difficult circumstances. We are encouraged
by the recent peace agreement reached between
the Government and HeZb-e-Islami, as we believe
the agreement represents a crucial milestone in the
Government's unwavering commitment to promoting
lasting peace and reconciliation in the country. We hope
that the successful implementation of the agreement
will contribute to confidence-building and encourage
further reconciliation between the Government and
other groups in the country. Since the agreement
was reached among the Afghan people, we are of the
view that the Council should be prepared to support
their decision, including by positively considering
the possible delisting of the Hezb-e-Islami principals
from the sanctions list of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), as requested by the
Afghan Government.

Promoting greater social and economic development
is another critical imperative in achieving long-lasting
prosperity, peace and stability in Afghanistan. In that
context, we are encouraged by the recent progress on
multiple initiatives to foster close cooperation among
Afghanistan, regional partners and the international
community. We welcome Afghanistan's continued
efforts to deepen engagement with regional partners,
including through the Heart of Asia-Istanbul
Process, particularly in the areas of addressing
security challenges in the region and enhancing
infrastructure development.

We are encouraged by the outcome of the Brussels
Conference on Afghanistan, where the international
community pledged $15.2 billion to support
Afghanistan's development priorities over the next four
years. That is a clear demonstration of the international
community's commitment to assisting Afghanistan in
progress towards self-reliance and improving the well-
being of its people.

Countering narcotics remains one of the protracted
challenges faced by the Afghan Government. Executive
Director Fedotov noted in his briefing that the area of
opium poppy cultivation increased by 10 per cent in
2016, and potential opium production surged by 43 per
cent compared over the year before. More distressingly,
eradication efforts decreased by 90 per cent as compared
to 2015. All that constitutes a significant reversal of the
marginal gains achieved in countering narcotics last
year. As narcotics continue to pose serious challenges
to the overall security situation and development of
Afghanistan, a comprehensive strategy to address all
aspects of illicit drugs and its economy must be put
in place and fully implemented. In that regard, we are
confident that the intensification of efforts and further
enhancement of cooperation between the Government
and international partners, including the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the Collective
Security Treaty Organization and the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization, will eventually bring about
success in addressing the issue of illicit drugs in a
comprehensive manner.

Finally, we wish to think Ambassador Van
Bohemen for his briefing on the overall work of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1988 (2011) and its Monitoring Team, as well
as for his excellent stewardship of the Committee. We
welcome and support the initiative of the Chair, which
would certainly contribute to enhancing the work and
coordination within UNAMA and the 1988 Committee.

In conclusion, I take this opportunity to express
our appreciation to Mr. Yamamoto and the entire
UNAMA team for their tireless efforts under
challenging circumstances. We are convinced that
the United Nations, with full respect for the principle
of the country's sovereignty, will continue to play
a significant and contributing role in realizing
Afghanistan's aspirations to achieve national unity and
lasting stability. To that end, Malaysia reiterates its firm
support for the reconciliation and reintegration efforts
undertaken by the Government of Afghanistan within
the context of respect for the country's democracy and
Constitution, non-violence and respect for the rights of
all Afghan people.

