Ms. Bird (Australia): Australia welcomes the
significant momentum for peace in Afghanistan. The
Government of Afghanistan has taken important steps
towards bringing the long-running conflict to an end.
The recent peace jirga, sponsored by the Government
of Afghanistan, was a significant opportunity for
Afghan community representatives to focus on what
peace means to them. Securing such buy-in of people
from across Afghanistan is essential to reaching a
sustainable political settlement to the conflict. We
encourage the Afghan Government to persevere with
its efforts to build a national consensus on the terms of
a settlement.

Australia also welcomes the efforts led by United
States Special Representative Khalilzad to engage
in meaningful negotiations with the Taliban. The
progress made has been important and we hope that
the momentum developed will continue towards a
comprehensive agreement. While those negotiations
were never going to be easy, we are disappointed that the
Taliban continues to resist direct talks with the Afghan
Government. We do not believe that a sustainable
political settlement is viable without such talks and call
on the Taliban and other parties to immediately begin
discussions without preconditions.

We encourage the Afghan Government to continue
its efforts to ensure that the people of Afghanistan can
vote freely and fairly in credible presidential elections
on 28 September, without the threat of violence, and call
on the Taliban to respect and engage with that process.

Australia stands firm in its support for peace in
Afghanistan, as part of a committed international
community. We were pleased to hear today about
the formation of a group of friends of women in
Afghanistan and look forward to participating in that
important initiative. We appreciate the role of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan,
under the able leadership of Special Representative
Yamamoto, in leading and coordinating United Nations
efforts in Afghanistan, and we remain committed to
the NATO-led international coalition and its effort to
support Afghanistan's security and development.

While the outlook for peace is promising, we
must not forget the millions of Afghans who continue
to struggle in the face of a protracted humanitarian
crisis. Australia is helping respond to a range of needs,
including lifesaving food and nutrition assistance. We
encourage humanitarian partners to continue to find
better ways of coordinating to meet the needs of the
Afghan people.

In conclusion, we know that Afghans are ready for
peace. Australia stands ready to support them and we
look forward to working with the Afghan Government
and other partners to help secure a sustainable political
settlement and contribute to the post-peace economic
action plan and development agenda.

