Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Costa Rica voted to adopt Security Council resolution
1904 (2009) because we recognize that collective
measures are effective in preventing and eliminating
threats to peace. However, as is well known, my
delegation has advocated the provision of the necessary
procedural safeguards for including people and entities
on the Consolidated List with the single purpose of
strengthening the regime established by resolution
1267 (1999).

In this context, we are pleased with the
improvements included in the resolution adopted today
concerning the sanctions regime, and we think that this
is a step in the right direction. We trust they will be
rapidly implemented. We are particularly pleased to see
the designation of an ombudsperson, providing for the
possibility of interaction between the person in
question and the Member States and relevant United
Nations bodies. We would have preferred the
ombudsperson to be able to issue recommendations,
but we consider that his or her comments will reflect to
some degree the results of their investigations. We
hope that in the future we will achieve a sufficient
consensus to incorporate new improvements into the
sanctions regime established by this resolution.
09-65516

For the last few months Costa Rica has worked
with the informal Group of Like-minded Countries:
Belgium, Costa Rica, Denmark, Finland, Germany,
Liechtenstein, Netherlands, Norway, Sweden and
Switzerland. The Group is pleased with the adoption of
this resolution and expresses its gratitude to the
Security Council for taking this important step, with
the aim of implementing fair and clear procedures for
including people and institutions on the sanctions list
and for withdrawing them, as well as for exceptions
authorized for humanitarian reasons, in accordance
with the outcome document of the World Summit of
2005 (General Assembly resolution 60/1). The Group
acknowledges that the improvements in the legal
procedures serve as an acknowledgement of the
concerns expressed by national and regional courts
regarding the fundamental rights of sanctioned people
and institutions, and that the new procedures adopted
strengthen the sanctions regime.

