Mr. Maurer (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
First of all, I should like to thank the United Kingdom
for having convened today's debate. I should like also
to thank the Humanitarian Coordinator and the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) for
their contributions. Finally, I should like to
congratulate you, Sir, on the format of this debate,
which shows that the Security Council's methods of
work have been somewhat reformed; we appreciate
that.

The text of my statement has been distributed, so
I shall simply make three points.

First, the protection of civilian populations is
ensured not only by international humanitarian law,
with which we are all familiar, but also by other norms
and standards for protection relating to human rights,
refugees and displaced persons, in particular the
Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement. In
addition, the norms of customary law apply to both
international and non-international armed conflicts.
Those rules were set out by the ICRC in a recently
published study. There exists, therefore, a coherent
body of non-negotiable legal principles and norms that
must guide the actions of the Security Council and of
Member States. We deem it imperative that this be
reflected in the draft resolution to be adopted by the
Council.

We have stated repeatedly in this Organization
that today respect for, and the application of, the law is
more important than its development. We are
nonetheless pleased when progress is made in the
development of the law, such as the adoption of a third
Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of
1949 yesterday morning in Geneva, which introduces
an additional emblem for the International Red Cross
and Red Crescent Movement.

Those decisions put an end to a long controversy.
As the depositary State of the Geneva Conventions,
Switzerland calls on all States to ratify speedily that
instrument.

My second comment relates to the mandates of
peace operations. In recent years, the mandates given
by the Security Council have become both broader and
more robust. We call on the Council further to
strengthen the civilian component of such operations.
We would like to forcefully stress the fact that
humanitarian work - be it emergency assistance to
victims or other protection activities - must be carried
out by civilians. Only in this way will it be possible to
guarantee the observance of humanitarian principles.
The lack of clarity which we sometimes see on the
ground with respect to the respective roles of
humanitarian and military actors jeopardizes
humanitarian action. That said, Switzerland deems it
just as important that close coordination be established
between civil and military actors. That is why we call
on the Security Council to give civilians, from the
beginning, a greater role in the planning and definition
of the mandates of peace missions.

In that context, we draw attention to the
Guidelines on the Use of Military and Civil Defence
Assets to Support United Nations Humanitarian
Activities in Complex Emergencies. Switzerland calls
upon the Council to follow those Guidelines in
defining the mandates of United Nations peace
operations and to exercise its influence on regional
organizations in order to ensure that those
organizations also follow the Guidelines.

My third remark concerns humanitarian access. I
would like also to stress the importance for
humanitarian organizations to have unrestricted access
to civilian populations. Switzerland calls upon the
Council to give special attention to the crucial issue of
humanitarian access. Even where access to victims is
clearly possible, it is often necessary to constantly
renegotiate that issue. In that context, Switzerland
supported the drafting by the United Nations of a
manual of field practices on humanitarian negotiations
with armed groups. The manual, which will be released
in the coming weeks, is being drafted in response to a
recommendation made by the United Nations
Secretary-General in his second report on the
protection of civilians in armed conflicts.

Finally, to conclude, Switzerland welcomes the
references to the responsibility to protect, contained in
the draft resolution under review.

