Mr. Heller (spoke in Spanish): In my capacity of
Chairman of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), I will highlight the main
developments in the work of the Committee in the six
months since the last joint briefing on 13 November
2009 (see S/PV.6217). I would like to update the
Security Council on the outcome of the recent
comprehensive review of the status of implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004), and to highlight the
Committee's main activities in outreach and awareness-
building, as well as in assistance to and cooperation
with relevant intergovernmental organizations. I have
already commented on the growing cooperation between
the 1540 Committee and other United Nations bodies,
especially the Committee established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1373 (2001) and the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force (CTITF).

The comprehensive review was launched in
response to a decision of the Security Council
contained in resolution 1810 (2008). As part of this
review, the Committee held a three-day open meeting
from 30 September to 2 October 2009. My predecessor,
Ambassador Jorge Urbina of Costa Rica, has already
briefed the Council on that meeting, at which 41 States,
21 intergovernmental organizations and other entities
made statements and held interactive discussions on
specific issues.

I will highlight today the outcome of the review,
which was sent to the President of the Security Council
on 29 January 2010 in the form of a final document
containing the review's key findings and
recommendations (S/2010/52). The main points
included five major areas in which progress can be
made: first, the Committee's capacity to gather
information on the status of implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004); secondly, its efficiency and
effective working practices; thirdly, means for
facilitating assistance; fourthly, cooperation with
international, regional, subregional and multilateral
institutions; and fifthly, outreach.

Without going into greater detail, I am pleased to
mention that the review confirmed that the adoption of
resolution 1540 (2004) has prompted significant steps
to be taken around the world to prevent non-State
actors from manufacturing, acquiring, possessing,
developing, transporting, transferring or using nuclear,
chemical or biological weapons or their means of
delivery, and has also facilitated the gathering of
comprehensive data on the measures taken by States in
this regard.

A great many States have submitted reports on
the measures taken in accordance with the resolution.
Since 2006, Member States have made tangible and
significant progress in addressing the threat of the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. Nearly
160 Member States have provided information on their
capacities and gaps in preventing the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. In addition, the number
of States that have reported having implemented
legislative measures to penalize the involvement of
non-State actors in the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction has grown considerably since the
adoption of resolution 1540 (2004).

The review also confirmed that, due to the wide
range of obligations arising under resolution 1540
(2004), some States still fall short in addressing all the
resolution's requirements in their legislation, including
the adoption of preventive measures and penalties for
violations. In addition, the review identified some
areas in which States have adopted fewer measures,
such as biological weapons, means of delivery, national
control lists, access to related materials and the
financing of prohibited or illicit proliferation activities.

The review also identified some measures that the
Committee could take in order to advance the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). Likewise, it
was determined that the cooperative and transparent
approach adopted by the 1540 Committee has been a
key factor in increasing the level of participation of all
States.

States and many international entities welcomed
the openness of the comprehensive review process and
urged the 1540 Committee to pursue this approach and
to increase its useful efforts to enhance transparency
and openness.
10-35734

The Committee's programme of work covering
the period from 1 February 2010 to 31 January 2011
follows the recommendations of the comprehensive
review by building on the programme of the past year
and by improving its methods of work by, for example,
facilitating the contribution of experts from capitals in
the Committee's work; by encouraging contributions
by non-permanent members of the Council who are no
longer members of the Committee; and by making its
matrix and assistance template more user-friendly.

In the wake of the comprehensive review, the
former Chairman of the Committee visited the
headquarters of several intergovernmental
organizations: the World Customs Organization in
Brussels, the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons in The Hague, and the International
Atomic Energy Agency and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe in Vienna. In
December, he followed up on those visits by sending
letters recording the understandings reached on
practical ways to strengthen cooperation with the
Committee.

In order to expand the scope of cooperation in
specific areas such as experience-sharing, coordinating
assistance requests and channelling legislative advice,
the Committee has begun sending expert missions to
the secretariats of these organizations. Two of our
experts participated in one such mission at the OPCW
headquarters in The Hague from 8 to 10 February. On
their first day, these consultations included a meeting
between the OPCW Director-General and myself. The
visit to The Hague was planned to coincide with my
participation as 1540 Chairman in the preparatory
meeting for the Nuclear Security Summit that took
place last month in Washington on the initiative of
President Obama, where I had the opportunity to
explain how the objectives of resolution 1540 (2004)
complement those of the Summit.

As Chairman, I also participated in the
non-proliferation meeting in Moscow, which examined,
from the perspectives of the past and the future, the
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) in the
framework of the preparations for the Review
Conference of the Parties to the NPT that is now under
way. I also took the opportunity to present the
requirements of resolution 1540 (2004) as a mechanism
for strengthening the non-proliferation regime. I was
accompanied by the coordinator of the Expert Group,
and we were able to hold a meeting with the relevant
10-35734
authorities of the Russian Federation. All the outreach
activities that the Committee participated in are listed
in the report; in the interests of brevity, I will not read
them out now.

On 14 April we held an unofficial meeting with
representatives of Member States that have not yet
submitted their first reports to the Committee, in order
to invite them to do so. I would like to continue to deal
with this issue and hold bilateral dialogue with them in
order to strengthen the resolution 1540 (2004) regime.

Finally, I would like to report that the Committee
has streamlined its work methods, aiming to hold
monthly meetings and as many meetings of its four
working groups as necessary, to guide and review the
work of the Expert Group. It is my intention to
continue that practice.

