Mr. Gayama (Congo) (spoke in French): As my
country is one of the 11 that make up the Great Lakes
region in the larger sense that Mr. Ibrahima Fall
mentioned, it is on behalf of all those countries - my
own, of course, but also those represented in the
Chamber, including those whose representatives are
seated at the side of the Council Chamber as well as
those whose representatives are currently away from
New York - that I would like today to express our
gratitude to Mr. Ibrahima Fall, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his professionalism and
commitment in carrying out his duties, which consisted
in establishing community institutions for the Great
Lakes region. We thank him most sincerely for that.

As Mr. Fall concludes his mission, it can be said
that the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region is now a reality. It is indeed a fragile institution
and must for that reason be strengthened -
specifically, by ensuring that the countries of the
region assume ownership for the mechanisms that have
been established. That is a requirement that must first
be met before the support of the international
community can continue. The countries of the region
should send a clear message as to their commitment to
the important tool for peace and development that they
have now established.

The ratification of the Stability, Security and
Development Pact then becomes a key and
indispensable requirement. Generally speaking, that
ownership can move from dream to the reality that, in
all countries of the region, Governments and peoples
have always called for, namely, peace and
development.

The Great Lakes region is of key importance, not
just for Africa but also for the world. That region is
where one finds the Congo River Basin, which, after
the Amazon, is the world's second largest ecological
lung, as it were. The region is also home to established
institutions operating to some degree or other. To a
certain extent, those institutions constitute the fabric of
the region. I am referring to the Economic Community
of Central African States, the Common Market for
Eastern and Southern Africa and the Economic
Community of the Great Lakes Countries, whose
reactivation is called for by all those concerned about
improving the situation in the region.

The international community has therefore rightly
called the Great Lakes region a special reconstruction
and development area. We therefore believe that it is
urgent that the Community's secretariat be able to
function properly. The indispensable support of the
international community must be channelled through
the secretariat and its member countries in order to
ensure that the entire structure can operate.

With regard to institutional coherence, it is being
developed on the basis of the genuine cultural unity
that exists in the region. That is evident in the major
languages utilized in the region, namely, Swahili and
Lingala, among others. That will undoubtedly
contribute to an inclusive approach, in which we
believe civil society will be the primary participant and
beneficiary. It is for that reason that we welcome the
commitment undertaken by parliamentarians of the
region meeting recently in Kinshasa with a view,
primarily, to ratifying the Pact.

There is no doubt that many factors are
contributing to fragility in the region, especially given
that all the elements of peace have not yet been fully
consolidated. The sad reality is that small arms are
circulating freely. Among others, that situation benefits
all those who illegally exploit the vast natural
resources of the region. Fragility is also evident in the
fact that there is still mistrust among the members of
the region, and that mistrust must be eliminated. The
region therefore still needs the international
community.

In that connection, we think that the role of the
Group of Friends of the Great Lakes Region will

continue to be welcomed for some time to come. We
support the idea of the Organization's continuing to
provide cooperation to the regional secretariat in
technical and material terms and in every possible way.

We know that the United Nations is now very
much involved throughout the region. It has been
working in Burundi, Rwanda, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and countries adjacent to the region,
particularly the Sudan, Chad and the Central African
Republic. But the United Nations has not done only
that. In Central Africa, it has also long promoted the
activities of the United Nations Standing Advisory
Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa,
which some time ago signed a non-aggression pact
bringing together many countries, particularly
members of the Economic Community of Central
African States. All of that reflects the historic United
Nations commitment to this region, whose recovery
will be a very important step for Africa as a whole.

That is why, at this point, it would be good if the
Security Council could define, or seek to encourage the
Secretariat to define, all support modalities that the
United Nations can provide to the Great Lakes
region - mindful, obviously, of lessons learned from
experience, such as those succinctly referred to by
Mr. Ibrahima Fall.

