Mr. Khare: I am honoured to be here today alongside
my colleague and friend, the Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Ladsous.

Mali remains one of the most difficult environments
known to United Nations peacekeeping. The size of the
country, the remote and landlocked areas where we
are deployed, and the poor and insecure road networks
continue to pose significant challenges.

Currently we are focused on implementing
measures to ensure secure and uninterrupted supply
routes; upgrade and strengthen the defence and
infrastructure of all existing camps; and improve the
capabilities of the the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).

MINUSMA is establishing its main logistics hub
in Gao to better serve the locations in northern Mali.
Discussions with Algeria, Benin and the Niger continue
so as to establish additional and much shorter supply
routes to Gao. The route from the port of Cotonou
through Niamey to Gao, for example, would be more
than 1,400 kilometres shorter than MINUSMA's
current supply route.

In response to the significant security threat in Mali,
MINUSMA continues to upgrade and strengthen the
defence infrastructure of all existing camps, including
by reinforcing its facilities against blasts and installing
protected command positions and bunkers. In high-risk
areas, the Mission has also improved living conditions
for civilian and uniformed personnel.

We continue to innovate with the use of modern
technology, particularly to improve our situational
awareness and strengthen the security of our own
personnel and assets as well as our capacity to protect
civilians. MINUSMA has implemented several
pilot projects using surveillance and early-warning
technology to improve the intelligence-gathering
capacity of the Mission so as to prevent attacks.

In order for MINUSMA to be able to implement
its mandate, it is critical that the Mission be provided
with the necessary capacities and capabilities required
to operate safely and effectively in the current
environment, which I have just described.

Since its inception, MINUSMA has experienced
significant contingent-owned equipment capability
gaps, particularly with the rehatted formed units from
the African Union. Shortages of major equipment
such as armoured personnel carriers, support
vehicles, generators, water-treatment plants and
other critical logistics equipment have affected the
ability of military and police components to perform
operational tasks. The self-sustainment services of
the contingents, especially in the medical, observation
and communication categories, among others, have not
always been provided up to the established standards.

Thanks to the corrective actions taken by the
concerned troop-contributing countries (TCCs) and
police-contributing countries this year to deploy the
needed contingent-owned equipment vehicles and
other items so as to meet their obligations and improve
equipment serviceability, the overall contingent-owned
equipment capability of contingents in MINUSMA has
improved, but key gaps remain.

Given the increasingly insecure and violent
environment outlined by Under-Secretary-General
Ladsous, efforts are being made to strengthen the
Mission medical support plan, equipment and personnel
gaps identified in the Mission's medical facilities.
MINUSMA's vast area of operations and the austere
environment present unique challenges with regard to
the implementation of our 10-1-2 emergency medical
response timeline for CASEVAC. To address critical
gaps in TCC capabilities in this area, the Mission
recently acquired, through a commercial solicitation
process, two medical evacuation helicopters equipped
with the latest in night-vision technology, along
with fully integrated medical teams. One is already
operational, deployed to Timbuktu, and the second will
be deployed shortly to Kidal.

In addition, in order to effectively address the
first 10 minutes from the onset of injury or illness, the
training of MINUSMA troops and medical personnel
is ongoing. We are also working on the development
of United Nations-specific first-aid training material,
which will be delivered to all Member States as a
United Nations medical standard to be incorporated
into predeployment troop-training material, so as to
streamline the quality of first aid.

Modern peacekeeping operations such as
MINUSMA demand a range of new or stronger
capabilities, and they demand innovative solutions.
We continue to call on Member States to consider
becoming what I would refer to as "contingent-owned-
equipment-contributing countries". We also call on
them to consider contributing tojoint battalions, and/or
partnering directly with troop- and police-contributing
countries to provide the required equipment.

One example of an innovative approach to ensuring
the required capabilities is the recent collaboration
between Norway, Belgium, Denmark, Portugal and
Sweden, which have jointly agreed to provide a C-130
aviation unit to MINUSMA through a mutually agreed
multinational rotation concept. This will guarantee
the continuous provision of this critical air asset to
MINUSMA for a period of approximately two years.
The Department of Field Support (DFS) is open to
exploring similar arrangements for other equipment in
Mali.

It is essential that we uphold the highest standards

as we serve and protect the local population. In Mali,
environmental management remains a key priority
for my Department. Likewise, I continue to prioritize
efforts to address sexual exploitation and abuse and
all issues related to the conduct of United Nations
personnel. I call on all Member States to ensure that
our personnel upholds the highest standards of conduct
and discipline, ensuring adequate training, the timely
reporting of incidents and follow-up action when
necessary, so as to ensure accountability.

Looking ahead, neither the challenges nor the risks
at hand should be underestimated. A failure to enhance
the Mission's capability will have a significant impact
on our capacity to deliver on the mandate. However, the
results achieved by MINUSMA thus far suggest that
with commitment, vision and the continued support of
the Council, these challenges are not insurmountable.

