Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): It is a
pleasure to see you, Sir, preside over the Security
Council this month, and to see that you have chosen
the issue of the working methods of the Council for
consideration in an open debate during your
presidency. Four years ago, we enjoyed working and
coordinating with your delegation on this issue during
our membership of the Security Council, and we
appreciated your work as Chair of the Informal
Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions.

We welcome this opportunity to make some frank
observations on the theme of this meeting, out of a
genuine interest in improving the performance of this
important body.

I should like at the outset to express our support
for the statement delivered by the representative of
Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

Developing and improving the working methods
of the Security Council and related procedural issues
are particularly important now as they are an integral
part of the process of Security Council reform, which
has both structural and functional dimensions. The
previous review of the Council's working methods
established the need for modernization and
development, identified shortcomings that should be
rectified and measures that should be taken in order to
enable the Security Council to fully discharge its
mandate in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, to revitalize its work and to maintain its
credibility.

The note by the President contained in document
S/2006/507 was an achievement in itself. However,
further useful suggestions have been made by various
parties. At least during our membership of the Council,
we did not see adequate implementation of the note's
recommendations, however useful those

recommendations were. Here, I would like to highlight
a number of points, from which the Council may
benefit when updating its rules of procedure - which
it is called upon to adopt in Article 30 of the Charter.
Since the Council represents all the Members of the
United Nations, it should take their views into account
when adopting its rules of procedure.

First, the question of the veto, although a
sensitive one, remains one of the central issues of
Security Council reform. I will not discuss here the
radical changes that are being proposed and discussed
in the framework of the intergovernmental negotiations
on Security Council reform, the increase in its
membership and other related matters. I will only stress
that it is important that the veto not be used to thwart
decisions of paramount importance for the maintenance
of peace and security and the protection of human
beings.

Second, we are also of the view that the Security
Council should adopt resolutions invoking Chapter VII
of the Charter only when necessary and in a manner
that is fair, and when deploying peacekeeping
missions. Even in those cases, the invocation of
Chapter VII should be limited to those paragraphs of
the resolution that are relevant to the self-defence of
the mission and other provisions that require the use of
Chapter VII.

Third, I want to stress the issue of coordination
between the Security Council and other United Nations
organs, in particular the General Assembly, in the
discharge of their mandates. In this context, we call
upon the Security Council to improve the annual
reports it submits to the General Assembly, in
particular with regard to the quality of their analytical
aspects and their recommendations. We also have
views concerning the frequency of meetings between
the Presidents of the General Assembly and the
Security Council, which are at the heart of the
coordination between the two organs. Increasing the
benefits resulting from these meetings can enhance the
work of both organs. Already, it appears to be possible
for the State holding the presidency of the Council to
transmit a monthly assessment of the Council's work to
the General Assembly.

Fourth, the Security Council should not only
coordinate with other United Nations organs, but
should also enhance its coordination with regional and
subregional organizations and entities, in line with the
provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter, in order to
enhance the success of Council measures to address
issues on its agenda and contribute to the legitimacy of
its work.

Fifth, the majority of United Nations Members
have repeatedly stressed that the Security Council
should not go beyond its mandate under the United
Nations Charter, specifically Article 24. We stress here
that the Council should not infringe on the functions of
other United Nations organs on issues that do not
involve international peace and security. At the same
time, the Security Council should take into account the
recommendations of the General Assembly on matters
concerning the maintenance of international peace and
security, in accordance with Article 11, paragraph 2, of
the Charter.

Sixth, while we are aware of the complexity and
sensitivity of the issues of which the Security Council
is seized, which frequently require confidentiality, we
emphasize the need to strike a balance between that
requirement and the Council's responsibility to achieve
transparency in its work and to serve the general
membership of the United Nations. Here, we stress also
the importance of consultation with the relevant
authorities and of not making decisions behind closed
doors. We have found it odd that, on a number of
occasions, closed formal meetings have been held to
consider items that do not require confidentiality, such
as the periodic meetings with the President of the
International Court of Justice. In the same context, we
believe it would be useful to hold more Arria Formula
meetings, which have proven more effective than
formal meetings in addressing certain issues.

Seven, the Council has taken praiseworthy action
to improve the listing and de-listing procedures of its
counter-terrorism and sanctions committees, with a
view to avoiding legal problems that have arisen. But
the methodology of listing individuals and entities on
the sanctions lists should be amended to conform to
court decisions and follow legal due process.
Eight, while we know that the Security Council is
a political organ, the documents it issues feed into
international law and have an impact on it. We should
therefore improve the work of the Council by involving
legal experts from the Secretariat in the consideration
of legal matters on its agenda and the agendas of its
subsidiary bodies.

Ninth, we want to stress the importance of the
careful selection of members of groups of experts
working with subsidiary bodies, subject to the principle
of equitable geographical distribution and in
consultation with all Council members.

Finally, the Security Council website has proven
to be an indispensable tool for following and
facilitating the Council's work, and we are delighted
that is being developed to keep pace with increasing
demand on the part of many actors. We also welcome
the endeavours of the Secretariat to promote the
institutional memory of the Council.

