Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, Ambassador Jurica
and Ambassador Grauls for your briefings and for your
joint statement on cooperation among the three
Security Council Committees that deal with the issues
of terrorism and non-proliferation. Your dedicated
leadership has been central to the effectiveness of those
three subsidiary bodies.

Today's briefing is an opportunity to focus on
some of the accomplishments of the three Committees
after their mandate renewal over the past several
months. We are grateful that Ambassador Grauls has
continued his predecessor's strong leadership as Chair
of the 1267 (1999) Committee. We are also deeply
appreciative of the work that the 1267 (1999)
Monitoring Team has done to support Ambassador
Grauls and the Committee. The 1267 sanctions regime
has been one of the great success stories of United
Nations counter-terrorism efforts. Its success is a credit
to global solidarity in confronting the Al-Qaida/Taliban
threat and its work has produced tangible results.
The Council has created an unquestionably useful
tool to help prevent Al-Qaida and the Taliban from
travelling internationally or acquiring arms and has
resulted in the freezing of millions of dollars that could
otherwise be used to fund terrorism. Because of the
severity of the threat that Al-Qaida and the Taliban
continue to pose to international peace and security, we
have a special responsibility to ensure that the 1267
regime retains its effectiveness, including by ensuring
that the 1267 consolidated list remains as up to date as
possible.

The 1267 regime has evolved in a short period of
time. In recent years, the Council established a focal
point to allow sanctioned individuals or entities to
petition the United Nations directly for de-listing.
Recently, the Council mandated the Committee to
make information explaining the Committee's reasons
for approving new listings publicly available.

The Council's adoption in June of resolution
1822 (2008) was another tremendous leap forward in
ensuring fair and clear Committee procedures. The
implementation of the new procedures for listing,
de-listing and reviewing designations will demonstrate
that the Council is serious about imposing preventive
sanctions in a fair manner.

This discussion about procedure and process
should not cause us to forget the regime's ultimate
goal: mitigating and ultimately eliminating the threat
posed by Al-Qaida and the Taliban. We should
encourage more States to submit names for designation
to the Committee and redouble efforts to ensure
implementation of these preventive measures.

We also thank Ambassador Jurica for his
statement and for his effective leadership of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee. The Committee survey
of the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) by
Member States is a positive step forward and the
survey provides excellent recommendations for the
Committee's future work.

Ambassador Smith has made impressive progress
in his first year as Executive Director of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED)
and deserves our thanks and congratulations. I would
also like to note that CTED's high tempo in visiting
five countries over the last six months is impressive.
The United States strongly supports CTED's targeted
visits as a way to address specific technical needs that
a country may have. As Ambassador Jurica noted, some
188 preliminary implementation assessments have been
adopted and shared with Member States. The United
States urges States that have not responded to their
Assessments to do so. Furthermore, we support the
Committee's initiative to conduct a stock-taking of

each Member States implementation of resolution 1373
(2001).

In regard to the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004), the United States welcomes
the completion of the Committee's report on States'
compliance. The report identifies a number of specific
measures that States have taken to implement
resolution 1540 (2004) and contains important
recommendations for the Committee's work, consistent
with the Committee's three-year mandate under
resolution 1810 (2008).

The United States urges the Committee to use the
report as a guide to its future work and for the
Committee to adopt its work plan by 31 January 2009.
Under Ambassador's Urbina's excellent leadership, the
Committee has engaged in several outreach activities
since May and the United States greatly supports these
initiatives.

In parallel with the 1540 Committee's efforts, the
United States is providing funding to conduct, in
conjunction with the Committee, outreach activities in
the form of regional workshops aimed at improving the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). The
workshops were provided to assist States in South
Asia, the Middle East, North Africa, sub-Saharan
Africa and the Caucasus.

The three Committees constitute an important
Security Council contribution to the United Nations
counter-terrorism strategy. We are committed to
working with them and other counter-terrorism bodies
in a concerted effort to confront and stop those
involved in terrorist activities.

