Mr. Brahimi: It is an honour, Sir, to come back
to brief the Council, and a privilege and a pleasure to
take the floor under your presidency. May I express to
you and to the new members of the Council my very
best wishes for the two years they are going to serve
this body.

Since the transfer of power in Afghanistan on 22
December, the Interim Administration, under the
leadership of Hamid Karzai, has been working to
establish itself as the central Government in
Afghanistan. Obviously, it has encountered many
obstacles, including the absence of trained personnel,
the destruction of ministry premises, and the lack of
equipment, including telephones and the other basic
necessities that any administration requires in order to
function properly.

However, progress has been made, and most
ministries are starting to carry out their responsibilities.
One of the most important achievements of the
Administration was the payment of civil service
salaries as of 22 January, that is, for the very first
month of the Administration's existence. This went a
long way towards enhancing the Administration's
credibility.

The contributions made to the Afghan Interim
Authority Fund, administered by the United Nations
Development Programme, were instrumental in
enabling the Administration to pay salaries on time. We
are very grateful to all of the Governments that have
paid into the Fund, but a much larger sum of money
will be required in order to ensure that the Interim
Administration can continue to pay salaries in the
coming months and provide the bare minimum that
peoples everywhere routinely expect of their
Government.

The Tokyo conference, as the Secretary-General
just said, was extremely well attended at a high level,
and the pledges made were substantial. The
commitment that was shown by the international
community was encouraging, but I cannot
overemphasize the need for the pledges to be followed
up, on an urgent basis, by actual contributions. The
Interim Administration can count only on the
generosity of the international community to help it
find the means with which to begin the reconstruction
of the country as soon as possible. Everyone
understands how important it is to avoid a situation in
which a large quantity of funds are said to be available
in future, but very little is actually in hand for the
urgent work that needs to be done now.

As the Secretary-General has just stated, security
is, indeed, the main preoccupation of the population in
Afghanistan. Flashpoints still exist throughout the
country, and tensions flare up periodically, instilling
fear in the population that peace will not last.
Meanwhile, in other parts of the country, the situation
remains calm.

Last week, tensions erupted both in the east and
in the north. In Mazar-e-Sharif, two of the main
factions moved troops into the city, and there were
indications that a serious military conflict could take
place. On 1 February, a joint mediation effort by the
Interim Administration and the United Nations led to
the renewal of a demilitarization agreement, in which
unauthorized bases and posts were redeployed outside
the city and security was placed in the hands of a joint
police force. This was a significant development,
although there are still unconfirmed reports of armed
clashes outside the city.

The conflict in Gardez, in the east, has not been
settled yet, although the military clashes ceased on 2
February. There are indications that the forces of one of
the factions are currently deployed outside the town,
with heavy weapons, and are threatening to attack
again.

These clashes demonstrate that the peace in
Afghanistan is still fragile. At the same time, the
visible presence of International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF) troops in the capital has led to an
improvement in the security situation in Kabul. This
has led to increasingly vocal demands by ordinary
Afghans, as well as by members of the Interim
Administration and even warlords, for the expansion of
ISAF to the rest of the country. We tend to agree with
these demands, and we hope that these will receive
favourable and urgent consideration by the Security
Council.

In the medium and long term, however, it is the
creation of a truly national police and army that will be
critical to improving and stabilizing the security
situation in Afghanistan.

A very useful meeting took place in the margins
of the Tokyo conference precisely to discuss
international support for the reform of the security
sector. With regard to the police, the Afghan authorities
have asked the German Government for training and
assistance, and we strongly supported that request. As a
result, a German delegation visited Kabul last month
and made a preliminary assessment of the needs. A
meeting is now scheduled to take place in Berlin on 13
February to discuss the specific needs of the Afghan
police and the ways in which different Governments
can assist. In the meantime, the United Kingdom has
agreed to provide, through ISAF, £190,000 for
communications and other basic equipment to the
police in Kabul for their most immediate needs.

The creation of a national army is also a priority,
and the international community will be called upon to
provide assistance in terms of training, salaries, and so
forth. For now, ISAF has undertaken to train a national
guard battalion of 600 soldiers, beginning on 26
February - a most welcome initiative, which will, I
am sure, show that helping Afghanistan to form a
national army can be done. I also hope that the
international community will pay attention to the need
to help all those who participated in Afghanistan's
many wars over the past quarter of a century to return
to civilian life in dignity. In Afghanistan, as in most
post-conflict situations, helping in the reintegration of
former combatants is an essential part of the peace
process.

I would like to emphasize the fact that the
population of Afghanistan has very high expectations
that the Interim Administration will bring about swift
and significant improvements in the security situation.
The Minister of the Interior and the Minister of
Defence have urged that international assistance to the
police and army, respectively, be forthcoming as soon
as possible, and I share the view that we cannot afford
to react slowly on this issue; time really is of the
essence.

The United Nations relief activities also illustrate
the disparate security situation in various parts of the
country. Relief efforts continue to gather momentum,
and access to several areas that were only recently
considered to be unsafe is improving. During the
month of January, for example, United Nations
agencies and non-governmental organization were able
to distribute 6,000 tons of food in Kandahar alone.
Relief workers have also gained access to several
districts in Konar and Laghman provinces and to the
road between Jalalabad and Kabul, enabling
international staff to travel from Peshawar to Kabul by
road. A city-wide distribution effort began in Mazar-e-
Sharif yesterday - the third such distribution this year,
after those in Herat and Kabul.

Work on a more systematic assessment of needs
is also gearing up. Rapid assessments of internally
displaced persons and of communities likely to be a
focus for return are ongoing and, in some cases,
nearing completion. This week, the World Food
Programme is deploying six helicopters to launch rapid
assessment missions in areas that are difficult to access
by road, in particular to investigate reports of food
shortages and even of famine - as some members may
have seen on television - in remote areas in central
west Afghanistan.

Despite encouraging developments, insecurity is
continuing to hamper relief efforts in many parts of the
country. Three entire provinces in the east - Paktia,
Khost and Paktika - remain practically off-limits for
humanitarian workers. The same applies to numerous
districts in south-western Afghanistan, where several
main roads remain extremely dangerous. The only
remaining access road from Kabul to Bamiyan, for
example, has been blocked by tensions in the area of
Ghorbund.

Additionally, the tensions in Mazar-e-Sharif
almost led to the evacuation of United Nations staff
last week, while the situation in Gardez actually did
force the evacuation of United Nations local staff, who
have not yet been able to return. Even in areas that are
considered relatively safe, such as Herat and Kabul, the
security environment for relief workers remains quite
fragile.

Insecurity is also continuing to have a serious
impact on population movements, both as a cause for
further displacement and as a major disincentive for the
return of refugees and internally displaced persons.
Insecurity will become even more relevant and
worrying when large numbers of refugees and
internally displaced persons will want to return to their
homes in March and April for the planting season.

Many of the returnees who have come back to the
country - a total of some 105,000 people in
January- have been moving to urban areas that they
consider safe, in particular to Kabul and Herat, instead
of going to their areas of origin, thus putting even more
pressure on the very meagre service capacities of those
cities. At the same time, Afghans seeking refuge in
Pakistan are still arriving at the Chaman border
crossing. Reports of discrimination against Pashtun
minorities in the north and the continued presence of
arms in some concentrations of internally displaced
persons are of great concern to all of us.
The Bonn Agreement provided for the formation
of a Special Independent Commission for the
Convening of the Emergency Loya Jirga within one
month after the transfer of power. This was one of the
main preoccupations of the Interim Administration and
the United Nations during January. The composition of
the Commission was announced by Chairman Karzai in
the presence of the Secretary-General during his visit
to Kabul on 25 January. All 21 members have accepted
membership in the Commission, and the group began
its work on 29 January. The Commission is meeting
every day, and it will be inaugurated officially by
Chairman Karzai tomorrow.

The Commission has confirmed its intention to
hold the emergency Loya Jirga within the five-month
time frame set forth in the Bonn Agreement and to
consult widely within the country in order to ensure
that the Loya Jirga is representative of all segments of
the Afghan population. A very strong effort was made
to ensure that the members of the Loya Jirga were as
independent as possible, and the composition of the
Commission has generally been well received by the
people of Afghanistan.

At the same time, the United Nations assisted in
putting together a proposal for the re-establishment of a
Civil Service Commission, including the preparation of
a list of possible candidates to serve on it. That
proposal is now with the Interim Administration, which
is expected to act on it shortly and make the Civil
Service Commission a reality.

With the establishment of the Loya Jirga
Commission within the time frame mandated by Bonn,
and with the Civil Service Commission on its way, two
of the critical milestones in the peace process have
been successfully met. We now intend to focus our
efforts on assisting the Interim Administration in the
formation of the other two Commissions provided for
in Bonn - the Judicial Commission and the Human
Rights Commission.

I should now like to say a few words about the
structure of the United Nations mission. This is, of
course, one of our major preoccupations, because we
need to finalize the structure of the future mission in
Afghanistan as soon as possible. There have been long
debates on this issue within the Integrated Mission
Task Force and the United Nations Development
Group/Executive Committee on Humanitarian Affairs
here in New York as well as among the various
agencies in the field. We are now close to a consensus
on the structure. It will be an integrated mission that
will operate with a "light footprint", keeping the
international United Nations presence to the minimum
required, while our Afghan colleagues are given as
much of a role as possible. My discussions both in
Kabul and in New York indicate that there is agreement
within the United Nations on this approach.

Mr. Nigel Fisher, who has been appointed by the
Secretary-General as Deputy Special Representative
for Humanitarian Affairs in Afghanistan, will play an
important role in bringing together the various parts of
the United Nations system engaged in relief,
reconstruction and recovery work and in ensuring that
we work in tandem with the vision and objectives of
the Interim Administration.

In the near future, the Secretary-General will also
appoint another Deputy Special Representative to
replace Mr. Vendrell, who has retired after a long and
distinguished career at the United Nations and
participated with distinction and dedication in the
Organization's ongoing effort to help the people of
Afghanistan out of their long and difficult crisis.

It seems that Bonn took place a very long time
ago, but in fact it did not. The agreement was reached
only on 5 December, exactly two months ago. The
Interim Administration is settling in, and Chairman
Karzai has become a familiar figure all over the world.
Yet this Administration was inaugurated only on 22
December, a mere six or seven weeks ago.

Afghanistan has gone some way on the road
towards peace and stability, but that road is still very
long and fraught with danger. The Afghan people are
tired - indeed, exhausted - because of the conflicts
that have destroyed their country and threatened the
very existence of their nation. They want peace, and
they know that they still need the support of their
friends and neighbours as well as the support of the
international community as a whole. Even the most
modest among them know that in mobilizing and
channelling that help, the United Nations has a central
role to play.

The Secretary-General was able to see and hear
some of these expectations in the discussions he had in
Kabul with Chairman Karzai and his colleagues, as
well as in his talks with civil society and during his
visit to a school for girls. I think that he also saw them
as soon as he landed at Kabul airport, where he was
met by a team of deminers, those heroic workers who
are trying to cleanse their land of the most painful
reminder of the terrible wars that Afghanistan has
endured.
Our hope, and that of the people of Afghanistan,
is that the international community in general and the
United Nations in particular will stand by the people of
Afghanistan, as the Secretary-General said, for the long
haul.

