The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Argentina.

Argentina voted in favour of the resolution. We
believe the fact that it was adopted unanimously is very
significant, as that represents important support for
continuity in the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL). That Force must continue to
contribute to restoring peace and security in the region.

My country attaches great importance to the
efforts being made by UNIFIL to preserve the ceasefire
along the Blue Line, resolve incidents and prevent acts
of violence. Given the importance attached to this
matter, we are gratified that on this occasion the

Council adopted the resolution unanimously. We
believe that text was developed in a favourable manner
during negotiations over the past few days.

I would like to recall that just a few weeks ago
the Security Council expressed its concern about the
violence that had developed along the Blue Line, in
particular as a result of the incidents on 9 January.
Those incidents clearly demonstrate that there is a real
risk of escalating violence and reprisals that could have
destabilizing repercussions throughout the region.

My country is particularly concerned that, despite
a period of relative calm along the Blue Line, tension
between the parties remains very high. Argentina
reiterates its appeal to the parties to act with the utmost
prudence and self-restraint and to put an end to
violations of the Blue Line, while complying fully with
their obligations under resolution 425 (1978) and other
pronouncements by the Security Council.

Despite the positive influence of UNIFIL's
presence on the ground, we must not forget that, as
stated in operative paragraph 8 of the resolution, Israel
and Lebanon bear the primary responsibility for
maintaining the ceasefire and respecting the
withdrawal line. Argentina supports the Lebanese
Government's efforts, and we will continue to provide
support for any measures to promote security in this
area.

Finally, I would like to reiterate that the situation
in southern Lebanon must be examined within a
broader, regional context. There can be no doubt that
what is happening there has an impact throughout
UNIFIL's area of operation. Argentina would therefore
like to recall once again the importance of achieving a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle
East, in keeping with resolutions to 242 (1967), 338
(1973) and 1515 (2003).

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Lebanon.

