Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): My first words must be to
thank you, Mr. President, for your initiative in
organizing this thematic debate. The concept paper
accompanying the discussion (S/2010/67) has also
proved invaluable in crystallizing perspectives for the
debate. I welcome the presence of the Secretary-
General and thank him for his useful statement. I
would also like to thank the Under-Secretaries-General
and Special Representatives for their invaluable
contribution to the debate.

My intervention will focus on six key elements.
First, with respect to mandates, I believe that we could
be more precise in the drafting of mandates to include
clear transition and exit strategies. Such clarity should
cover mission objectives, mandates and strategies. The
Council should be clear and firm on the need to link
exit and transition strategies to the achievement of
stated objectives. Mandates should be realistic and
achievable, allowing for flexibility in their
interpretation, and we should not overlook the moral
imperatives that impel peacekeeping operations in the
first place. Exit for its own sake would be
counterproductive, if not prejudicial, to peacekeeping
missions. We want neither to see a repeat of the
mistakes in Rwanda and Srebrenica nor to relive the
painful memory of their tragic consequences.
Secondly, planning must be comprehensive and
provide for an integrated approach that allows
peacekeeping operations to dovetail with peacebuilding
and peacemaking. Lessons should be drawn from the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), especially during
its forthcoming review, to guide future planning. We
support a broad and integrated approach, with a phased
completion of peacekeeping missions. We believe that
there should be wider consultations with relevant
stakeholders, particularly troop- and police-
contributing countries, on the planning and deployment
of missions.

Thirdly, we believe that capacities and resources
must be adequate and predictable. Our experience has
affirmed the point well articulated in this Chamber
today that resources for peacekeeping operations are
often disproportionately allocated, resulting in an
abundance of resources where there is the least need
and a shortage where the need is greater. Liberia and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo are cases in
point.

On the other hand, the strengthening of national
capacities on which a successful exit strategy will
depend does not receive sufficient and sustained
support. It is therefore necessary for the Council and,
indeed, for Member States to attach greater importance
to building and strengthening capacities, and to
allocate adequate and predictable resources to promote
quick-impact programmes and, ultimately, sustainable
development in its integrated economic, social and
environmental dimensions.

Fourthly, the challenge of coordination is
manifested not only in security sector reform, but in all
phases of United Nations operational activities,
especially at the country level. The capacity of the
United Nations to lead international efforts in
peacekeeping should be strengthened. Accordingly, the
Council should intensify its promotion of coordination
and synergy among the various actors and
stakeholders.

The United Nations goal of acting and delivering
as one will be tested on its ability to coordinate
effectively. More importantly, the United Nations must
give practical expression to the notion of national
ownership of development priorities and needs. Our
support must be sequenced to take into account such
identified priorities and needs, with a View to
promoting coherence in the actions of international
actors.

Fifthly, sustained political support for peace
processes is essential if peacekeeping operations are to
succeed and, indeed, pave the way for an orderly and
honourable exit. The discordance and lack of
consistency in the political support given to different
conflict situations call for profound rethinking. Here,
consideration should be given to other mechanisms,
notably preventive diplomacy, as soon as the signs are
clear that conflict is imminent. The capacity to
respond, especially at the regional and subregional
levels, should be built and, indeed, strengthened. The
growing cooperation between the United Nations, the
African Union and the Economic Community of West
African States could provide useful lessons to draw on
in designing operational models and frameworks.

Sixthly, all this will depend on the processes we
put in place with regard to measurable performance
benchmarks, reporting systems and evolution of
results. Mandatory reporting to the Security Council
and review of results will be necessary if members of
the Council and, indeed, the international community
are to have a better appreciation of the exit and
transition targets that will be established. We would
warn against a precipitate exit and transition strategy
that does not take into account the significant
achievement of the set objectives of peacekeeping
missions. The Council should also resist the temptation
to exit simply because a mandate requires an exit by a
set period or an exit motivated by other extraneous
factors. The United Nations should endeavour to go in
early and stay long enough, if need be, to give hope to
the hopeless and succour to the millions of helpless,
distressed and displaced victims of conflict.

