Mr. Motoc (Romania): I should like now to
address the Council in my national capacity.

First, Romania fully supports the European Union
statement, to be delivered later by our colleague, Sir
Emyr Jones Parry. In addition, I wish to make the
following specific brief comments.

Romania welcomes the emerging practice
whereby the Council hears regular briefings by its
three counter-terrorism Committees. As the Council is
thus resolutely pursuing, in a synergetic manner, its
endeavours against terrorism, the three Committees
and their Chairpersons are increasingly reaching out to
each other, as set out in resolution 1566 (2004). This is
a good opportunity for me to commend not only the
dedicated work of my Danish and Argentine peers,
who are presiding over the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) and the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999),
respectively, but also the friendly and collegiate
easiness with which we can share at all times our own
experiences and evaluations, and envisage ways to
further strengthen Security Council action in the area
of counter-terrorism and non-proliferation.

Recent events have reminded us that terrorism is
alive and well and that no one is safe from its ugly
spectre; now more than ever we have to ensure that
terrorists are denied access to weapons of mass
destruction and related materials. The fact that there
seems to be increasing interaction among terrorists is a
solid additional reason for us to increasingly join
forces and to pool all of the resources that those who
support freedom and safety for everyone are able to
muster.

Action at the global level, including that of the
three subsidiary bodies of the Security Council - the
"borderless committees" - is extremely valuable in
laying down the broad outlines of a universal shield
against terrorism. However, this requires, first and
foremost, committed efforts on the part of each State.
Every Member of the United Nations should be
supported in developing at least minimal defence
capacities and adequate response capabilities in the
face of terrorist threats. The protection both of States
and individuals is, ultimately, a national function and
responsibility.

Many States require, for what is assuredly the
long haul, technical assistance for capacity-building in
this area involving significant changes in domestic
threat perception, security strategies, legislation and
enforcement. We must work relentlessly so that the
Security Council can improve its capacity to facilitate
such assistance and, where appropriate, develop its
own set of tools in this field. Many valuable ideas
along those lines were recently put forward at the
annual informal retreat of members of the Security
Council with the Secretary-General.

My delegation supports a continuing review of
the performance of the subsidiary bodies established by
the Council to address the scourge of terrorism, as well
as an early process of reflection on how the respective
regimes put in place in recent years could be further
improved and consolidated, in the light not only of
lessons learned but of the continuous escalation of
terrorist activities around the world.

Romania hopes that renewed political guidance in
this field will be given at the highest levels by our
leaders when they gather in New York in September. In
that regard, we welcome the recent proposals made by
Norway aimed at providing more substantial content
with respect to the relevant paragraphs of the draft
outcome document for the summit. Romania, along
with Member States from all regions of the globe, fully
supports Oslo's bold and timely initiative.

The anti-terrorism effort must be a
comprehensive, system-wide undertaking on the part of
the United Nations system as a whole. It cannot be
fully sustained only by action taken at the Security
Council level. The recent measures taken by the
Secretary-General to set up a counter-terrorism
interdepartmental task force within the Secretariat sets
a good example in terms of fostering greater synergy
and coordination among the many valuable
contributions each sector is making in the global fight
against the ominous threats of terrorism and the

proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.

Let me take this opportunity to commend the
various branches of the Secretariat, in particular those
within the Department of Political Affairs and the
Department for Disarmament Affairs, that are
providing valuable support to the work of the three
Committees. We hope that the Secretariat will continue
its valuable efforts to support work in the field of anti-
terrorism with the sense of urgency and priority that
this threat is constantly bringing home to our
constituencies.

The groups of experts that are assisting the three
Committees in their activities are doing a fine job, and
this is a good occasion for us to commend them for
their professionalism and dedication to the cause.
National and global anti-terrorism preparedness cannot
substitute for action at the regional and subregional
levels. The Security Council itself and, in particular, its
anti-terrorism community will have a good
opportunity, on the occasion of the upcoming high-
level meeting of the Secretary-General with heads of
regional partner organizations, to pass on a strong
message on the need for mutual engagement against
global terrorism and the proliferation of WMDs.

Beyond their differing mandates, the three
committees share common concerns, challenges and
strengths. It is therefore necessary to ensure that their
work is guided towards ensuring a coherent effort by
the Council and is translated into a joint pool of
expertise and knowledge. Establishment of a unified
database would help the committees accomplish their
monitoring mandates, and it would also help Member
States to pursue effectively the implementation of
Security Council resolutions while avoiding
duplication and overlap. It could also help address the
issue of reporting fatigue, which has been raised for
some time in our debates.

Transparency has to remain a hallmark of our
work. But it should work both ways. The Security
Council and its committees have to inform the general
membership regularly on progress achieved and on
shortcomings identified in their work. For their part,
Member States should provide the Security Council
with comprehensive information and feedback on their
implementation efforts. The committees cannot
perform their mandates properly if national reporting
requirements are not adequately met. Without
information, the Council cannot assess what has been
done so far in terms of implementation and what
additional measures are needed to improve our
common defences against terrorism.

In a final reference to the work I am directly
responsible for, let me say that the figure 15-40 is a
tennis score that indicates a situation on the edge for
the side that is serving. The international community is
now facing a similarly worrying situation in the face of
increasing terrorism and greater possibilities for the
illegitimate proliferation of WMDs. It has therefore to
serve hard and to serve effectively in order to take the
game.

