Ms. Ganjanarintr (Thailand): I am honoured to
speak on behalf of 10 States members ofthe Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), comprising
Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, the Lao
People's Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Myanmar, the
Philippines, Singapore, Viet Nam and my own country,
Thailand.

ASEAN congratulates the new non-permanent
members of the Council and wishes them success
throughout their terms. We also welcome the presence
of the new Secretary-General. ASEAN will render him
our full support and close cooperation in the fulfilment
of his mandates. We thank Sweden for organizing this
debate on conflict prevention and sustaining peace, one
of the most pressing issues in maintaining international
peace and security.

As embodied in the ASEAN Community Vision
2025, ASEAN is a people-centred, rules-based and
peace-loving community. We adhere to the principles
of international law governing the peaceful conduct
of relations among States, including refraining
from the threat of the use of force, of inclusivity and
responsiveness, which ensure our peoples enjoy human
rights and fundamental freedoms, and of tolerance in
the spirit of unity in diversity. ASEAN believes in a
comprehensive approach to security that addresses
existing and emerging challenges in a timely manner,
and in resolving differences and disputes by peaceful
means while strengthening confidence-building
measures and preventive diplomacy.

This year marks the fiftieth anniversary of the
ASEAN Bangkok Declaration, which established
ASEAN to promote regional peace and stability
through abiding respect for justice and the rule of law
in the relationship among countries of the region and
adherence to the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. For the ASEAN community, maintaining and
enhancing peace, security and stability and further
strengthening peace-oriented values in the region is
one ofthe most important purposes ofthe Organization,
as reflected in the ASEAN Charter. Without peace,
security and stability, it would be difficult to attain other
important goals of the ASEAN community. Therefore,
conflict prevention and sustaining peace remain one of
the most fundamental of ASEAN's priorities since its
establishment in 1967.

ASEAN-led platforms, such as the ASEAN
Regional Forum and the East Asia Summit, have
provided venues for regular dialogue on political and
security-related matters in the Asia-Pacific region since
1994 and continue to play a central role in the regional
stability architecture.

For ASEAN, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, in particular Goal 16 regarding peace
and justice, can serve as important guidelines for
conflict prevention efforts. Building resilient inclusive
societies and a development agenda that addresses the
root causes of the conflict and that provides economic
opportunities in post-conflict communities are key
factors that lead to sustaining peace.

ASEAN has a comprehensive approach to
promoting traditional and non-traditional security in
the region. Guided by the Sustainable Development
Goals, the ASEAN community is working together to
provide political, economic and social security for all
member States. We are a region of diversity, but we are
striving to build our strengths based on our common
interests and mutual understanding, which is the best
way to prevent conflict.

Beyond our region, ASEAN member States are
active contributor to United Nations peace operations
worldwide. Under the framework of the ASEAN
Defence Ministers Meeting/ASEAN Defence Ministers
Meeting Plus, ASEAN Member States have pledged
to enhance cooperation in peacekeeping through the
ASEAN peacekeeping centres network. The ASEAN
Institute for Peace and Reconciliation is also a valuable
contribution to conflict prevention and sustaining
global peace.

All these actions are consistent with the ASEAN
Community Vision 2025 and related blueprints, which
ASEAN adopted in 2015, and our regional commitments
under the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in
Southeast Asia. They are also in line with the 2016-
2020 Plan of Action to Implement the Joint Declaration
on Comprehensive Partnership between ASEAN and
the United Nations, where we look forward to the
continued development of an effective partnership
with the United Nations to enhance our capabilities in
preventive diplomacy and post-conflict peacebuilding.

It is ASEAN's view that the Council and the
Secretary-General should work closely to make conflict
prevention and sustaining peace a reality. Regular
dialogues should be promoted to ensure that all Views
are heard and that a swift and coordinated response to
emergency situations is implemented. We encourage
the new Secretary-General and Council members, as
well as other relevant United Nations organs, including
the Peacebuilding Commission, to continue to enhance
cooperation to promote coherence and complementarity
between United Nations peace and security efforts
and development. To this end, ASEAN fully supports
the efforts to create synergies and multiply positive
impacts laid out in previous United Nations milestones,
such as the 2015 reviews of the United Nations peace
and security architecture.

Considering the role of regional organizations as
stipulated in Chapter 8 of the Charter of the United
Nations, ASEAN's contribution to the maintenance of
international peace and security has been constructive
and consistent with the spirit of that Chapter. We
therefore encourage the United Nations to engage with
regional organizations and all concerned parties at the
earliest possible stage to address emerging threats.

In conclusion, ASEAN believes that strong political
will, robust leadership and sufficient resources must be
consistently provided to ensure that peace is sustained
and conflict does not erupt, escalate or relapse.

