Mr. Rock (Canada): Canada welcomes the report
today of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) with
respect to its structure and activities. We want to
congratulate the Chairman and the members of the
CTC for their very productive work. Canada also
welcomes this occasion for an open debate. We
understand what an investment of time it is by the
Council, but we do regard it as a valuable opportunity,
not only to generally remind States of our collective
responsibility in relation to terrorism, but also to
permit us to give an account of our own activities that
are consistent with the priorities identified by the
Council.
We very much appreciate the progress the CTC
has made, particularly in taking its work into a new
phase with the establishment of the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate (CTED). The CTED will now
permit the Committee to take its organizational plan,
adopted in August, to the next stage. The Executive
Director will have flexibility in taking that work
forward, and we anticipate the implementation of the
plan, along with the setting of priorities and objectives,
because the critical work of the CTED must have a
clear sense of direction.

We also understand that positive consideration is
being given to hiring a human rights expert. Canada
welcomes that development. We strongly support such
a step. Part of the work of the Directorate will clearly
be to coordinate technical assistance. In that respect,
allow me to say that Canada is establishing a counter-
terrorism capacity-building programme as part of our
new national security policy. The objective of the
programme will be to provide training, technical and
legal assistance and expertise to enable partner
countries to prevent and respond to terrorist activity in
a manner that respects international human rights
norms and standards.

This Canadian programme is intended to respond
to the call in Council resolution 1456 (2003) for States
to assist one another to improve their capacity to
prevent and fight terrorism. The Government of
Canada takes this responsibility very seriously,
recognizing that this global threat requires a global
response. We will work closely with the CTC, with
participants in the Group of Eight's Counter-Terrorism
Action Group and with others to engage in joint
activities to ensure that this assistance is provided in a
coordinated manner.

(spoke in French)

Canada would also like to take this opportunity to
welcome the adoption, at the initiative of the Russian
Federation, of resolution 1566 (2004). The United
Nations plays a central and coordinating role in the
global fight against terrorism. We therefore appreciate
the efforts of the Security Council to involve States not
members of the Council in these issues. We trust the
Council will continue these efforts to provide
opportunities such as today for all Member States'
views to be heard and taken into account. Transparency
and inclusiveness, wherever and whenever possible,
strengthen the effectiveness of the Organization's
efforts in the fight against terrorism.
