Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this open debate on civil aviation security
and counter-terrorism. Our thanks also go to the two
briefers - Ms. Fang Liu, Secretary General of the
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), and
Ambassador Aboulatta, Chair of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC).

Civil aviation is important to connectivity,
political and cultural exchanges, trade and economic
cooperation among nations. In recent years, terrorist
organizations have been targeting civil aviation in
terror attacks, jeopardizing the safety and security of
people and property and undermining the stability and
socioeconomic development of the countries affected.
Guided by the notion that humankind is a community
with a shared future, the international community
should scale up international cooperation in civil
aviation and take practical and effective measures to
protect the global civil aviation system from the threat
of terrorist attacks. In that context, I would like to
highlight the following three points.

First, a harmonized set of standards should be
upheld to guard against and combat acts ofterror against
civil aviation. All countries should be consistent in
their zero-tolerance and non-discrimination approach
towards terrorism - that is to relentlessly suppress
terrorist activities regardless of the countries they
target or the means they employ. International counter-
terrorism operations must fully leverage the leadership
of the United Nations in general, and in particular
that of the Security Council, adhere to the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
strengthen effective coordination, develop a united
front against terrorism at the international level and
keep the heat up on terrorists - fighting them with an
iron hand.

Secondly, as this is a Member State-led process,
strengthening developing countries' capacity-building
should be prioritized. Developing countries face more
challenges in capacity-building to ensure civil aviation
security. The international community's priorities in
that regard include airport security screening, safety
and security risk assessment and on-site response.
Developing countries should receive assistance to
enhance their civil aviation protection capacity.
Meanwhile, it is necessary to respect the sovereignty
of the recipient countries and to help them address
practical challenges with concrete measures.

Thirdly, the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council should be implemented in good faith to
scale up international cooperation in protecting civil
aviation from terror attacks. In September 2016, the
Council unanimously adopted resolution 2309 (2016).
Pursuant to the resolution, all parties should strengthen
the sharing of civil aviation security intelligence and
step up cooperation in border control and enforcement.
ICAO should encourage States to improve and refine
their civil aviation security measures and encourage
the international community to invest more in civil
aviation security, continue to work closely with the
CTC and the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate
under the Security Council and the United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism and assist Member States
in enhancing capacity-building in the relevant fields.

China is an important member of the international
counter-terrorism community. China will continue
to promote anti-terror cooperation in civil aviation
and raise our standards of civil aviation security, in
accordance with our counter-terrorism law, national
civil aviation security legislation and international
conventions. During the Belt and Road Forum for
International Cooperation that was held in Beijing in
May, the Civil Aviation Administration of China and
ICAO signed a memorandum of understanding on
cooperation. China is ready to work with ICAO to scale
up international cooperation in areas such as aviation
safety and security management.

