Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): The human rights situation
in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea is indeed
a source of serious concern. And we understand the
relevant mechanisms established within the Human
Rights Council, including the Special Rapporteur about
human rights in the Democratic Republic People's
Republic of Korea as well as other mechanisms, such as
the Universal Periodic Review and special procedures
for the Human Rights Council. The Government of
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea has a huge
responsibility for protecting the rights of its citizens.
The dialogue on this issue with the relevant mechanisms
I just mentioned should certainly continue with a view
to improving the human rights and humanitarian
situation in the country.

We also wish to take this opportunity to express
our solidarity with Japan in connection with the
abduction of its nationals. We support all efforts and
discussions at the bilateral and multilateral levels
to ensure the return of the abductees at the earliest
possible time. This is in fact the most critical issue that
made it very difficult for us to abstain in the procedural
vote, because we are deeply convinced that the issue of
abductees is a gross violation, which we condemn very
strongly and vehemently. We call on the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea to take urgent positive steps
on the matter.

Nevertheless, we all know that situation on the
Korean peninsula is so extremely difficult and complex,
and its implications for international peace and security
so grave, that it is no wonder that the Council spends
so much time discussing the issue and has adopted
several resolutions and statements this year, thereby
demonstrating the seriousness with which it has been
actively seized of the matter.

Again this month, under the Japanese presidency,
we will once again discuss the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea issue at the highest level, following
the emergency meeting we held after the latest ballistic-
missile launch by that country (see S/PV.8118). Without
a doubt, that test showed that we are indeed at the edge
of the precipice, and any slight miscalculation, perhaps
even if totally unintended, could land us into a major
nuclear catastrophe on the Korean peninsula. That is
why every possible diplomatic effort must be made to
prevent that from happening, and time is not on our
side. Therefore, we believe that the Security Council
should devote all its time and energy to finding a
peaceful and diplomatic solution to the situation on the
Korean peninsula through dialogue and negotiation, in
the light of the looming danger and its unimaginable
consequences for international peace and security.

In that context, we very much welcome the visit
of Under-Secretary-General Feltman to the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, which is the first ofits kind
by a senior official of the United Nations since 2010.
It is a small but important step in the right direction.
We look forward to Mr. Feltman's briefing tomorrow
on his various engagements in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea.

