Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): Having followed
the discussions in a constructive manner, which is
particularly appreciated given the participation of
countries that are not often in agreement with each
other, one cannot but regret Turkey's continuation
of the policy of negation and its unchanged rhetoric.
Allow me to briefly touch upon the misinterpretations
that we heard from the Ambassador of Turkey on the
issue of the Armenian genocide.

I think that the delegations present in the Chamber
were surprised to hear the distorted explanations about
the undeniable fact of the Armenian genocide, which
took the lives of 1.5 million Armenians - Armenian
children, women and men living in the Ottoman Empire
during the Young Turk regime. Let me refresh the
memory of the representative of Turkey, in particular.

The systematic and planned slaughter of the entire
nation began on 24 April 1915 and went on until 1923.
It is defined as genocide and is known as the Armenian
genocide. It began on that fateful day when the
Ottoman Turks rounded up 300 Armenian community
leaders in Constantinople - writers, philosophers
and professionals - who were executed. On the same
day, 5,000 of the poorest Armenians were butchered
in the streets of the city. Then the brutal executions
spread to the entire Armenian community in Anatolia.
Deportations and killings were carried out. There
were death marches to the deserts. The mass killings
were condemned by the representatives of the British,
French, Russian, German and Austrian Governments
stationed in Turkey. That crime has been recognized
by a number of Member States and international
organizations, including the United Nations, the
Commission on Human Rights and its subsidiary body,
the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination
and Protection of Minorities.

We are particularly sensitive about this subject
because the policy of genocide carried out by the
Ottoman Empire, culminating in the indiscriminate
extermination and slaughter of Armenians, has
remained unrecognized by Turkey despite the efforts of
the international community to recall and acknowledge
the crime. I would just say to the representative of
Turkey that it is time to realize - and that is why this
thematic debate has been convened - that in order
to be part of the civilized world, one should avoid
negationism and resorting to the denial of historical
facts in order to conceal past injustices, particularly
mass atrocity crimes that have been committed.

In concluding, my country believes that Turkey's
recognition of the Armenian genocide would lead to the
removal of psychological barriers between our nations.
As we approach the centennial commemoration of
that crime in 2015, we call upon the United Nations
and its Member States, as well as other international
organizations and civil society groups, to continue
taking appropriate steps and actions for the recognition
of that crime against humanity in order to prevent its
horrendous repetition in other parts of the world.

