Mr. Yankey (Ghana): I too wish to express
appreciation to Mr. Pronk for his very illuminating
assessment of the implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA). That
assessment indicates a mixed record of success and
setbacks. It also shows what a United Nations mission
can accomplish when the receiving State embraces it as
a partner in solving problems. We look forward to the
draft resolution being proposed by the United States
and to its early adoption.

As the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2006/728) clearly shows, the United Nations
Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) is already lending
critical support to the African Union Mission in the
Sudan (AMIS). That confirms that the proposed
expansion of UNMIS into Darfur is a logical, natural
extension of what is already happening and is intended
to enhance work that is already being done. So, I think
the timely adoption of our resolution is very positive,
and we call on all to cooperate.

The assessment that has been given is also very
disturbing in some key aspects, particularly with regard
to those parts of the CPA that seek to address the
underlying causes of the conflict in southern Sudan.
But the failures also show why the Darfur problem is
so difficult to resolve, and perhaps why the
Government of the Sudan is so vehemently opposed to
the deployment of a United Nations mission.
To put it briefly, it seems to me that the
Government of the Sudan must first take a certain
strategic decision. That strategic decision is to accept
all the ethnic groups in the Sudan as equal citizens,
because that relates to the root cause of the conflict.

We know clearly that that aspect of the CPA - the
power-sharing, the wealth-sharing and the treatment of
the internally displaced persons (IDPs) - has not
worked. The constitutional review process, the
legislative reform, the vital electoral laws: we have not
made any progress there. And yet, they constitute the
core of the power-sharing aspect of the Agreement.

With respect to wealth-sharing, we also know that
there is a tussle between the National Petroleum
Commission and the Ministry of Energy and Mining.
Behind the technical manoeuvring, there is also the real
problem of deciding what must go to whom. It is not
just a technical or legal matter about who has the
competence and so forth. Wealth-sharing is at the heart
of the problem. The same applies to the boundaries -
Abyei and the north-south boundary - as Mr. Pronk
explained.

I would have liked not to make a linkage on a
certain matter, but unfortunately, the facts cannot be
interpreted otherwise. Here, I am talking about the
treatment of the IDPs. We heard clearly what
Mr. Pronk said: that sexual abuse is being used as a
tool of war. How do we interpret the forced relocation
of people in IPD camps? Why does UNMIS not have
access to those people to find out what their needs are
and then to stand up for them? Where are they? Are we
to say that the bombing and the burning of villages are
the first part of a strategy of confining people to the
camps and then, later on, forcibly relocating them? I do
not know, but that is what the facts on the ground
suggest. We have to read those facts in the light of the
power-sharing and wealth-sharing problems that have
been highlighted in the report. For us, there can be no
other interpretation, unless of course the Government
of the Sudan can provide more information on that
matter.

It is also obvious from the assessment given by
the Special Representative that the Darfur Peace
Agreement is falling apart, and not necessarily because
some parties did not sign it, regrettable as that is. We
do not make any excuses for the parties that did not
sign the Agreement. But it is clear that they did not
take up arms again and try to destabilize the situation;
they simply did not sign the Agreement. Why did they
not sign it? According to information available to us,
they were not happy about two things: the wealth-
sharing and the compensation. So, whichever way you
go about it, you come back to core problem.
In conclusion, we are all very happy that the
African Union and AMIS are playing a role. But let us
not forget: what we are doing is not window-dressing.
We are not interested in a window-dressing force that
can be pushed around at will. We are interested in a
force that can make a difference. If UNMIS was not
even able to clear its communications equipment in
eight months and is being restricted from certain parts
of the Sudan, one may want to ask, concerning the
proposed extension of the mandate of the mission,
under what terms it is going to perform: what size and
what mandate? Are they going to have unrestricted
access? These are not issues we should gloss over,
because these issues will make the difference between
an UMIS that is able to perform on the one hand and
business as usual on the other. We know that the
presence of UNMIS has not made much of a significant
difference in the situation in Darfur. So, as we consider
what to do between now and 1 January, we should also
not overlook the issues that I have highlighted: the
size, the mandate and the question of access for
UNMIS.

And finally, who is going to be accountable? War
crimes have been committed, and they continue to be
committed. That cannot be glossed over. What my
delegation has been insisting on, particularly in the
African context, is that all countries must be treated
equally. What is bad in Cote d'Ivoire is bad in the
Sudan. Today, Charles Taylor is languishing in jail.
What is going to happen to those who have committed
serious war crimes in the Sudan?

We do not have the answers, but these are not
issues that we are prepared to sweep under the carpet.

