Mr. Bermudez Alvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I would once again like to thank Mr. Kubis,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
for his comprehensive and informative briefing and for
the ongoing work that he and his team have been doing
in an environment as complex as Iraq. I would also
like to pay special tribute to Major Anna Patrono for
sharing her very interesting experience in training the
police corps in Iraq, and we congratulate her.

Uruguay recognizes the hard work that the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) and the
Special Representative have been doing in continued
coordination with the Iraqi Government, making
possible the close cooperation needed to tackle the
multiple emergencies that they are facing at present.
In that regard, the Security Council's confidence in its
work and of the United Nations in Iraq generally was
expressed in our unanimous vote in mid-July to extend
UNAMI's mandate through resolution 2367 (2017).

I would like to begin by expressing sincere
condolences on behalf of Uruguay to the victims'
families and the Governments and peoples of Iraq and
Iran in the wake of the earthquake on 12 November that
left more than 500 dead and thousands injured near the
border between the two countries. The resilience that
the Iraqi people have shown so many times will surely
also enable them to overcome that natural disaster as
well.

We reiterate our congratulations to the Iraqi
Government on its courage and its enormous effort
during the military campaign to defeat Da'esh and
drive it out of Iraq after enduring more than three years
of unimaginable atrocities at its hands. That is a huge
achievement for the international community as well as
the Iraqi people and authorities, and an overwhelming
victory over international terrorism. Uruguay hopes
that this major victory represents a decisive step towards
the ultimate overthrow of Da'esh, which has subjected
the people under its control in Iraq and Syria to brutal
attacks and slaughtered hundreds of innocent citizens
in other countries. That victory should not make us lose
sight of the very serious crimes committed by Da'esh
fighters, who must not go unpunished. Resolution 2379
(2017), which the Council adopted exactly two months
ago, has put measures in place to ensure accountability
for war crimes, crimes against humanity and possible
genocide committed by Da'esh. Bringing its leaders
and those mainly responsible for its crimes to justice
will help to discredit Da'esh's image by exposing
their atrocities and should have a deterrent effect on
potential followers or imitators.However, we reiterate
that the fight against this scourge must be in line with
international humanitarian law and international human
rights law, and agreed on here at the United Nations, in
order to prevent any excessive responses.

Da'esh did not emerge from a vacuum. It was rather
the product of a chain of events, including the effects of
the unfortunate 2003 invasion of Iraq and the sectarian
civil war that the country endured in the years following
the collapse of Saddam Hussein's regime. That unstable
situation was compounded by the ideological, financial,
arms and human support provided by various countries
in the region and beyond, at least at first. The liberation
of Ramadi and Fallujah in 2016, the long and complex
military campaign preceding the liberation ofMosul this
year and the recent victories in Tal Afar and Hawija are
only initial steps. While important, they are not enough
to restore relative normality to Iraq. The Government
has two major tasks that, with United Nations support,
it must tackle immediately - rebuilding those cities
and enabling its hundreds of thousands of internally
displaced persons to return home.

As we have always done, we commend the Iraqi
Government for prioritizing the protection of civilians
in its fight against terrorism, but it is now time to
address the economic, social, health and psychological
needs of the hundreds of thousands of Iraqis who have
been terrorized for far too long. One of the main goals
of the United Nations and UNAMI is to support the
Iraqi Government in its reform efforts and find long-
term political solutions that will enable it to combat

extremism and ensure that the country will be stable
enough to avoid any recurrence of phenomena such as
that of Da'esh. Iraqi leaders must continue to work to
overcome their ongoing divisions and historical mistrust
so that they can reach a broad national reconciliation
agreement that will enable them to turn the page on
the many years of suffering that the Iraqi people have
endured as a result ofinterreligious and ethnic divisions.
As we have seen with the conflict in Iraq and others on
the Security Council's agenda, it is relatively simple to
establish military coalitions to fight a common enemy.
We must work in that spirit to establish coalitions for
dealing with post-conflict issues as well, with a view
to de-escalating and reducing the internal tensions that
inevitably persist after military conflicts have ended.

For that reason, we are concerned about the
referendum held by the Kurdistan Regional Government
in September, which regrettably led to clashes not only
with the Iraqi Government but also with other countries
in the region with Kurdish populations. We encourage
both parties to engage in constructive dialogue so as
to settle their differences without endangering Iraq's
stability, unity and territorial integrity and in a way
that safeguards the rights of all the ethnic groups and
minorities that have inhabited the region for centuries.
We condemn yesterday's suicide attack in Tuz Khurmatu
in Salah Al-Din province south of Kirkuk - where
Arabs, Kurds and Turkmens all live together - in
which more than 20 died and dozens were injured.

Iraq is now facing a new and crucial chapter in its
history. The victory over Da'esh will not be enough
if the authorities fail to make concrete progress in
combating corruption, involving all segments of
society in the political life of the country and ensuring
the protection of the human rights of all of its citizens,
including women. With the support of UNAMI, it is
their job to carry out the reforms that have been planned
so as to enable Iraq to become more modern, inclusive
and peaceful.

