Mr. Fulci (Italy): The Italian Government and the
Italian people have been concerned for a long time about
reports of the systematic, widespread and flagrant violations
of international humanitarian law that were committed in
Burundi following the assassination of President Ndadaye
on 21 October 1993.

We have on previous occasions extended our full
support for the statements of the President of the Security
Council, who twice this year appealed for an end to be put
to the impunity still enjoyed by the perpetrators of these
crimes. It is the very concept of impunity for those
responsible for such dreadful crimes that is unacceptable.

It was against this background that Italy decided to
join the sponsors of the draft resolution just adopted by the
Security Council. With this resolution, the Council responds
not only to concerns felt worldwide but also to the decision
of the parties of Burundi, in the Convention of Government
of 10 September 1994, to seek the establishment of an
international commission of inquiry. The report prepared by
Mr. Pedro Nikken, the legal expert appointed by the
Secretary-General, and the proposals made by the
Secretary-General himself on the basis of this report have
provided the framework for the Council's decision to
establish such a commission.

We look forward to an early beginning of the work
of the commission, and in particular we agree with the
provision that an interim report be submitted to the
Council by the Secretary-General within three months
from the date of the Commission's establishment. This
would allow the Council to make a preliminary
assessment of the progress of the commission's work and
to give a signal of its determination to move as quickly as
possible towards putting an end to impunity in Burundi.

We agree also with the broad mandate given to the
commission. It is called on not only to establish the facts
and recommend measures to eradicate impunity, but also
to make specific proposals aimed at preventing any
repetition of deeds similar to those it is investigating, as
well as to promote national reconciliation.

We believe that the work of the commission of
inquiry should contribute above all to the restoration of
peace in Burundi, where the overall political situation
continues to be of concern. The violence there gives no
real sign of abating, and the existing tensions could easily
shatter the fragile stability of the country.

While a solution to the crisis of Burundi and the
entire region can be found only through political and
diplomatic means, the commission of inquiry can also
make specific proposals aimed at fostering better
coexistence of the various ethnic groups.
It is our View that the only real chance to stop the
violence that has ravaged Burundi in the last two years
lies in initiating a process of true national reconciliation.
Mutual acceptance of all ethnic groups has to be the basis
on which to build such a process. We hope that the
establishment of a commission of inquiry, which is being
requested by the Council today, can make a useful
contribution to this end.

We trust that Ambassador Terence, whom we
welcome as a new colleague and friend and who happens
to be sitting at this table tonight, will convey to the
Government and the people of Burundi the expectations
of the Security Council in this regard.

