Mr. Voto-Bernales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to congratulate the Russian delegation and
you in particular, Ambassador Churkin, on Russia's
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
and to assure you of our delegation's full support in the
discharge of your important functions.

Likewise, we congratulate the outgoing President,
Ambassador Al-Nasser of Qatar, for his skilled
stewardship of the Council in December 2006. We also
warmly welcome the five new Security Council
members.

We wish to welcome the presence at this meeting
of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, to whom we wish
every success in his work, which he is just beginning.
We assure him of Peru's full confidence in him and of
its cooperation in the discharge of his sensitive
mandate.

As was recognized in the 2005 World Summit
Outcome Document, we are working on the common
understanding that development, peace and security,
and human rights are interlinked and mutually
reinforcing. We must therefore coordinate our actions
in order to address threats to international peace and
security and their interconnection in a comprehensive
and far-reaching manner as well as prevent them, as set
out in resolution 1625 (2005).

Globalization has had a major impact on the
potential for economic inclusion and for knowledge-
sharing, but we know that there is also a dark side
to this phenomenon which has aggravated
marginalization, thus providing fertile ground for the
emergence of fresh threats to international stability.
New risk factors have arisen. We know that many of
the items on the Security Council's agenda relate to
intra-State conflicts, which, for the most part, occur in
States with scant progress, fragile institutions and
worrisome development indicators.

To prevent these types of conflicts from
multiplying and countries from sliding back into such
situations, it is necessary to address not only the
military and institutional recovery aspects, which the
Security Council has made a priority, but also pay
close attention to other factors such as poverty, social
exclusion, environmental degradation and trans-
national crime, as well as focusing more intently on the
issue of cultural diversity.

Unresolved inter-State conflicts also deserve
particular attention. The indefinite prolongation of such
conflicts gravely endangers the achievement of the
Council's main objectives, and renewed efforts to bring
about peace must therefore be made, in the framework
of international law and commitments based on mutual
respect.

The threat of the recurrence of genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity
has sharpened our resolve to recognize that we have a
responsibility to protect peoples from such scourges.
Thus States Members of the United Nations, including
Council members, must be vigilant in order to fulfil
our mandate to protect peoples when the State
concerned is unable to do so or unwilling to comply
with its obligations.

It is equally urgent that we strengthen
disarmament and non-proliferation regimes for nuclear,
chemical and biological weapons and related systems.
Peru supports the Security Council's efforts to prevent
the proliferation of such weapons in the hands of State
and non-State actors, and also deems it necessary for
the multilateral system to redouble its efforts to that
end and make further progress in the collective
commitments undertaken. We must work towards a
system of security based on cooperation that will
strengthen peace and security structures and prevent
arms races at the global, regional and subregional
levels.

Terrorism has become a universal scourge that
must be defeated. It is unacceptable in any shape or

form, regardless of motivation. It must therefore must
be condemned and combated in all its aspects. In this
struggle, the multilateral system has at its disposal 13
international conventions in additional to regional
agreements and the more recent Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy. In that context, resolute action on
the part of the Security Council is vital to combat this
threat. The commitment of each and every State must
also be unwavering. We must act to ensure that States
have adequate operational capacity, above all in the
areas of intelligence and police cooperation, as these
are key tools in this struggle.

However, we should not restrict ourselves to this
aspect of our work. The activities of irregular armed
groups, the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons, the smuggling of natural resources, drug
trafficking and other ways in which organized crime
weakens institutions undermine social stability and
democracy and pose a threat to security. We must
continue to pay priority attention to all of these factors,
which converge in a number of existing conflicts.

Peru also believes it essential for us to
acknowledge the special importance of the role of the
environment in maintaining international peace and
security. Water, forests and the climate are elements for
which we must formulate specific strategies and action
plans if we are to prevent the further destruction of
natural resources. Deforestation, pollution, abrupt
climate change and radiation, among other phenomena,
all have a negative impact on the ability of many
peoples to subsist and on the quality of life on our
planet now and in the future.

The diversity of threats to peace and security and
their interrelated nature require the assistance of
multilateral agencies and regional organizations, as
well as the active participation of the private sector and
civil society to respond to such threats, each within the
context of its purview.

Finally, I would like to reaffirm Peru's
commitment - drawing on its own economic and
social experience and its regional involvement and
profound multilateral vocation - to continue to
contribute constructively to international peace and
security and to economic and social development, and
to support and protect democracy, freedom and human
rights throughout the world.

