Mr. Nkoloi (Botswana): Let me at the very outset
congratulate the delegation of the Federal Republic
of Nigeria on its assumption of the presidency of this
Council for this month. We pledge our full support to
you, Madam President, as you lead the activities of this
Council.

This debate on regional organizations and
contemporary global security challenges is indeed
timely and pertinent, particularly at this historic
moment in the calendar of the United Nations. We
therefore appreciate your initiative, Madam President,
in convening this important debate.

Botswana reaffirms its commitment to peace and
security issues, as well as to human rights. Seventy
years after the founding of the United Nations, when
the founders pledged to settle disputes through peaceful
means, the United Nations, and in particular the
Security Council, remains the only hope for humankind
to live in peace.

The world community continues to face
unprecedented levels of threats to international
peace and security, and at a frightening pace. Above
and beyond those, there is the proliferation of armed
conflict, radical extremism and racial and religious
intolerance, which have taken root in most regions of
the world. No single country is immune from those
threats, and no single country can counter them alone.
The threats come in different forms and manifestat
themselves in many ways. One thing is clear: they are
deadly, sudden and they leave ruin and destruction in
their wake for families, communities and nations, big
and small.

The growth and continued existence of the Islamic
State, Boko Haram, Al-Shabaab and many other brutal
terrorist groups continue to pose serious threats to
global security. They kill, maim and unleash brutal
terror on innocent people with impunity. Apart from
those global terrorist networks, there are those who
engage in drug trafficking, trafficking in wildlife and
wildlife products, money laundering and the illicit
trafficking and trade in arms and light weapons. In
essence, they destabilize regional governance structures
and inflict a sense of insecurity in our communities.
The continued violations of human rights perpetrated
against vulnerable populations, especially women and
children, with millions displaced, calls for regional
bodies to work together to stem the rising tide of terror.

In addition, climate change continues to unleash
havoc on our planet - triggering humanitarian
crises, robbing populations of their natural capital and
compromising food security. As a result, millions of
people face hunger as a result of drought, starvation
and diseases such as Ebola and malaria.

The United Nations - in particular the Security
Council as the custodian of international peace and
security 4 must continue to display exemplary
leadership in addressing threats to peace and security. It
is therefore imperative for the international community
to work in unison and make concerted efforts to address
those challenges. To that end, we call on influential
members of the Council to refrain from the use of
the veto, especially where genocide and atrocities are
concerned. Any attempt to frustrate the ends of justice
by those members constitutes an insult, especially to
victims.

Threats posed by armed conflicts require that
the United Nations and regional organizations work
together in a complementary manner to bring justice
to people. In taking the lead, regional organizations
can help, as they possess valuable advantages, such
as a clearer understanding and knowledge of regional
dynamics, cultures, sensitivities and perceptions. They
are also better placed to address conflict prevention
through mediation, arbitration and reconciliation, as
well as handle differences between warring groups.

Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations recognizes that important role for regional
organizations with regard to global peace and security.
It is therefore Botswana's belief that the engagement of
regional organizations at an early stage of conflict helps
contain it before it manifests itself, or even spreads and
becomes out ofhand. In playing our part, my delegation
has engaged in intervention and mediation efforts at the
political level by using the experience and wisdom of
our former leaders, especially within our subregion.
At the regional level, we operate in the context of the
Southern African Development Community (SADC)
troika. At the continental level, we engage and continue
to work through the African Panel of the Wise. Having
just assumed the chairmanship of SADC, we pledge to
continue to live by the values, traditions and culture
of SADC as a cornerstone of regional cooperation.
In that connection, we shall remain steadfast in our
commitment to the principles of democracy, inclusive
development, the rule of law and the promotion and
protection of human rights for all. We continue to
strongly support action against all forms of threats to
international peace and security, as well as action for
the strengthening of institutions of accountability at
national, regional and international levels.

To conclude, Botswana reaffirms its unwavering
support to the efforts of regional organizations in
promoting and protecting international peace and
security.

