Mr. Berrocal Soto (Costa Rica) (interpretation from Spanish): I wish first to thank the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kofi Annan, for his objective, realistic, lucid and
comprehensive report on the situation in Africa. What we
have before us is essentially a vast programme of action for
the entire United Nations system; in its implementation the
Security Council must obviously play a central coordinating
role regarding the critical aspects of peace and security.

All of this shows once again the extent to which
today's economic, social and political realities have
changed the Security Council's traditional concepts and
practices and the interpretation its members place on the
powers, obligations and duties set out in the Charter, and in
particular in Chapters VI and VII.

This in itself constitutes important progress. My
delegation is pleased that we are here, in a formal meeting
of the Security Council, discussing problems of
international peace and security in Africa in an integrated,
realistic context, basing our deliberations on a document of
significant political content that also describes objectively
the true framework of an ongoing crisis that bears the
deep and credible signs of a crisis that is not solely
political and military but also economic and social, with
structural origins. The 30 African wars of recent years are
simply a consequence of this situation.

The Security Council agenda is replete with items
relating to Africa. In each case, when we look deeper and
go beyond the outbreak and violence of armed military
conflict or the brusque Violation of human rights, we
inevitably find the deep-seated, critical economic and
social realities that are described so objectively in the
report of the Secretary-General. This report could equally
form the basis of deliberations in the Economic and
Social Council or of a debate on priorities in the
framework of the United Nations Development
Programme. That is how basically interrelated and
mutually dependent are the topics of international peace
and security and of contemporary political, economic and
social realities.

The Secretary-General therefore does well in inviting
us to reflect on these aspects, because if the international
community and the African countries themselves and their
regional and subregional organizations do not embark
responsibly and with determination on a major
programme of action and development for Africa, the
current crisis of security and peace will persist and a
solution will never be found to close the long chapter of
wars in Africa as a central and dominant item on the
international agenda and on the agenda of the Security
Council.

The Secretary-General's report tells us that we have
gone beyond the era of grave crises relating to State
borders in Africa. We have no doubt that this is true
politically, but it is undeniable, for example, that a serious
and complex crisis, such as that of the Great Lakes
region, to a great extent has to do with the arbitrary and
artificial division that separated ethnic groups and
peoples, creating unequal national realities and countries
with sharp imbalances between the powerful economic
resources and the geographical immensity of some
countries and the small territorial size, overpopulation and
poverty of others. The crisis in the Great Lakes region,
with all its painful human consequences, is the concrete
expression of this African truth.

If the undeniably correct decision of the
Organization of African Unity in 1963 was not to reopen
the painful chapter of border and territorial disputes, the
correct decision now, and with a view to the future, must

 

be, as the Secretary-General's report rightly points out, to
join efforts and wills to develop and integrate, with
international assistance and cooperation, subregional
economic spaces and political realities in Africa. There is
no way to development other than through cooperation and
joint efforts. Nor is there any other way to peace.

This vision of the future is, speaking sincerely, what
pleases us most about Secretary-General Annan's report. It
is not a question of reopening an academic and theoretical
debate. It is a question of defining and implementing a
range of practical initiatives for solutions. It is a question
of reversing priorities and working with a democratic and
democratizing vision in a joint, integrated effort to deal
with the realities of Africa. Of course, a great deal will
depend on the effort and initiative of the African countries
and organizations themselves. A great deal is also the
responsibility of the international community and the entire
United Nations system.

On the basis of its own experience, my country fully
agrees on this critical course of action and the reversal of
priorities set out in the Secretary-General's report. For 50
years Costa Rica has not had arms expenditures, and the
priority in public expenditure is geared essentially towards
education, preventive health and infrastructure. We are not
saying that our national experience and our decisions
regarding disarmament are valid for all, but it is true that
without investing intensively and systematically in human
resources and without creating appropriate and modern
conditions of infrastructure and international
communications, the struggle for economic development,
social justice and democratic institutionality is a mission
almost impossible to achieve. Ending investment in
weapons is undoubtedly the simplest and most intelligent
decision for developing countries. Investing in our people
and doing so with a sense of moving ahead towards the
twenty-first century is the essential challenge for the
developing countries. This applies in the case of Africa, just
as it does in Asia or Latin America and the Caribbean.

We are therefore in full agreement with that reversal
of priorities and the democratic and democratizing approach
that Secretary-General Annan urges us to take. Of course,
the countries of Africa and all the countries of the
developing world, without exception, need to work for the
effective separation of the powers of the State, the good
management of public affairs, respect for human rights and
the rule of law. At the same time, sustainable development
requires realistic and concrete decisions in order to balance
budgets, obtain appropriate macroeconomic equilibrium,
attract investments and create environments conducive to
free competition in business and trade. All of us in the
developing world are working towards this - some more
and others less.

For these reasons, nothing could please Costa Rica
more than to tell the Secretary-General at this formal
meeting of the Security Council that we fully concur with
his democratic and democratizing vision of the future of
Africa. For my country, the great political and historical
challenge of our African brothers and sisters at this end
of century is the achievement and consolidation of
constitutional systems of government, with the rule of
civil authority prevailing over military rule and resulting
from transparent and free electoral processes. In attaining
this objective, the political will of the Africans will be
absolutely irreplaceable. It is up to the leaders, the
political parties and civil society in the various African
countries to fully undertake that enormous, complex,
difficult and historic task of building, consolidating and
preserving democracy and freedom in Africa.

We in Latin America know full well that democracy
as a framework and as a political reality can last and be
strengthened only in societies that have managed to do
away with ignorance, illiteracy, poverty and poor health
conditions. To say otherwise is like preaching in the
desert. In lands of poverty and social injustice, freedom
can hardly grow and develop. Political history and the
enormous and decisive struggle for democracy in Latin
America in recent decades is clear and irrefutable proof
of this truth. If freedom and democracy hold sway in our
lands today it is because our peoples have at last begun
to win over poverty and ignorance.

Another result has been a lessening of military
conflicts and the achievement of peace between countries
such as those of Central America, for example, that just
a few years ago were torn apart by civil and fratricidal
wars. This, which is true for us, is also true for our
brothers in Africa.

Therefore, my country, which was at the very
epicentre of the turmoil of the Central American wars,
wishes to emphasize the realistic vision of this report of
the Secretary-General and his appeal for assistance and
international cooperation, which, because of the
exceptional conditions in many countries of Africa,
establishes a proper balance between the political will and
the effort required of the Africans themselves and the
inevitable responsibilities that must be shouldered by the
developed countries, the international community and its
organizations, including through the active involvement of

 

the Bretton Woods institutions. The responsibility lies with
us all, and not just with Africa.

The African countries can never be asked to move
directly from economic crisis and civil war to structural
adjustment programmes, to the opening of markets, to
international competition and to globalization. The
International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, in close
cooperation with the United Nations Development
Programme and with other international bodies, must adapt
their programmes and their approach to African reality to
these unquestionable realities, and they must build on these
bases - just as the Security Council, in its agenda for
international peace and security, will have to continue to act
in close cooperation with the Organization of African Unity
and other subregional bodies for the success of its
peacekeeping operations. This close relationship and
cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization of African Unity is essential to the success of
our own work in the Security Council.

As Secretary-General Annan quite rightly points out,
the obligation and the responsibility rest with us all. The
important things are our determination and our sincerity,
which will undoubtedly be put to the test on innumerable
occasions in Africa and here in the Security Council, as
well as in all the many decision-making bodies of the
United Nations system.
In the end, if we are truly faithful to what we believe
and say, we will all be able to join with President Mandela
and celebrate, together with our African brothers, the
achievement of our goal and the complete rebirth of Africa.

In spite of the enormous difficulties, my country is
certain that this day is not far off. Africa undoubtedly has
the resources and the human capacity to achieve this.

