Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Many interesting things have been said,
and I have decided to share our views on them after
all, although of course a lot of them are not worth
discussing and a lot are very predictable. First of all,
we once again feel we were absolutely justified in our
proposal to hold a meeting under a different agenda
item, since people seem to be talking about anything
they feel like - annexation, occupation, aggression. I
was astonished to learn that we have occupied and even
annexed the Sea of Azov. That is news to us. But as
far as the main theme is concerned, nobody really said
much. Except Ambassador Yelchenko, who did indeed
torture the facts. But I will return to that later.

The only question is why the Ukrainians, who had
been familiar with the regime for passage through the
Kerch Strait and using it without any problems, suddenly
carried out an act of clear provocation and risked the
lives of their own sailors. Nobody has tried to answer
that question or even mention it. It could therefore
be perceived by as giving Ukraine carte blanche to
continue such provocations and foment a situation that
could pose a threat to everyone in the region. And going
on what Mr. Yelchenko said, Ukraine got the message.

I would like to correct some errors on the part of
some of the speakers. Ms. DiCarlo somehow confused
Crimea and the Minsk agreements in a very odd way. I
hope that she has actually read the Minsk agreements.
She is no doubt well aware that there is not a word
in them about Crimea. She also urged respect for the
sovereignty of Ukraine, but only Ukraine. Surely,
though, the Russian Federation's sovereignty should be
respected as well. At least we assume that is what she
believes. Mrs. Haley also assumed that Crimea is part of
the Minsk agreements, and I got the impression, at least
I thought I heard, that the Minsk agreements apparently
extend even to the Sea of Azov too. I am sorry to say
that such ignorance is shocking. We devoted most of
a previous meeting (see S/PV.8270), to an analysis of
the Minsk agreements by Mr. Nebenzia, our Permanent
Representative, who went through them from the first
to the last paragraph. And in spite of that we have to
listen to this egregious stuff.

With regard to the incident itself there are many
questions. An investigation is under way, of course, and
we will certainly share its conclusions. I do not want to
anticipate anything about what is still a hot topic, but I
can speak to two points that have not been mentioned
but that are clearly significant and relevant to analysis
of the incident. First, on board one of the vessels were
two employees of Ukraine's security services who
admitted that they were on a special assignment and
were supposed to act in exactly that way. We will tell
the Council about that too.

In another small but relatively important detail,
the Ukrainians violated our border in a place that
was Russian territory before 2014, if we decided to
talk about what is Crimea and what is not. But the
Ukrainians refused a pilot and made a treacherous
approach to the Kerch Strait from the south. That is an
act of gross provocation and it is hard even to imagine
any other way of putting it, and yet some of those here
have knowingly covered it up. It is also worth pointing
out that their actions, including in supporting Ukraine's
version of what happened, are already exacerbating
the situation, including in eastern Ukraine. As our
colleagues from the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe have told us, the Ukrainian
military has been drawing up Buk S-300 surface-to-air
missile systems and Grad and Uragan multiple rocket
launchers at the line of contact. The disengagement of
forces in Stanytsia Luhanska is blocked and soldiers
have infiltrated disengagement areas in Zolote and
Petrovske. Units of the Ukrainian seventy-second
brigade have captured the village of Rozsadky near
Svitlodarsk. Those are real things that testify to the
fact that the Minsk agreements are being violated.
Everything else, and in any case a lot of what has been
said here today, has absolutely nothing to do with that,
and those facts have been completely ignored by the
speakers here today.

Although Crimea is not on the Security Council's
agenda, as long as the subject has been brought up, I
would also like to say that whether anyone likes it or
not, the question of where Crimea belongs has long ago
been closed for both us and for Crimeans. No sanctions
or restrictions will change our decision. That issue
was closed after the Crimeans voted to reunite with
Russia in a free referendum based on a nation's right to
self-determination. Many people ask if we knew then
what awaited us in the frenzied rush of the West to
launch its anti-Russian geopolitical "project Ukraine"
that I mentioned earlier this morning. Of course we
knew. We had no illusions. Does Russia regret what
has happened? Absolutely not. Furthermore, I want
to say that an overwhelming majority of Russians
are proud of it, since if we had not taken a stand to
protect the Crimeans, today they would be dying from
the Ukrainian army's bullets and shells, just as the
Russian-speaking residents of Donbas are dying. They
are dying merely because they want to speak Russian,
teach their children in Russian and honour those who
liberated Ukraine from the fascists rather than those
who collaborated with them.

While I did not mention it in my previous
statement on the correct topic for this meeting, I
should also point out that Kyiv's decisions have given
free rein to Ukraine's radical nationalists. They have
been particularly active in the past few days. And in
particular, nobody has mentioned the fact that there
was another attack on the Russian Embassy in Kyiv
while the police did nothing. A diplomatic car was set
on fire last night. The radicals continue to threaten to
storm our diplomatic headquarters. As I understand
it, we should expect no response on this from anyone.
Does anyone think that is normal? We demand that
Ukraine provide full and unconditional immunity to
Russia's embassies and general consulates in Ukraine,
in accordance with the norms of the Vienna Convention
on Diplomatic Relations of 1961, and that it hold those
responsible for the attacks accountable.

Since you represent China, Mr. President, I would
like to remind you of a well-known saying of Confucius
about the fact that it is very difficult to find a black cat
in a dark room, especially when it is not there. That is
exactly what the members here are doing, discussing an
imaginary act of aggression by Russia without talking
about the real reason for having this meeting today. But
the problem is right under their noses and can be solved
extremely easily, as I have already said. An order from
Washington could resolve it in the space of 10 minutes.
Unfortunately, judging by our Ukrainian colleague's

statement, I have to conclude that they have been
considerably cheered and intend to continue in their
chosen provocative spirit, and hence the fantasies we
have been hearing about our plans to seize Mariupol.

In conclusion, I want to issue a warning that Kyiv's
policy of provoking a conflict with Russia conducted in
coordination with the United States and the European
Union is fraughtwith exceedingly serious consequences.
We will put a firm stop to any infringement on the
sovereignty and security of the Russian Federation,
including in the waters of the Sea of Azov and the Black
Sea. I hope that is clear to everyone.

