The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.

I thank President Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz
for their briefings. We are grateful for the unwavering
commitment of the judges, attorneys and staff in Arusha,
The Hague, Kigali and Sarajevo to pursuing justice for
the victims in Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia.

We welcome the efforts of President Agius aimed at
improving efficiencies and harmonizing the operations
of the two branches of the Mechanism as the remaining
cases pending before the Tribunal draw to a close.
This focus is helping to achieve the lean operations
envisioned by the Security Council when it established
the Mechanism in 2010. We are looking forward to the
Council's review next year of the progress of the work
of the Mechanism, pursuant to resolution 1966 (2010).

The report delivered by President Agius

(S/2019/888, annex I) predicts that 2020 will mark an
important year for the conclusion of the vast majority
of the current judicial work of the Mechanism. The
conclusion of appellate proceedings in the case of
Prosecutor v. Ratko Mladic' will be a landmark in the
history of international criminal law. Let us be very
clear about exactly what kind of acts were committed
that bring us to this meeting today.

General Ratko Mladic served as the commander of
the Bosnian Serb Army, and his forces systematically
murdered Muslim Bosnian men and boys in Srebrenica,
raped women and girls, shelled the civilian population
of Sarajevo and brutalized Muslim and Croat prisoners,
all with the horrifying objective of permanently
removing Bosnian Muslims and Bosnian Croats from
Bosnian Serb-claimed territory. We therefore welcome
and celebrate the Tribunal's work to rule on General
Mladie's responsibility for grave crimes committed
during the war.

Similarly, we support the work of the Mechanism in
the retrial of Jovica Stanisic' and Franko Simatovie on
charges of crimes against humanity and war crimes for
their alleged roles in the unlawful, forcible removal of
non-Serbs from Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We also support the contempt proceedings in the
cases of Prosecutor v. Maximilien Turinabo et al. and
Prosecutor v. Augustin Ngirabatware. Attempts to
interfere with witnesses or otherwise undermine court
proceedings are a grave threat to the rule of law and
must be dealt with seriously.

We also commend the endeavours of the
Mechanism to support national judicial efforts, from
the Balkans to Rwanda. These proceedings remain vital
to ensuring that the pursuit ofjustice will not end even
as prosecutions at the Mechanism conclude. We note
Rwanda's progress in continuing to try cases related to
the genocide and urge Balkan States to improve their
cooperation across national systems.

We also continue to support the efforts of
the Mechanism to apprehend the remaining eight
Rwandans still wanted for their roles in the 1994
genocide. The United States continues to offer rewards
of up to $5 million for information that leads to the
arrest, transfer or conviction of any of the remaining
fugitives. We strongly urge all countries to cooperate
fully with the Mechanism and to bring these people,
who are wanted for some of the worst crimes in history,
to justice. To this end, it is absolutely essential that
requests for cooperation be met by Member States with
the swiftness and utmost seriousness that the victims
and survivors deserve. When we do not cooperate
with the Mechanism, fugitives remain at large and
impunity reigns.

It is deeply troubling that the Prosecutor continues
to report the ongoing challenge of genocide denial and
the non-acceptance of historical truths in both Rwanda
and the Balkans. We cannot bring back those whose
lives were lost, but if we do not act forcefully when
leaders seek to turn certain populations into scapegoats
for society's ills or deny historical facts, we will fail to
ensure justice for the victims and their loved ones.

In her guilty plea to the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, former Bosnian Serb
leader Biljana Plavsie spoke from her own experience,
warning that where leaders rely on stoking fear and
prejudice, thereby become victimizers, the result is
"graves, refugees, isolation and bitterness against the
whole world". We must recommit to protecting the
welfare of civilians during armed conflict and holding
those who do not to account. The Mechanism has been
an important part of this work, and we continue to
support its efforts on behalf of victims.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the Assistant Minister of Justice
of Serbia.

