Mrs. Theofili (Greece): At the outset, I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening today's
highly relevant and timely debate.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union and
would like to add the following remarks.

The latest scientific data suggest that climate
change poses rapidly increasing risks to natural
ecosystems, human health, food security and economic
development. Indeed, its effects are no longer a distant
eventuality, but a present reality. In my own country,
Greece, and throughout the Mediterranean region,
catastrophic forest fires, diminishing water resources
and increasingly prolonged seasonal floods pose a
serious threat to the vital agriculture, fisheries and
tourism industries. The increasing magnitude and
frequency of extreme weather events not only create new
threats, but also further aggravate existing social and
cross-border tensions. Clearly, no country is immune
to the direct and indirect consequences of climate
change, and therefore their mitigation necessitates
enhanced multilateral cooperation. In that vein, Greece
has signed and ratified all the important conventions
on climate change and the environment. At the same
time, we actively participate in ongoing negotiations
and supports ambitious efforts by the European Union
to address the long-term security implications of
climate change.

We believe that the recently reformed, nimble
architecture of the United Nations, with its emphasis on
long-term analysis, cross-cutting effects and a novel,
holistic approach to international security, is uniquely
equipped to address those challenges. Our first priority
should be to improve shared knowledge and situational
awareness on climate-related security risks, before
consistently factoring them into our early-warning and
conflict-prevention mechanisms. Strengthening and
aligning the implementation of the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development can be a crucial first step in that direction.

In the future, our ability to anticipate and adapt
to security threats created by climate change may be
equally important to our long-term efforts to reverse it.
In that context, we look forward to this year's climate
summit to be hosted by the Secretary-General. Inaction
is not an option.

