Mr. Taha (Sudan) (interpretation from Arabic): I
would like at the outset to convey through you, Sir, the
deepest feelings of sorrow prevailing in the Sudan as a
result of the lives that have been lost in Al-Quds Al-Sharif.
I take this opportunity, on behalf of the Sudan, to extend
our condolences to the families of the bereaved and to wish
the wounded a speedy recovery.

No doubt, a comprehensive and just peace is an
objective to which the peace-loving nations aspire and
which they endeavour to realize based on the principles of
justice and equity. Reneging on undertakings and
obligations runs counter to the genuine goal of establishing
peace and undermines any movement in its direction. The
squandering of the chance for a just, comprehensive and
permanent peace by the occupation Powers through the
practices being pursued in the Arab territories is ample
evidence of the weighty contradiction between the realities
of occupation and peace.

The measure taken by the Israeli Government in Al-
Quds - the opening of a gate to a tunnel under the
western wall of Al-Aqsa Mosque in the eastern part of this
city and the ensuing violent and bloody suppression of
unarmed civilians expressing their opposition to this
measure - is a violation of the noblest of sentiments. It
also defies all international covenants and civilized human
values and runs explicitly counter to the resolutions of this
Council relating to the status of Al-Quds.

Undoubtedly you know, Sir, that the Al-Aqsa Mosque
enjoys a high status among Muslims all over the world. It
is part of Islamic belief, is regarded with love and respect
and is linked to ancient and modern history. It constitutes
an important part of the heritage and culture of Muslims.

The existence of Jerusalem - Al-Quds - with all its
sites that are holy to the followers of the three religions,
must be insured as a place dear to believers and as a safe
sanctuary where religious tolerance and peace prevail. If
the status of Al-Aqsa Mosque is understood, any attempt
to change that status explains to us the opposition that
was peaceably demonstrated by the Palestinian people in
East Jerusalem. This has truly expressed the feelings of
all Muslims and Arabs throughout the world.

It might be appropriate in this connection to recall
the arson that took place in 1968 at the same Mosque.
That event touched the feelings of Muslims all over the
world, resulting in their leaders' agreeing to establish a
collective, formal entity to represent them. Thus was born
the Organization of the Islamic Conference.

These practices will eventually lead to disaster and
to catastrophic consequences for the people and countries
of the region. They will also have negative repercussions
for international peace and security.

Therefore, while we vehemently condemn these
Israeli measures and the suppression of unarmed civilians,
Sudan - based on its commitment to international
covenants and to the agreements reached by the parties
concerned - requests the Security Council to discharge
its responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. We ask that it request Israel to put an
immediate stop to these measures, which cause grief to
Muslims all over the world. The Security Council must
also take specific measures to put an end to aggression
against the Palestinian people and to comply fully with
human rights covenants.

Sudan, in solidarity with the Palestinian people and
their legitimate rights, and as part of its commitment to
the resolutions adopted by the Arab summit held last June
in Cairo, calls upon the Council to confirm its credibility
by implementing all the resolutions adopted on the Israeli-
Arab conflict and the decisions of the Madrid Conference,
with a view to achieving a comprehensive and just peace
on all tracks. This is the sole way to stability and security
in the region.

