At the outset, South Africa expresses its appreciation to Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC), for her briefing today on the situation in Libya. South Africa continues to support the implementation of resolution 1970 (2011), which, apart from imposing a vital arms embargo, also mandates the ICC to investigate war crimes and crimes against humanity. We note with concern that the non-execution of arrest warrants for ICC fugitives remains the greatest obstacle faced by the Prosecutor. South Africa ardently supports strengthening complementarity through the development of domestic institutions to investigate and prosecute crimes. We commend the Prosecutor's efforts to promote the investigation and prosecution of international crimes committed in Libya in domestic jurisdictions, where viable and appropriate. Like the Prosecutor, South Africa welcomes the signing of the ceasefire agreement by the Libyan parties in Geneva on 23 October, under the auspices of the United Nations. South Africa believes that cooperation with the ICC remains imperative, and we are encouraged by the continued engagement of the Libyan authorities and its commitment, at the highest level, to cooperate with the Office of the Prosecutor. However, South Africa believes that progress in the Libyan peace process is vital in order to address the concerns that necessitated the implementation of resolution 1970 (2011), which the ICC process is part of. Furthermore, South Africa welcomes the assistance provided to the Prosecutor's Office by international and regional organizations, civil society groups and private individuals, as well as the Office's constructive working relationship with the United Nations Support Mission in Libya. We have noted reports of the escalation in abductions and enforced disappearances of journalists, civil society activists, lawyers, migrants and State officials by armed groups, which is deeply disconcerting. Despite the myriad challenges faced by the Prosecutor, including as a result of the coronavirus disease pandemic, it is heartening to note that the Court received State cooperation, which allowed it to make progress in ongoing investigations. South Africa calls on all parties and stakeholders to renew their commitment to building durable peace in Libya on the basis of inclusive political dialogue as the only viable means to achieving sustainable peace in Libya.
