Mr. Kovanda (Czech Republic): The disparity
between the objectives and the mandate of the United
Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR), on the one hand,
and the wherewithal at its disposal, on the other has
always been one of the most vexing problems bedeviling
that operation. In seeking compliance with Security
Council resolutions, and indeed in protecting its own
personnel, UNPROFOR has had a widely bifurcated
choice between two options: its own persuasive abilities,
and air power.

UNPROFOR'S persuasive abilities, never a terribly
strong choice, have been dissipating with every additional
failure, with every additional concession. And yet
UNPROFOR leadership demonstrated a marked
reluctance, a distaste even, for employing air power, a
reluctance that bothered many observers, who felt it
overly cautious. As events of the past weeks have
demonstrated, that caution was appropriate. From the
military point of View, UNPROFOR indeed turned out to
be extremely vulnerable, and the Bosnian Serb hostage-
taking demonstrated that for all to see.

The taking of hostages is reprehensible and
despicable. It has been described as a terrorist act, and we
agree with that description. It cannot be tolerated by the
international community. The hostage crisis is a crisis for
all of UNPROFOR at least, and is the main reason why
the Czech Republic supports, indeed has joined in
sponsoring, the draft resolution before the Council.

On the initiative of France and Britain, the two
countries whose UNPROFOR contingents are the largest,
and of the Netherlands, we are now authorizing the
sending of a rapid-reaction force which will bring into
better alignment the mandate of UNPROFOR and the
means at its disposal. A tank or an armoured personnel

 

carrier is surely the appropriate instrument to assure safe
passage in sniper or ambush territory or to remove
obstacles to the delivery of humanitarian supplies, the kind
of instrument we have always needed. It will not help with
the release of the hostages who are still in captivity, who
include two of our nationals, but surely it will prevent a
repetition of such action. In this respect, the rapid-reaction
force fills the space between persuasion and air power.
Several aspects of this draft resolution are important
for us: it preserves the peace-keeping nature of
UNPROFOR. It is easy to argue - now, regrettably and
alarmingly, perhaps even more than at other times - that
in Bosnia and Herzegovina there is no peace to keep. But
the important aspect is that, peace or not, UNPROFOR is
not turning into a peacemaking or a peace-enforcement
operation. For this reason, too, we are satisfied that
Chapter VII of the Charter is invoked only in the context of
UNPROFOR's self-defence and freedom of movement, and
that the draft resolution is in this regard not breaking any
new ground. We also reiterate the impartial status of
UNPROFOR. The Security Council, thus, through this draft
resolution would emphasize once again that peaceful
negotiations, not war, are the way to settle the conflict;
peaceful negotiations which should take the Contact Group
peace plan as a starting point.

We are happy to have the very welcome agreement of
the Government of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina
with the deployment of the rapid-reaction force - and
from the legal point of View, no other party can veto it, of
course. However, practical considerations make it necessary
that conversations and contacts should proceed with all
parties, in order to win their acquiescence, if not their
agreement, at least ex post facto if not in advance. We
encourage the Secretary-General to proceed with efforts
along these lines.

