Mr. Koncke (spoke in Spanish): I am grateful
for the invitation extended to the General Secretariat
of the Organization of American States (OAS) to
participate in this Security Council meeting and to
brief it on the efforts that the General Secretariat has
been undertaking in Nicaragua, as well as to provide
an overview of the situation from the perspective of a
regional organization. I wish to convey the greetings of
OAS Secretary General Luis Almagro.

The situation involving death, violence, repression
and political and social crisis in Nicaragua is the subject
of extreme concern in the western hemisphere. The OAS
General Secretariat is closely following the situation in
the country, which, according to the Inter-American
Commission on Human Rights (IACHR), has resulted
in 322 deaths since 18 April. Among the dead are
23 children and adolescents, as well as a number of
detained persons. We also lament the deaths of21 police
officers between 18 April and 24 August. Tragically, the

number of deaths in the country has been increasing.
Again according to the IACHR, 76 people had died by
the end of May, 212 by the end of June, 264 by the end
of July and, as I said earlier, 322 by the end of August.
As has unfortunately become routine, the OAS General
Secretariat extends its condolences to the families and
friends of the victims.

As is well known, the OAS Secretariat is
continuously following the situation with a growing
sense of concern at the loss oflife and the deterioration
of democracy and political and social coexistence
in the country, as well as the corresponding effect
on the economic situation, which disproportionately
impacts the most vulnerable. Since 18 April, in line
with the Inter-American Democratic Charter and its
own Charter, the OAS has employed the tools at its
disposal in the quest for peace, democracy, the rule
of law, justice, truth and the re-establishment of the
institutional order in the country. In that context,
Secretary General Almagro secured authorization from
the Government ofNicaragua for an IACHR mission to
the country, which took place from 17 to 21 May and
produced 15 recommendations that form the basis for the
restoration of respect for, and the promotion of, human
rights. Likewise, on 30 May, the Secretary General, the
Government of Nicaragua and the IACHR Executive
Secretary signed a document on the establishment of
the Interdisciplinary Group of Independent Experts
(GIEI), in line with recommendation 3 of the IACHR
preliminary report.

Moreover, the Special Monitoring Mechanism for
Nicaragua (MESENI) was established in the country
pursuant to recommendation 15 of the preliminary
report, mandated, as its name indicates, with
monitoring the human rights situation on an ongoing
basis. Similarly, the General Secretariat of the OAS
has been working with the Government of Nicaragua
for the necessary electoral reforms that will identify
democratic solutions through popular expression in
the country.

The Permanent Council of the OAU set out its
position on the situation in Nicaragua in resolution
1108/18 of 18 July, by which, among other things,
it reiterated

"its vigorous condemnation of and grave concern
over all acts of violence, repression, and human
rights violations and abuses committed by police,
parapolice groups, and others against the people
of Nicaragua, as documented by the IACHR;
to encourage that steps be taken to identify the
individuals responsible, through the corresponding
legal procedures; and to demand that parapolice
groups be disbanded".

Similarly, the Permanent Council has created a working
group composed of 12 countries in order to provide
solutions to a problem of concern to the entire region.

It is regrettable that the situation in the country
has not improved in terms of democracy, respect for
human rights and social and political coexistence. The
322 deaths that I mentioned earlier were the result of
repression, violence, the actions of irregular armed
pro-Government groups, and violations of human
rights. In its report of 22 June, the IACHR concluded
that the State of Nicaragua had infringed on the rights
to life, personal integrity, health, personal freedom,
assembly, freedom of expression and access to justice.
The Commission found especially worrisome

"the assassinations, extrajudicial executions,
abusive treatment, possible acts of torture and
arbitrary detentions committed against the
country's majority young population".

The IACHR conclusions concerning repeated violations
delegitimize the Nicaraguan Government. The OAS
General Secretariat believes that this process of
delegitimation must end as soon as possible.

As pointed out by Secretary General Almagro, the
solution for Nicaragua incontestably requires peace,
truth, justice and democracy. To ensure truth and justice,
it will be necessary for the Government of Nicaragua
to facilitate and cooperate with the work of GIEI and
MESENI, provide free access to places of interest,
documents and necessary files, grant guarantees and
facilities, offer the prescriptive answers of the State and
not to hinder the work of those bodies. These are the
fundamental demands that the General Secretariat of
the OAS has made of the Nicaraguan Government.

In the same way, the General Secretariat of the
OAS asserts that there can be no genuine solution
for Nicaragua without heeding the voice of its
people through the holding of free, fair, democratic
and transparent elections, in accordance with
inter-American standards. In that regard, the General
Secretariat reiterates its invitation to the Government
of Nicaragua to resume and accelerate the work that is
being done with the Nicaraguan State to ensure that the
pertinent electoral reforms are completed by January
2019, as agreed by both parties.

Secretary General Almagro has openly stated his
opinion that the more timely holding of elections will be
critical and represents a genuine solution to the crisis of
democracy in the country. In situations of maximum
polarization and tension, the validation of the voice of
the people in the polls is the necessary path. The date
for the holding of elections should be agreed among
Nicaraguans - there is no other way - but we believe
it essential to consult with the sources of political
power. It is also important that the Government and the
opposition, represented by the Civic Alliance for Justice
and Democracy, revisit the possibility of holding talks
that could lead to good-faith agreements between the
parties, in which the participation of the Nicaraguan
Episcopal Conference would be critical.

In conclusion, Nicaragua is at a crossroads on
which its peace, democracy and future depend. We
believe that this crossroads could have been avoided
because the inter-American system has tools that it has
made available to the Nicaraguans to find solutions,
including electoral reforms and electoral monitoring to
identify the will of the Nicaraguan people, and GIEI
and MESENI to promote truth justice. At the centre
of this crossroads is the Nicaraguan Government, on
which depend the decision-making and the democratic
gestures that will restore the country's institutions
and find the path to the rule of law. After 18 April, we
cannot apply to Nicaragua the same tools that led to the
tragedy, because that would lead to more confrontation
and more suffering for the people.

It is necessary to apply irreversibly democratic
mechanisms that will restore to the Nicaraguan people
the possibility of choosing and reviving political
coexistence. At this crossroads, the Nicaraguan
Government can opt for the revival of democratic
institutions. There is still time to do so. Failure to do so
would be to choose the erroneous path taken by other
countries of the region that have fallen into dictatorial
Governments in which the rule of law and democracy
do not exist and that have led their people into misery,
social and family disintegration, and emigration.

In the Americas in particular, crises of democracy
and human rights affect more than just the country they
afflict. The example of the migration crisis originated
by the Venezuelan regime must serve as a warning.
Nicaragua is not in a position to endure the exacerbation

of a social, economic and political crisis. At the same
time, we in the General Secretariat of the OAS believe
that Central America is not in a position to endure
the exacerbation of a crisis of democracy and human
rights in Nicaragua that amplifies migratory variables,
encourages the actions of criminal gangs, and ends up
generating elements harmful to regional stability and
security.

That is why the General Secretariat of the OAS will
continue advocating to find solutions for the country.
We reiterate to the Nicaraguan Government the need to
advance jointly in the work of electoral reform, agree
on an electoral calendar for Nicaragua, facilitate the
tasks of the Interdisciplinary Group of Independent
Experts and the Special Monitoring Mechanism for
Nicaragua, and resume dialogue, with guarantees of
non-repetition, in order to achieve peace, justice and
human rights in the country.

