Mr. Biabaroh-Iboro (Congo) (spoke in French):
My delegation is grateful to you, Sir, for having
organized this important debate on the situation in the
Middle East. We thank the Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, Mr. Lynn Pascoe, for his briefing.

The overall picture in the Middle East today is a
picture of contrasts, showing glimmers of hope and
serious concern. But we have noted signs of movement
that appear to be overcoming the lethargy we have seen
in Palestine over many years.

On the plus side of those developments, we
should note the Mecca Agreement of 8 March 2007,
which my delegation welcomed as a positive event that
might bring peace back to the Palestinian camp, but
also, and above all, might create the appropriate
conditions for relaunching a peace process between
Israel and Palestine and beyond.

Even more significant in that positive trend are
the conclusions of the latest summit of the League of
Arab States, held in Riyadh on 28 and 29 March 2007,
which revived the Arab Peace Initiative adopted in
Beirut in 2002. The activation of this peace plan would
allow for Israel to return all the occupied Arab
territories in return for its recognition by the Arab
States, which would lead, in time, to the creation of a
Palestinian State and to the establishment of normal
diplomatic relations between Israel and the Arab world.
That in turn would contribute to the long-term peace
and security of Israel.

We welcome those advances and support the
various diplomatic demarches and initiatives
undertaken to that end, particularly by the Quartet on
the Middle East and by the States of the Arab League.
We should also welcome the willingness to undertake
dialogue shown at the highest level by the Israeli and
Palestinian leaders, illustrated both by the now regular
and sustained meetings between Prime Minister Olmert
and President Abbas and by the generally positive tone
of their remarks.

It seems that a time for dialogue and relaunching
the negotiation process is imminent. We feel that the
main protagonists in the Israeli-Palestinian crisis
should demonstrate patience, self-control, flexibility
and creativity so as not to allow this window of
opportunity. offered to us at the present moment, to
close again.

The Palestinian and Israeli authorities, with the
necessary support from the international community
and particularly from the Quartet, perhaps expanded to
the countries of the region, should promote and
strengthen confidence-building measures with respect
to the following imperatives.

They should put an end to violence and to the
recurring provocations and should preserve the
ceasefire concluded between the two parties in
November 2006, which should be extended to the West
Bank. That involves stopping the continuing firing of
rockets into Israel and the cordoning off of territories
and incursions by the Israeli army into occupied
territories, which endanger the lives of civilian
populations.

They should ensure that the Israeli soldier held by
Palestinian armed factions is released and give serious
consideration to the problem of the numerous
Palestinian prisoners in Israel, among them ministers
and members of parliament.

They should lift the suspension of direct financial
aid to the Palestinian National Unity Government and
hand back assets from customs duties and taxes that
Israel is unjustifiably withholding. Circulation and
access for goods and persons at the crossing points at
Karni and Rafah between Israel and the Palestinian
territories should be improved. Settlement activities
and the building of the separation wall - which is in
violation of international legality - should be stopped.

With regard to Lebanon, the precarious situation
that country is facing socially, politically and
economically is made even more complicated with the
project to set up a tribunal of an international character,
which is a source of division among the different
Lebanese political factions. We encourage the

Lebanese political authorities to once more seek,
through national dialogue, consensual solutions to the
many challenges that that country, so damaged by the
war in the summer of 2006, has to face.

In addition, in the light of the complex situation
in Lebanon and what is at stake domestically and
regionally, we think that any pursuit of a lasting
solution to the Lebanese crisis will have to involve
Lebanon's neighbouring countries. In this regard,
Congo await with interest the follow-up to visits in the
region by the Secretary-General and his colleagues,
whose commitment we support with a view to helping
the Lebanese people to recover peace, which is an
essential condition for the reconstruction of Lebanon.

