Let me congratulate you, Madam President, on taking up your position. It is good to have a fellow Commonwealth member in the chair. May I thank High Representative Nakamitsu for her briefing and, through her, the Director General of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) for his eighty-fifth monthly report (see S/2020/1056, annex), and the OPCW Technical Secretariat for its ongoing work in professionally and dispassionately implementing the tasks assigned to it by the OPCW Executive Council and the Conference of the States Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention. On 8 April, the OPCW Investigation and Identification Team issued its first report. In that report, it found the Syrian Arab Air Force responsible for three chemical attacks in Ltamenah in 2017, in which it used chlorine and sarin. Those findings bring the number of chemical-weapon attacks for which the United Nations and the OPCW has found the Syrian regime responsible to seven. It was yet further evidence that Syria had retained a chemical-weapon stockpile beyond the agreed date of destruction, with the intent and ability to produce and use them, and that Syria's initial declaration was incomplete. It was another reminder of the real threat this posed to Syrians and to the international non-proliferation regime. In response, in a decision on 9 July, the OPCW Executive Council requested that the Syrian authorities declare the facilities used for the Ltamenah attacks and the chemical weapons it currently possesses and resolve the outstanding issues with its initial declaration. In addition to the six years that Syria has already had to do that, the Executive Council granted it an additional 90 days. It is with great regret to note, as confirmed by the OPCW Director General on 14 October, that Syria failed to take the required steps. It is with further regret that the Syrian regime did not even see fit to respond to the Director General's letter notifying it of the action requested of Syria. We strongly condemn the failure of Syria to comply with yet another Executive Council decision. As recommended in that decision, the Conference of the States Parties should now take appropriate action to address Syria's failure to comply with the Executive Council decisions and the Chemical Weapons Convention. The failure to comply with the 9 July decision represents yet another failure to comply with the fundamental terms of resolution 2118 (2013), the issue before the Council today. In that resolution, we decided that, in the event of non-compliance, including the use of chemical weapons, we would impose measures under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations. For the Security Council not to take action would be a dereliction of its duty and would undermine its authority. It is incumbent on all of us to uphold the Security Council's authority under the United Nations Charter. Syria's continued non-compliance is a proven threat to international peace and security. Turning to the Director General's monthly report, I want to welcome the ongoing tireless work of the OPCW Technical Secretariat, particularly in the light of the limitations imposed by the coronavirus disease pandemic. Regarding the work of the Declaration Assessment Team, we welcome that it was able to travel to Syria at the end of September for further consultations and to resolve issues with samples collected in a previous deployment. Regarding the additional information and amendments to Syria's declaration referenced in last month's report (see S/2020/961, annex), we understand that these are still being assessed by the OPCW. We will wait for further reporting from the OPCW before we welcome any progress. As the latest monthly report states, Syria's declaration cannot be considered accurate and complete, in accordance with the Chemical Weapons Convention, Executive Council decisions and resolution 2118 (2003). Further amendments to the declaration are yet more evidence that the initial declaration was incomplete. I would like to stress once again that Syria needs to cooperate fully with the OPCW and make progress on all outstanding issues. I would like to touch on some points raised by the Russian Ambassador. We in the United Kingdom are gravely concerned by the poisoning of Russian opposition politician Alexei Navalny, with a nerve agent from the Novichok group. I remind colleagues on the Council that a similar chemical weapon was used in Salisbury, United Kingdom, resulting in death and severe injury. It is unacceptable that these weapons have been retained, and even worse that they have been used. Under the Chemical Weapons Convention, the poisoning of an individual through the use of a nerve agent is considered a use of chemical weapons. And, as the Council reaffirmed last November in presidential statement S/PRST/2019/14, any use of chemical weapons - anywhere, at any time, by anyone and under any circumstance - is unacceptable and a threat to international peace and security, and those responsible must be held to account. Russia must urgently conduct a full and transparent investigation into the use of a banned chemical weapon on its territory. We must not allow this behaviour to become normalized. Russia must fully cooperate with the relevant institutions, including the Security Council. I am afraid that it is not difficult to understand Russia's motives for constantly attacking and seeking to undermine the OPCW.
