Mr. Brende (Norway): No country is immune to
violent extremism. From Baghdad and Bamako to Paris,
Brussels and Istanbul, we have had tragic reminders
of this global peril. Threats to our security are more
complex than they have been for decades, and the most
serious among them is violent extremism. It must be
defeated at all levels by Governments and citizens
alike. When and where necessary - as in Syria and
Iraq - we must also be willing to use military means.

At the same time, we must stop the flow of finances
and foreign fighters, improve our development policies,
strengthen fragile States and offer young people
education, jobs and opportunities. It does not help to
win the day-to-day battles in Iraq if we lose the battle
for the future. The likes of the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) can be degraded and destroyed
only iftheir ideology is dismantled. We must refine our
counter-messaging, bearing in mind that messages are
only effective when accompanied by substance and real
progress. Young people must be able to find jobs and
opportunities, to be seen and to influence their own
lives - in the Middle East, North Africa, Europe and
elsewhere.

As we refine our methods, extremist groups are
finding new ways to spread their propaganda, finance
their activities, recruit people and carry out attacks.
The sharing of intelligence and information between
our countries must be improved. The core values of
peace, tolerance, democracy, human rights and rule of
law are what the terrorists are fighting. If we want to
defeat terrorism, we must defend the values that gave
birth to the Security Council 70 years ago.

As ISIL is losing ground in Syria and Iraq and
its recruitment seems to be slowing down, we must
increase our focus on the threat that foreign fighters
pose when they return home. We must also do what we
can to prevent new ISILs from emerging.

The international community must adapt to
a changing security landscape. The Secretary-
General's Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism
(A/70/674), building on the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, is timely and much needed.
It focuses on national, regional and United Nations
activities that can become drivers for change. The Plan
seeks to tackle conditions conducive to terrorism while
aiming to ensure respect for human rights and the rule
of law. It addresses how we can effectively counter
the manipulative messages of violent extremism by
advocating freedom of expression and the values of
tolerance, pluralism and understanding. These are
all necessary ingredients for building peaceful and
inclusive societies.

Governments have the primary responsibility for
preventing extremism, but they can only succeed if
they work closely with civil society, including with
young people and women. That is why Norway has
initiated the launch of two civil-society networks. First,
there is YouthCAN, which is a network of young people
working together against violent extremism, not least
by developing alternative narratives. Secondly, we have
established an alliance ofwomen's organizations. Many
of the women in the alliance have suffered directly
from extremism in places like Syria and Iraq. There can
be no more qualified and credible voices in speaking
out against terrorism than its victims and witnesses.
Norway will continue to work with these networks and
help them expand.

We all have a role to play in countering violent
extremism. Our efforts must be amplified and our
methods refined. We need a strong United Nations to
show global leadership. We need a United Nations that
is fit for purpose and has sufficient resources to do its
important part. Norway is pleased that the General
Assembly earlier this year welcomed the initiative of
the Secretary-General to develop and present his Plan
of Action to Member States. We can fight terrorists
with soldiers and police and indeed we will. But in the
long run, we can only prevail if we understand the root
causes of violent extremism and commit ourselves to
translating this understanding into action.

We cannot rest in our quest for answers and
solutions. Violent extremism is a threat to us all, so we
must fight it globally, at home and together.

