Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom voted in favour of resolution 2202
(2015) because of the importance of providing full
Security Council backing for the agreements reached in
Minsk on 5 and 19 September 2014 and of 12 February
this year. These agreements must now be implemented
comprehensively and according to the agreed timelines
in order to secure a sustainable and peaceful resolution
of the crisis in eastern Ukraine.

Over 5,400 people have lost their lives in this
conflict and over 1.5 million have been displaced. The
parties must commit to and invest in this opportunity
for peace. We welcome the intensive diplomatic efforts
that have brought us to this point, but agreements
have been reached before. This time, we must see
commitments translated into action and full delivery of
the obligations that have been undertaken.

The ceasefire has now been in place for two and a
half days. Reporting from the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) suggests that it has
been respected in the majority of the Donbas. However,
intense fighting continues around Debaltseve, where
heavy shelling and street-by-street fighting have

resulted in scores of casualties. This flagrant disregard
of the ceasefire is deeply concerning and risks
undermining the Minsk package in its entirety. The
fighting for Debaltseve must stop, and any detained
soldier must be treated humanely.
It is totally unacceptable that separatist leaders
have made statements claiming that the ceasefire
did not apply to Debaltseve, where they were clearly
intent on making further territorial gains, and it is
deeply concerning that the OSCE Special Monitoring
Mission has not been given access to the town. The
press statement that the Council has just agreed
(SC/11784) makes clear our collective, grave concern
over Debaltseve and our unified call for OSCE access.

The actions in and around Debaltseve are not the
actions of a party interested in peace. We recall how a
Russian-backed separatist offensive brought to an end
the ceasefire agreed in September - a cynical effort
to undermine the September Minsk agreements and
create new realities on the ground. We therefore call on
Russia to use its influence on the separatists to cease
their onslaught against that town and abide by their
commitments. It is vital that the ceasefire be respected
in full and upheld across all of eastern Ukraine.

But the ceasefire is only the first step in a series
of obligations set out in the Minsk package. We also
expect to see the withdrawal of heavy weapons by both
sides over the next two weeks in order to create an
effective security zone. As the Minsk package makes
clear, this process should be facilitated, monitored and
verified by the OSCE. It is welcome that the Ukrainian
armed forces have already set out their withdrawal plan
to the Monitoring Mission. We call on the separatists
to show the same commitment to that crucial element
of the Minsk package. In parallel, we look forward to
progress being made towards local elections, special
status legislation, the release of all hostages, and the
urgent distribution of humanitarian assistance on the
basis of an international mechanism.

The resolution we have adopted today reaffirms
resolution 2166 (2014) on the downing of Malaysia
Airlines Flight MH-17, in which the Council demanded
that those responsible be held to account and that
all States cooperate with the efforts to establish
accountability. Let me be clear that the amnesty
provided for in the Minsk package does not apply to
those who may be found responsible for that dreadful
crime.

The Council must scrutinize closely the
implementation of the Minsk package and use its
influence to prevent any repetition of what we saw last
autumn. We call on Russia to deliver on the promises it
has made. Russia has committed to the implementation
of the Minsk agreements at the highest level. That
commitment needs to be reflected in actions on the
ground. We also call on Russia to use its undoubted
influence over the separatists to ensure that they meet
their commitments in full. Until we see such actions,
international pressure must remain on Russia and
its separatist proxies. The Council must play its full
role in ensuring that there is complete compliance
so that stability can be restored and to guarantee
the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity of Ukraine. That must include regular and
close monitoring of the ceasefire and a willingness to
take further steps in the event that it is not implemented.

Finally, it will be recalled that this crisis began with
Russia's illegal annexation of Crimea. As we approach
the first anniversary, we must not let events in eastern
Ukraine distract us from Russia's blatant disregard for
the Charter of the United Nations through its illegal
annexation of Crimea.

