Mrs. Bakoyannis (Greece): Allow me to begin,
Mr. President, by welcoming your initiative to hold an
open debate on the situation in Haiti at this critical
juncture, near the end of the transitional period and at
the dawn of new, and hopefully better, times. Your
presence here underlines the importance that the
international community attaches to efforts to stabilize
the country and to help the Haitian people in their
quest for peace and development.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
welcome to our deliberations His Excellency Mr. Rene
Garcia Preval, President-elect of Haiti, and to
congratulate him on his election. In addition, I
welcome my colleagues the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs who are present at this debate. For my part, I
feel privileged to participate in this morning's
deliberations, since the relations between my country
and Haiti go back a long way, Haiti being the first
country to recognize Greece after it gained its
independence.

Greece fully associates itself with the statement
to be made later by the representative of Austria on
behalf of the European Union.

After two long years, Haiti's transitional period is
coming to an end. Democracy has prevailed once more.
The Haitian people will soon have a new President, a
new Prime Minister, a new Government, a new
legislature and new municipal and local authorities.
But above all, Haitians will have new hope for their
future - a future that is theirs to build.

The road that lies ahead is full of challenges.
First, it is imperative that the second round of
legislative elections, as well as the municipal and local
elections, be conducted smoothly and take place on
time. The next few weeks are extremely crucial, and
neither the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH) nor the Haitian national authorities
should relax their vigilance. The transition of power at
all levels, the swearing-in of the new President and the
formation of a new Government must move ahead
swiftly and unhindered. We urge all parties to remain
engaged in the political process and to respect the
outcome of the elections.

Haiti's newly elected authorities will have the
opportunity to focus their attention on the most
immediate and important challenge facing the country:
the creation of institutions that uphold the rule of law
and protect human rights. Most notable, in this field,
would be the reform of the Haitian national police and
of the judicial system. As a new Haiti is gradually
emerging, we must leave behind us the mentality and
practices of the years of transition. From now on, the
Haitian national police must not resort to extreme
methods and must fully comply with internationally
recognized standards of respect for human rights and
due process. Impunity is an important issue that must
also be addressed.

National dialogue and political reconciliation
must continue to be promoted. While it is true that new
institutions are in the making, remnants of the old ways
continue to abound. To that end, the disarmament of
the armed bands that roam the country must definitely
be completed. A secure and stable environment will be
conducive to fostering economic development and to
getting children off the streets and back to school.

As we have all stated on numerous occasions, the
Haitian people are the owners of their own future.
However, Haiti cannot go it alone and will need
considerable help from the international community to
implement projects for economic development. We
therefore call upon donors to do everything they can to
help Haiti at this critical moment and to ensure not
only a steady influx of financial aid, but also timely
disbursements.

The Haitian Government must, through the
Interim Cooperation Framework, reassess assistance
priorities and implement projects for long-term
economic development that will sustain Haitians' faith
in their new Government. The European Union,
international financial institutions and other
stakeholders must ensure that economic development is
channelled to viable projects that will help create jobs
and provide basic social services. Greece, for its part,
will continue bilateral support in addition to the aid
that we already channel through the European Union.
Furthermore, on a bilateral basis, I have the pleasure to
pledge today an amount of €100,000 in addition to the
€100,000 that we contributed last year.

At this point, I would be remiss if I did not
express my sincere congratulations to the Secretary-
General's Special Representative, Ambassador Juan
Gabriel Valdes, on a job well done. I would also like to
express my Government's deep appreciation to all
those countries that contribute troops and police to
MINUSTAH. We utterly condemn all attacks on
MINUSTAH and on other international personnel,
especially those with humanitarian tasks.

The Security Council will soon consider the
mandate and future role of MINUSTAH. For the time
being, it suffices to assure the Haitian people that we
remain committed to Haiti over the long term.

