Mr. Menkerios: As highlighted by Under-
Secretary-General Le Roy, the prospects for peace
3
consolidation between northern Sudan and southern
Sudan, soon to be two separate countries, will remain
contingent upon the quality of relationship they
establish between them, and such a relationship will
largely be shaped by the agreements they reach on
residual Comprehensive Peace Agreement issues and
post-referendum arrangements.

I therefore cannot stress enough the critical
nature of the ongoing negotiations on these issues and
the responsibility that rests on the leaders of the two
sides to reach agreements that will provide the
foundation for peace and security in the Sudan, South
Sudan and the region as a whole. It is essential that the
leaders of both sides demonstrate the political will
necessary to find solutions to these issues and agree on
mechanisms for their implementation, with particular
focus on a border management mechanism and on a
lasting solution for Abyei. There is no time to lose.

So far, although some progress has been made in
the negotiations regarding some of these issues,
lingering disagreements on others - and in fact the
worsening of the situation in Abyei, for instance -
threaten a further deterioration of relations that could
hamper the establishment of two viable States at peace
within and between them. That would also negatively
affect the entire region, thus constituting a continuing
threat to international peace and security which the
international community has invested so much so far to
avoid.

I would like to express here, however, that with
the concerted efforts of the international community
and the countries of the region to urge, encourage and
assist the two parties to do what is right for their
future, it will be possible for them to avoid an
acrimonious divorce with lasting consequences.

As Mr. Le Roy's statement fully covered the
realities as they are, I do not have much to add here,
but I stand ready to answer any questions in this
regard, here or in the closed consultations of the
Council.

