Mr. Martins (Angola): This is the last opportunity
forusto speakinthis ChamberonthequestionofPalestine
and the Middle East peace process. As a non-permanent
member of the Security Council, I would like to take
this opportunity to thank the Secretary-General and
commend him for his consistent engagement with the
peace process, and in particular for his work in favour
of the two-State solution. I would also like to express
appreciation the positive engagement of New Zealand,
and especially the presence in the Council this morning
of Foreign Minister Murray McCulley.

Over the past two years, a great amount of
information was provided from United Nations sources,
humanitarian agencies, civil society and warnings
made by the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy
with regard to the unsustainable status quo on the
Israeli-Palestinian issue and the mounting threats to the
two-State solution. However, despite the overwhelming
evidence, the Council has been unable to effectively
address the situation.

The matter of the fact is that Israel, with its
relatively great military power, has pursued the
colonization of territories against the will of their
populations for almost half a century. Palestinians
living under harsh occupation and brutal blockade
face systematic discrimination and violations of their
basic human rights. We in the Security Council cannot
continue defending equal treatment of both sides
and shared responsibility for the lack of progress in
the two-State solution. We wonder how it is possible
to apply the same level of legal, political and moral
obligations and responsibilities to the Palestinians,
who are dispossessed of their homelands, deprived
of natural resources and economic development and
restricted in their movement. Such treatment is one
of the main root causes that creates, fuels and breeds
anger, frustration and despair, giving rise to acts of
violence and extremism.

In that context, we commend the drive in recent
months by the international community to mobilize
in order to salvage the process and prospects for
the two-State solution. Israeli policies of continued
settlement expansion is a real threat to the two-State
solution. All members of the Council reiterated that
point this morning. The Government's latest move to
adopt a legalization bill aimed at sanctioning the illegal
settlements and outposts built on private Palestinian
property in the West Bank is a step further towards
annexation and a demonstration of our collective
failure to bring about dialogue between Israelis
and Palestinians. The Council is called upon to act
decisively and in unity if we are to defuse another
explosive ingredient in an already volatile region.

Angola therefore welcomes initiatives by a number
of Council members to unblock the situation, especially
the French conference that is due to take place, seeking
to restart negotiations, since it is our collective
responsibility to act, and urges the Council to uphold its
responsibilities in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations. We furthermore welcome efforts by the
League of Arab States and look forward to the outcome
of the ministerial meeting, which we hope will provide
a workable road map on the way forward. As important
as it is to get the parties back to the negotiating table,
however, we must insist that the Israeli Government
halt and reverse the illegal settlement activity and put
an end to the blockade of Gaza, which has been the
cause of a dire humanitarian situation so far and for
too long.

During the past two years, we have tried to actively
participate in all initiatives to revive the Middle East
peace process. In Security Council debates, in private
consultations, in several Arria Formula meetings, we
have tried to contribute to finding a solution for this
long-standing conflict. The international community
and the United Nations membership agree that the
Council has enough tools at its disposal to address the
issue of the settlements, since they are illegal under
international law and constitute the most concrete
threat to the two-State solution.

As we come to the end of our two-year participation
as a non-permanent member, let me reiterate the hope
that the Council will look at the two-State solution not
as a mere slogan, but as a workable, effective road map
towards peace in this very volatile region.

