Mr. Dauth (Australia): Thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this timely and important meeting on an
issue of deep interest to Member States. Let me add my
congratulations to you personally on the professional
way in which you have led a difficult debate,
particularly so early in your tenure of office in New
York.

Like the Secretary-General, the Australian
Government was deeply alarmed by the escalation in
violence last week between the Israelis and the
Palestinians, and the resulting heavy death toll. At the
highest levels in our Government, we have repeatedly
called for an immediate end to the violence and an
early and effective resumption of negotiations. The
importance of calls like ours does not diminish. There
is no military solution to the situation between the
Israelis and the Palestinians and there is no real
alternative to a negotiated settlement. Australia
condemns all acts of terrorism. Aimed at innocent
civilians, terrorism is morally reprehensible,
undermines peace and is tragically futile. It will never
solve the differences between Israelis and Palestinians.

Australia has consistently expressed its support
for efforts to build peace in the region. As we stated as
recently as November last year in our statement in the
general debate to the General Assembly, we remain
committed to a negotiated settlement based on Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and the
principle of land for peace. We remain - and we will
say this as often as we need to and for as long as
necessary - strongly committed to the territorial
integrity of Israel and the right of the people of Israel
to live in peace within secure and recognized
boundaries, free from threats or acts of force, as
affirmed in resolution 242 (1967). We are, of course,
equally committed to the application of this principle
to all States in the region.

Australia has consistently recognized the proper
right of the Palestinian people to self-determination.
We expect that a comprehensive, just and durable
resolution of the region's conflict necessarily will meet
the legitimate aspiration of the Palestinians to a
homeland of their own, in accordance with the
principles of resolution 242 (1967).

While a cessation of the violence is paramount,
the international community should not lose sight of
the importance of other issues identified by the
Secretary-General. We recognize the heavy burden that
the closures and movement restrictions have placed on
the Palestinian people. An alleviation of these
circumstances is essential to assisting peace and
economic prosperity in the region.

The international community can give political
support to rebuilding confidence, but it is at least
equally important that it remain committed to a long-
term process of economic assistance. It is vital that the
people most affected by violence see the benefits that
would come from an end to violence and a return to
economic development and the prospect of a better life.

Australia has a long-standing programme to
provide development assistance, in coordination with
other donor countries, to support the social and
economic advancement of the Palestinian people in the
West Bank and Gaza in areas where we have expertise,
such as agriculture, health and education, as well as
assistance to build the Palestinian Authority's legal,
agricultural and vocational training capacity. This
assistance is designed to deliver tangible benefits to
those most in need.

Australia has consistently supported international
efforts to achieve peace and security and we will
continue to do so. In this respect, let me add that, like
others, we are encouraged by the reports of new
thinking attributed to Crown Prince Abdullah of Saudi
Arabia. However, violence must be halted and lead to a
durable ceasefire in order to rebuild the confidence
necessary for a return to negotiations. International
efforts must be directed at assisting building the
confidence of both sides.

The present situation is difficult, but we do have a
viable set of principles to guide the parties back to the
path of a negotiated peace. The recommendations of
the Mitchell report and of the Tenet plan are the vital
and necessary steps to end the current violence. The
Australian Government urges the unconditional
resumption of security cooperation between Israel and
the Palestinian Authority and urges both sides to exert
full and complete efforts to implement all the
recommendations of the Mitchell report.

