Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the unanimous renewal of the mandate of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)
for one year through resolution 2470 (2019). I would
like to assure Special Representative Jeanine Hennis-
Plasschaert our full support and thank her for her very
informative briefing.

I would like to focus on three points: first, the
importance of building on the progress made by Iraq
in recent months; secondly, the many challenges
the country continues to face, which should not be
underestimated; and, lastly, the importance of the
ongoing and united support of international community.

Iraq has now entered a new phase of stabilization,
which the Council must encourage in order to enable it
to build on those gains. I would like to commend the
progress made by Iraqi authorities more than a year
after the announcement of the military victory against
Da'esh. The elections have deepened the democratic
process and ushered a new Government into power.
That Government has developed an ambitious work
programme to meet the needs of the Iraqi population,
in particular as it pertains to public services and the
fight against corruption. The Government is also
focused on improving Baghdad's relations with the
Kurdistan Regional Government. We again call for
the continuation of dialogue within the framework of
a united, federal and democratic Iraq. That positive
momentum must be maintained. That is why we hope
that an agreement can be quickly reached regarding the
ministerial portfolios that remain vacant. Finalizing
the Government is essential if it is to be able to fully
meet the high expectations of its population in the post-
Da'esh period. In view of the many challenges faced by
Iraq, we believe that three priorities are essential.

The first priority is the fight against the terrorist
threat, as the battle is not yet over despite the end of
the so-called Da'esh caliphate. The continuing terrorist
threat in Iraq and on the Syrian border should encourage
us to be extremely vigilant.

The second priority is the humanitarian response,
stabilization and reconstruction of the country,
in particular in the areas regained from Da'esh.
Stabilization and reconciliation efforts are essential to
ensuring a lasting victory against the terrorist group
and to promoting reconciliation among the various
components of the Iraqi population. I welcome the fact
that that point is underscored in resolution 2470 (2019),
which we just adopted, in particular at the request of the
Iraqi authorities. Special attention should be paid to the

plight of children - an issue on which an action plan
between the United Nations and the Iraqi Government
is being finalized. Equal importance must also be given
to the meaningful participation at all levels of women
and persons belonging to minority groups. The return
of internally displaced persons, the continuation of the
socioeconomic reforms announced by the Government
and the fight against impunity, as well as holding the
perpetrators of sexual violence to account, are also
important areas on which progress is needed in order to
promote reconciliation.

Lastly, the third priority concerns the regional
agenda, which is essential to Iraq's stability. Recent
developments in the region are of particular concern.
France will continue to monitor developments closely
and call for de-escalation. We hope that a regional
dialogue will be established to address all of the many
legitimate concerns in a peaceful manner. In that
regard, I, too, welcome the balanced regional diplomacy
by Iraqi authorities and their renewed commitment
to dialogue.

To meet those challenges, the mobilization of the
international community in support of Iraq is more
necessary than ever. UNAMI's work in support of the
Iraqi authorities at this critical juncture is essential.
The Special Representative has our full support in
the implementation of the three priorities set. We also
support her ongoing work on the people and property
reporting missing.

France will continue to give its full support to the
Iraqi authorities, as President Macron reminded Prime
Minister Adil Abd Al-Mahdi in Paris at the beginning
of the month. France will continue its support in the
area of security to combat the common threat posed
by Da'esh. We will also continue to provide support
in areas related to humanitarian, stabilization and
reconstruction efforts, as shown by our commitment to
the rehabilitation of Mosul. We will continue to support
not only the reconstruction of Iraq - the purpose of the
€l billion reconstruction loan announced by the Minister
for Foreign Affairs in February in Baghdad - but also
the strengthening of its State institutions. We also call
on the Iraqi authorities and all our partners to fully
implement the commitments they made at the Kuwait
International Conference for the Reconstruction of
Iraq, held in February 2018.

Lastly, in keeping with a principle that can be found
in all of our support activities, France will continue to
work towards the inclusive and lasting reconciliation
of all Iraqis. As such, we will be organizing another
conference in the fall as a follow-up to the Paris Action
Plan on the Victims of Ethnic and Religious Violence in
the Middle East, which was launched in 2015.

