Mr. Favre (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I would like to thank the Vietnamese presidency for organizing this open debate. As 2020 begins, it is very important for all ofus States Members of the United Nations to uphold the Charter of the United Nations, which is celebrating its seventy-fifth anniversary. Despite its age, it remains wholly relevant. Its role has not diminished, rather quite the contrary. The number of crises and conflicts in the world is of great concern. It is estimated that 168 million people will need humanitarian assistance this year. The world needs our action. While the Charter is neither a magic wand nor a panacea, it remains a powerful tool for conflict prevention and peacekeeping, provided that Member States implement it in its entirety. Peace and security are also dependent on development and respect for human rights. It would be wrong to disregard them for security reasons. For the security and prosperity of small and medium-sized States, including Switzerland and the vast majority of Member States, an effective rules- based multilateral system remains essential. Respect for international law, including the prohibition of the use of force and the peaceful settlement of disputes, is of vital importance to prevent escalations. The similarities between the Charter and Switzerland's Federal Constitution are striking. Both promote shared prosperity, sustainable development and respect for human rights. Switzerland is a young State Member of the United Nations, fully engaged in the search for and implementation of multilateral solutions. Today more than ever, young people inspire us to assume our responsibility to resolve crises peacefully and to protect natural resources for future generations. But what kind of United Nations will young people need? We welcome the Secretary-General's reflections on that question. It is crucial that all segments of society express their views and it is our duty to listen to them. In Geneva and elsewhere in Switzerland, activities will take place this year to raise awareness about the Charter, anchor it more firmly in people's daily lives and remind us of the Charter's political relevance in the twenty-first century. The Charter also provides the basis for action by the Security Council, including its obligations to the General Assembly, in particular the duty to ensure adequate interaction between the Security Council and the General Assembly under Article 24 of the Charter. That is a fact often recalled by the interregional Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group, coordinated by Switzerland, which promotes accountability, coherence and _ transparency in the Council. What unites us is more important than what divides us. The Charter remains the common denominator - our starting point for strengthening multilateralism in the spirit of inclusion and dialogue. At a time when the Secretary-General stresses that geopolitical tensions are at their highest level, Switzerland supports his call for resuming dialogue and renewing international cooperation. The seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations and its Charter is an opportunity to recall that multilateral bodies and international law, including human rights law and international humanitarian law, are essential to ensuring international peace and security. It is more crucial than ever for the Security Council to fully assume the responsibilities bestowed upon it by the Charter.
