Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I am
grateful, Sir, for your presence here among us, and I
congratulate your delegation on having chosen this
important subject.

The Charter of the United Nations gives the
Security Council a mandate concerning the pacific
settlement of disputes and mentions a number of
mechanisms that we must utilize to that end. In
addition, at the Millennium Summit, held in 2000, the
heads of State of States Members of the United Nations
committed themselves to enhancing the Organization's
effectiveness in the maintenance of international peace
and security. I shall mention five elements that, in our
view, will enable us to improve the Council's
effectiveness in that regard.

The first is the need for political will. The 1992
document "An Agenda for Peace" (S/24111) rightly
pointed out that the Organization's possible failures
with regard to the settlement of disputes have been
caused largely by an absence of political will on the
part of States and not because United Nations measures
were insufficient or inadequate. That 1992 affirmation
retains its full validity.

The second element is the interaction among the
various organs of the system. Although the Security
Council, through a 2001 presidential statement
(S/PRST/2001/5), affirmed its readiness to consider
ways to improve its cooperation with other organs of
the system - in particular the General Assembly and
the Economic and Social Council - at times there is
not enough synergy between the Council and other
organs, and when such cooperation exists, it often
comes too late.

Thirdly, as Judge Elaraby mentioned, there is a
need for adequate analysis of information. In order to
have an effective conflict prevention policy, we
need - in addition to enhancing the Council's
authority, established in Article 34 of the Charter-
adequate analysis of information originating from other
sources.

The fourth element is cooperation with regional
organizations and arrangements. In both Chapter VII
and Article 33 of the Charter, it is established that
Member States must utilize existing regional
organizations, among other means of peaceful
settlement. The Security Council must therefore
promote measures undertaken at the very important
regional level.

The fifth aspect is the need to coordinate
peacemaking initiatives. The Secretary-General, in a
1998 report on the causes of conflict and the promotion
of durable peace and sustainable development in Africa
(S/1998/318), made a universally applicable statement
when he pointed out that peacemaking efforts need to
be well coordinated and well prepared. We must avoid
situations in which international actors undertake rival
or competing efforts, which would do nothing except
make finding a solution even more difficult.

From all of the foregoing, we may draw a series
of conclusions about the improvements needed in the
Security Council's work. It is not possible to speak of
the pacific settlement of disputes without attaching
equal importance to measures of preventive diplomacy.
The Council must do more to prevent conflict. It does
not do so because of, among other things, the power
relationship within it, which sometimes prevents the
consensus needed to deal with an issue. In addition,
sometimes there is excessive caution, and problems are
allowed to develop in the belief that the conflicts will
solve themselves, which is not the case. We also need
more synergy between the work of the Council and that
of other regional and subregional organizations and
bodies.

In conclusion, as ways to improve, I should like
to emphasize that the Security Council must make
greater use of its prerogative under Article 34 of the
Charter and to investigate any dispute, or any situation
which might lead to international friction. It must make
more use of Council missions in conflict zones, which
enable it to obtain information first-hand while
exerting pressure on the parties. In order to have an
effective conflict prevention policy, we also need to
analyse information originating from other sources,
such as the media or civil society. Finally, as our
Mexican colleague just pointed out, the Council should
consider - as established in Article 36 of the
Charter - initiatives employed by the parties to settle
a conflict.

