Mr. Shobokshi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, I would like to extend to you, Mr.
President, my sincere congratulations for assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. We
are fully confident that your capabilities and wisdom
will guide the work of the Council to our desired
objectives. I would like to extend my thanks and
gratitude to your predecessor, my friend the
Ambassador of Bulgaria, for directing the work of the
Council last month. I would also like to extend thanks
to my friend, the representative of South Africa, for
requesting the convening of this meeting to hear the
views of States and their positions vis-a-vis the issue.

Bringing peace, security and stability to the world
requires a more active role for the United Nations, as
well as an intensification of diplomatic efforts and
political endeavours. Undoubtedly, such diplomatic
means, as well as a full and in-depth analysis of the
different aspects of the problem, its impact and results
on the regional and international levels, are the best
means of maintaining international peace and security,
instead of resorting to the use of force.

The present phase of the situation in the Arabian
Gulf region is very sensitive and fraught with a myriad
of risks. The matter requires rationality and
farsightedness in order to avoid the outbreak of another
war that would have unforeseen and unpleasant results
leading to instability in the region, and may have an
adverse impact on the peace and stability of the entire
world. Also, conducting such a war may lead to the
rekindling of hatred, hostility, spite, vengeance and
violence, as well as to humanitarian catastrophes that
the world could very well do without.

Iraq's acceptance of the return of United Nations
inspectors, as well as its assurances of facilitating
United Nations inspectors mission and its pledge not to
impede their work, should lead to accelerating the
return of the inspectors to complete their task. The
inspectors would be expected to submit a report stating
that Iraq is free from weapons of mass destruction and
that Iraq is implementing all relevant Security Council
resolutions, including the release of Kuwaiti and third
country prisoners of war and the return of Kuwaiti
property. This would undoubtedly lead to the lifting of
the economic sanctions that have been imposed on Iraq
and that are hurting the brotherly Iraqi people. This
would also help to preserve the unity, security and
territorial integrity of Iraq.

In addition to the United Nations insistence that
Iraq implement all resolutions of international legality,
we cannot ignore the contempt that the Israeli
Government has shown for such resolutions. The
United Nations is not very satisfied with Israel's
implementation of the many resolutions adopted by the
Security Council and the General Assembly.

There is no doubt that the United Nations lack of
resolve to ensure the implementation of these
resolutions of international legality and the
international community's disregard of Israel's refusal
to implement them are among the main reasons for the
ongoing tragedy and instability in the Middle East. The
statement of one minister of the Israeli Government
that all Security Council resolutions should be filed in
the dustbin brings home for us the fact that Israel is not
committed to honouring resolutions of international
legality. According to Israel, such resolutions are not to
be implemented and have no inherent procedure for
implementation. Israel has flouted all resolutions
adopted since 1948 and heeds only those warnings
made by powerful and influential countries. This in
itself is a challenge to international legality and
disregard for the peace and security of the region.

Double standards and Israel's lack of commitment
to the implementation of the resolutions of
international legality diminish the Council's credibility.
Indeed, they encourage other countries to flout and
disrespect this legality. It cannot be claimed that
resolutions not issued under Chapter VII are non-
binding; if they are, of what value are they? Security
Council resolutions, under whatever chapter they may
be adopted, are binding on the international
community, particularly since they address issues of
international peace and security. They are especially
binding on the permanent members of the Security
Council, because those countries have participated in
drafting and adopting them.

That commitment and the obligation to
implement these resolutions have a bearing on the
credibility of those States. It is assumed that the
Security Council will take practical steps to ensure the
implementation of its resolutions when the party
concerned refuses to do so, as has occurred in many
other parts of the world, including with respect to the
Iraqi situation today.

