Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): With your permission, we would like, at this
time, to give a more detailed response to the statement
made by the representative of Ukraine, all the more so
since, with respect to that country, there is a great deal
to say on the matter of extremism. However, contrary
to what our Ukrainian colleagues believe, the issue
actually is not where they say it is.

Last year, units of fighters, with the participation of
representatives of radicalized youth, were intentionally
used to carry out a violent coup d'etat against the legally
elected Government in Ukraine. Ever since then, the
authorities in Kyiv have insisted on turning a blind eye
to the rise of extremism, intolerance and nationalism
in the country. It is difficult to imagine a more horrific
confirmation of that fact than the unpunished seizure
of dozens of people as hostages in Odessa in May
last year. Moreover, it seems that the Kyiv authorities
are intentionally creating an atmosphere of hate and
xenophobia in the country, which has, of course, had
an enormous effect on young people. One need only
consider, for example, at the voluntary battalions
fighting in the Donbas, with their odious inclination to
Nazi ideology, made up mostly ofpreviously radicalized
youth.

What is the meaning of the law adopted by the
Rada or Parliament on the status of fighters for the
independence of Ukraine in the twentieth century?
Those who fought on the side of the fascists in the
Second World War, among them members of the
Ukrainian nationalist movement and the Ukrainian
rebel army, have been declared national heroes. Tens of
thousands of peaceful people were killed by that army
during one of the most horrific examples of ethnic
cleansing in the history of Ukraine. In 1941, the so-
called heroes of Ukrainian history adopted a document
declaring that the newly formed Ukrainian State would
closely cooperate with the great National Socialist
Germany, which, under the leadership of Adolf Hitler,
would create a new order in Europe and the world. Such
are the views circulating in Ukraine today.

Those who do not agree with the Kyiv Government's
position are called enemies of Ukraine, and the media
cover up alternative points of views. There has been a
wave of killings of opposition journalists and political
actors. Recently, the former deputy of the Regional
Party, Oleg Kalashnikov, and the Ukrainian journalist
Oles Buzyna were both killed. Threats have also been
made against other dissidents. There is a peace-making
website with a list of individuals - with some personal
information - who disagree with the wild outbursts
of xenophobia in the country. Kyiv has been officially
spreading such propaganda, as has been demonstrated
by the statements of the advisor to the Minister for
Internal Affairs, Mr. Gerashchenko.

Extremism in Ukraine is spreading in a climate of
impunity. There have still not been proper investigations
into the tragedies that took place in the Maidan, Odessa
and Mariupol. The report of the International Advisory
Panel of the Council of Europe on its investigation into
the events in the Maidan described them as not in line
with the European Convention for the Protection of
Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.

In the light of the new approach to history, as can be
seen in school textbooks, young Ukrainians can hardly
avoid xenophobic or nationalistic Views. It has become
a regular practice to spread hate speech, as evidenced
by the campaign mounted by student activists at Lviv
University on 25 February in setting up the so-called
corridor of shame denouncing dissident professors.
We might also recall the video clips that appeared on
the Internet last year that showed a large crowd of
Ukrainian students chanting in the school courtyard
for reprisals against Russians. The list of evidence of
intolerance, radicalism and extremism in Ukraine goes
on and on. However, considering the late hour, I would
like to conclude with an appeal to the representative
of Ukraine to seriously deal with resolving the issue
of extremism and radicalism in that country. Members
of the Security Council should also try to objectively
understand the situation in Ukraine.

