The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Italy.

I would first of all like to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Zahir Tanin
for his briefing and Minister Daeie and Ambassador
Citaku for their constructive statements.

Italy is bound by long-standing ties of friendship
with Kosovo and Serbia and is also a long-standing
supporter of the path that the Western Balkan countries
have chosen towards the European Union. European
integration is the key to the long-lasting peace and
development of the entire region. Italy will continue to
promote regional integration, building on the outcomes
of the Western Balkans Summit held in Trieste in July
under our presidency of the Berlin process.

The normalization of relations between Belgrade
and Pristina remains crucial. We commend Belgrade
and Pristina for resuming the dialogue facilitated by the
European Union at the presidential level and welcome
their resolve to open a new phase of that dialogue. We
call on both parties to take advantage of that window
of opportunity to move steadily towards normalizing
their relations. We also welcome the decision of the
President of Serbia to open an internal dialogue with
the aim of defining an overall, comprehensive and
widely shared policy on Kosovo by involving all
potential stakeholders. We welcome the formation of a
new Government in Pristina and look forward to the
free and fair conduct of the run-off municipal elections
on 19 November.

We call on the new Government to intensify
its efforts to move forward with the reforms that the
country so greatly needs. The most urgent measures
to be taken include the ratification of the agreement
on border demarcation with Montenegro and the
implementation of the association/community of Serb-
majority municipalities. The rule of law, justice and
the fight against corruption should also remain high
on the Government's agenda. We also underscore the
importance for all parties to ensure full cooperation
with the Specialist Chambers. We commend and support
the work of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo and of the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo and we affirm our contribution
to the Kosovo Force.

Being aware of the many challenges that are still to
be tackled, while taking into account the progress made
in recent years, Italy will continue to assist Kosovo. In

thatperspective, we stand ready to discuss a way forward
for the United Nations presence in the country, which
should be adjusted to the current needs in coordination
with the other international actors involved and in line
with the wider review of peacekeeping operations.
We therefore look forward to the Secretary-General's
recommendations in that regard. We are also open
to extending this reporting period in line with the
evolution of the situation on the ground.

In conclusion, I call on both parties to refrain from
rhetoric rooted in the past and to focus their energy and

attention on the future of the relationship. Both at the
international and bilateral levels and as a member of
the European Union, Italy will continue to do its part to
facilitate dialogue and to build mutual trust.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.

The meeting rose at 1.20pm.
