I thank you, Prime Minister Gonsalves, and your team for organizing this high-level discussion today. We welcome Saint Vincent and the Grenadines' first Security Council presidency and we are so excited to work with you and your team here in New York. I would also like to thank our briefers today - Ms. Amina Mohammed, Mr. Ibrahim Mayaki, Sir Hilary Beckles and Mr. Munir Akram - for the work that they and their teams have done to make our world a safer place. Sadly, we are living in a world where violent conflict is now increasingly common after years of decline. We know that violence begets more violence. It distorts social norms, undermines institutions and destroys countries and lives. Fragile States are particularly susceptible to destabilizing violence and armed conflict, and it is everyday citizens who pay the price. We know that conflict and violence are often exacerbated by environmental factors. The exploitation of minerals, including precious metals and gemstones, timber and wildlife often finance conflict, and the associated environmental degradation and social upheaval can undermine prospects for peace. In Venezuela, for example, the illegitimate Maduro regime is complicit in, and profits from, the illegal gold mining that is devastating the environment and indigenous populations across the southern part of the country. Armed criminal groups, including some from Colombia designated as terrorists, are stripping the land of its resources in an attempt to propagate the conflict and exacerbate the deprivation faced by the Venezuelan people. Fragile States are also susceptible to destabilizing threats because of the interference of external malign actors. We have expressed increasing concern about some States using their influence in fragile States, gained by sovereign loans and debt obligations, to promote undemocratic governance practices. The resulting corruption, diminished respect for the rule of law and authoritarianism further raise the risk of violent conflict and instability in those countries over the long term. One of the greatest offenders is Iran, the world's leading state sponsor of terror. Iran has used its malign influence to propagate violence throughout the Middle East. Through its own direct military role and that of its proxy, the terrorist organization Hizbullah, in supporting the murderous Al-Assad regime, it has played a central role in creating the refugee crisis. It has also played a central role in the humanitarian tragedy and extended conflict in Yemen, due to its arms transfers to the Houthis, and in unrest in Iraq, thanks to its support of Shia militias. It exports arms to its partners, proxies and terrorist organizations that destabilize the region, in contravention of United Nations arms embargoes. Iran is deepening, widening and extending those conflicts. We must not allow this to continue. The Trump Administration remains committed to thwarting the attempts of malign actors like the regime in Iran, which crushes dissent in its own country while creating instability in others. Our sanctions programmes are designed to constrain the ability of bad actors, like Iran, to take advantage of our financial system or threaten the United States, our allies and partners and civilians. Despite the false accusations from some members of the Council, our sanctions do not target humanitarian-related assistance or activity. Rather, we often exclude this type of activity, and in many circumstances proactively, from our sanctions programmes. The United States Government also utilizes targeted foreign assistance as a tool to thwart the drivers of conflict. Roughly 50 per cent of all United States foreign assistance today goes to fragile states, including 70 per cent of the United States Agency for International Development's assistance. In the past five years, the United States has spent approximately $30 billion in foreign assistance in the 15 most fragile countries as indicated by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. The United States also continues to lead the world's contributions to United Nations peacekeeping operations, contributing 25 per cent of the United Nations peacekeeping budget - a key tool in advancing international peace and security and addressing the root causes of conflict. President Trump reaffirmed the United States' commitment to conflict prevention and addressing vulnerability when he signed the Global Fragility Act of 2019. Among other things, that important United States legislation places local solutions, ownership and accountability at the heart of the United States' approach to building resilience. We know that countries with higher rates of gender inequality are more vulnerable to conflict. The United States prioritizes the meaningful participation of women in efforts to prevent and resolve conflict while promoting the safety of women and girls in conflict and crisis. Our global leadership and commitment to this issue was demonstrated when President Trump signed the United States Women, Peace, and Security Act of 2017, followed by the Administration's release of our bold and innovative United States Strategy on Women, Peace, and Security in June 2019. The United States remains actively engaged in diplomatic efforts to resolve conflict worldwide. Just a few weeks ago, President Trump hosted a historic signing ceremony where Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu and the Foreign Ministers of the United Arab Emirates and Bahrain signed the Abraham accords declaration and formally agreed to normalization with Israel - the first such agreements between Israel and Arab countries since 1994. On 23 October, the Sudan, which has renounced terrorism, followed suit, taking the historic step to agree to normalize relations with Israel and begin economic and trade relations. The Abraham accords provide a foundation for further advances toward regional peace. Those leaders are boldly choosing a future of mutual understanding, coexistence and prosperity for their people - they are endorsing a culture of peace. As one of the co-chairs of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe Minsk Group addressing the conflict in Nagorno Karabakh, the United States is working with the parties to the conflict towards the cessation of hostilities and an urgent resumption of dialogue without preconditions in order to reach a political settlement through a negotiated solution. In Syria, the political process outlined in resolution 2254 (2015) remains the only legitimate way to address the brutality of the Al-Assad regime that started the conflict a decade ago. The United States remains fully committed to the implementation of resolution 2254 (2015) to secure a future of peace and prosperity for the Syrian people. The United States is committed to conflict prevention and mitigation and we will continue to use all available diplomatic and economic tools to address the drivers of conflict that make fragile States susceptible to destabilizing violence and armed conflict. We hope that all United Nations Member States will join us in making our world safer and more peaceful. Our job, the job belonging to all of us at the United Nations for the past 75 years, has been "to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war". Let us double our efforts to make that vision come true.
