Mr. Berger (Germany): At the outset, I would like
to thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report. I would also like to welcome the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Jan
Kubis, and extend my thanks to him for his briefing
and his and his team's dedicated work in support of the
Afghan people.

My Government aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier in this debate by the observer of the
European Union.

Afghanistan has come a long way in its security,
political and economic transitions, and progress has
been achieved in many respects.

In 2011 and 2012, the Government of Afghanistan
and the international community set the framework
for continued close cooperation throughout the
Transformation Decade at conferences held in Istanbul,
Bonn, Kabul and Tokyo as well as at the Chicago
summit.

Those conferences sent a clear message of the
continued support of the international community to
Afghanistan and its people.

This year is set to provide important steps by
Afghanistan in implementing the decisions taken at
these conferences. Germany will continue to support
Afghanistan in its efforts to do so.

My Government welcomes the progress made
in the transition of security responsibility. President
Karzai announced the fifth and final tranche of security
transition earlier this week. With that milestone event,
the Afghan National Security Forces have resumed lead
security responsibility throughout the country. The
security forces continue to face serious challenges, as
the latest series of attacks on Afghan and international
institutions demonstrates. However, Germany is
confident that, with evolving but persistent international
support, the Afghan security forces will continue to
prove capable of responding to those challenges.

At the Bonn and Tokyo Conferences, the
Government of Afghanistan and the international
community reaffirmed their partnership and agreed
on mutual commitments constituting the foundation
on which their long-term partnership rests. My
Government is convinced that the comprehensive and
timely implementation of the commitments contained
in the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework is of
paramount importance in achieving Afghanistan's
goal of developing into a democratic and economically
thriving country.

In that regard, we acknowledge the progress made
by the Government of Afghanistan in preparing for
the presidential and provincial council elections to be
held on 5 April 2014, but further progress is a pressing
requirement. Germany is particularly concerned with
regard to the pending decisions on the legal framework
for the elections, including the establishment ofa credible
electoral complaints mechanism as well as the pending
appointment of a new chairman to the Independent
Election Commission. Furthermore, effective measures
need to be put in place to prevent widespread electoral
fraud. The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan can further increase its beneficial role in
supporting that Afghan-led and -owned process. Our
shared objective is to hold inclusive, transparent and
credible elections in Afghanistan.

Preserving and consolidating gains in the protection
and promotion of human rights in Afghanistan is of
the utmost importance. We are confident that the
Government of Afghanistan will continue to ensure
the independence of the Afghan Independent Human
Rights Commission according to Afghan law and the
Paris Principles.

Germany looks forward to the senior officials
meeting to be held in Kabul on 3 July with the aim of
reviewing the progress made so far in implementing the
mutual commitments of the Accountability Framework.
Progress on those issues ahead ofthe meeting is strongly
encouraged.

We welcome the opening of the Taliban office in
Doha. That could well be a new beginning, one that will
take years to unfold and will no doubt experience many
setbacks. Yet, we believe that there is no alternative
to that path. All now depends upon the willingness of
all the Afghan interlocutors to engage in substantive
negotiations. As in the past, Germany remains willing
to lend its good offices, if and when needed.

I would like to conclude by underlining that
Germany will continue to support the Government of
Afghanistan through transition and beyond.

