Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I want to begin by
congratulating Bolivia and Ambassador Sacha
Lllorentty Soliz on taking up the role of Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) and for the recent adoption of the programme of
work. We are very pleased to have assumed our role as
Vice-Chair and look forward to working together over
the next year.

Last year the Committee made much progress in
its work under the chairmanship of Spain. I would like
to compliment Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi on his
effective and ambitious leadership of the Committee last
year. Progress included the adoption of resolution 2325
(2016), which represented a significant step forward for
efforts to prevent non-State actors from acquiring and
using weapons of mass destruction. It is important that
we now build upon that momentum.

The threat from non-State actors is real. We are
still facing the risk of the trade in and proliferation of
sensitive technology and materials. At the same time,
we are highly concerned with the continuing use of
weapons of mass destruction in the form of chemical
weapons, including by non-State actors, in places
such as Syria, Iraq and elsewhere. We must do our
part to prevent such disregard for the international
non-proliferation regime by urgently supporting the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and its
successor resolutions.

We should not limit our vigilance to items and
materials. Knowledge and information also represent
important factors in the acquisition of weapons of mass
destruction. For that reason, we are particularly pleased
that this issue, often called "intangible transfers of
technology" (ITT) is reflected in resolution 2325 (2016)
and in the programme of work of the Committee. We
welcome the expert meeting on ITT planned for later
this year. We also commend the work of the Group
of Experts, not least its outreach-related efforts at the
regional and subregional levels, and we encourage
efforts to improve matchmaking and the clarity of
assistance requests.

Finally, Sweden remains strongly committed to
the objective of resolution 1540 (2004) to prevent
the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons and their means of delivery by non-State
actors. In order to pursue that objective, we have
contributed some $60,000 to the 1540 trust fund in
order to facilitate the implementation of our programme
of work.

