Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to express our sincere congratulations to the
Minister for Home Affairs of Malaysia on his country's
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. We also express our congratulations and
thanks to the Permanent Representative of Japan for
his wise conduct of the Council's work last month, and
to Spain in leading the work of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004).

Access to weapons of mass destruction by terrorist
groups is one of the main dangers seriously threatening
international peace and security. No country in the
world can face or avoid such threats alone. Cooperation
and coordination are necessary among all parties in
the international community to face those threats
effectively and combat the production and illegitimate
transfer of nuclear materials and weapons of mass
destruction. Our common responsibility requires
that we establish a legally binding international legal
framework to prevent the dual use of, or access to, such
materials on the part of non-State parties.

We stress the importance of resolution 1540
(2004), which we consider to be the most effective
means available to take international measures to face
the danger of the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and their delivery systems. In that context,
I would like to stress that we have regularly briefed the
Secretariat on the Government of Iraq's implementation
of the provisions of resolution 1540 (2004) through
executive and legislative measures aimed at preventing
access to weapons of mass destruction by terrorist
groups. We again stress our resolute support for all
international efforts aimed at preventing terrorist
groups from accessing weapons of mass destruction
and their means of delivery, as well as trafficking in
such weapons or the materials used in their production,
in implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and other
relevant international resolutions.

Iraq also stresses the importance of promoting
relevant national and international legislation in that
regard. Article 9 (a) of Iraq's Permanent Constitution
stipulates that the Government of Iraq shall fully
implement its international commitments in the area
of nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction.
It also prohibits all means of their development,
manufacture, production or use. Iraq has therefore
subscribed to all international treaties and agreements
in the area of weapons of mass destruction, as well as
conventions, agreements, protocols and international
resolutions against terrorism. We make every effort
and take the necessary steps to prevent any deviation
in the peaceful uses of such materials, thereby
complying with our commitments under the relevant
international instruments.

Iraq urgest all States Members of the United
Nations to fully implement the provisions of resolution
1540 (2004) by adopting robust, effective measures to
prevent the proliferation of nuclear and other weapons
of mass destruction and their delivery systems. In view
of the increasing terrorist threats and the possibility of
the use by terrorist groups of such weapons, we call for
the further enhancement of international and regional
cooperation in this area so as to contain and fully
eliminate the threats by providing the necessary know-
how, technical assistance and capabilities to all States
parties to enable them to detect such weapons and the
materials used in their manufacture.

In conclusion, we emphasize our determination to
continue working at national, regional and international
levels in promoting and strengthening our ability to
prevent the non-proliferation of nuclear and other
weapons of mass destruction.

