Mr. Seek (Senegal) (spoke in French): I have the
honour to brief the members of the Council in my
capacity as Chair ofthe Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South Sudan.
In my briefing, I will present the main findings and
recommendations set out in the final report ofthe Panel
of Experts (S/20l6/70), which was submitted to the
Committee on 14 January, as well as the results of the
Committee members' consideration of its conclusions
and recommendations. I will also briefly the discuss
the deliberations that took place on 12 February on the
report of the Panel of Experts and on the status of the
implementation of sanctions during the Committee's
third official meeting, held with the representatives of
South Sudan and the States of the region.

In its final report, which was conveyed to the
Committee on 24 December and in the presentation of
the report to the Committee on 14 January, the Panel of
Experts provided an overview of the security situation,
the political process and the humanitarian situation,
each of which I will briefly touch upon. The Panel also
described in detail the chain of command and control
within the Government and the opposition, which
underpinned its findings in establishing the command
responsibility for the actions and policies that, in the
Council's View, are grounds for designation.

First, with regard to the current security situation,
the Panel's final report states that, as of mid-December
2015, the Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict,
which was signed in August 2015, had failed to an end
the violence. Both parties were consistently violating
the permanent ceasefire provided for by the peace
Agreement, with particularly high levels of violence in
Unity and Western Equatoria states. In mid-January,
the Panel of Experts observed that, although a lull in
the violence had been noted in some areas, including
Upper Nile, violence between the communal forces and
the Sudan People's Liberation Army had intensified in
Western Equatoria state and flared up in other regions,
particularly in Western Bahr el-Ghazal. According to
the Panel, both parties continued to acquire weapons
and military equipment, even after signing the peace
Agreement and despite the worsening humanitarian
crisis, considerable economic pressures and a
significant decline in Government revenues.

Secondly, with regard to the political process,
the Panel's final report underscores that, as of
mid-December 2015, progress towards the establishment
of the Transitional Government of National Unity had
been minimal. In the Panel's assessment, even the
tentative steps taken by the parties to implement the
peace Agreement of August 2015 had been offset by
a number of adverse factors, including the absence
of a ceasefire, the intensification of intercommunal
violence in some regions, the lack ofverifiable progress
on the demilitarization of Juba, and the Government's
decision to create 28 new states in the country, despite
the request of the Chair of the Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission, former President of Botswana
Festus Mogae, who we have just heard, to refrain from
pursuing the restructuring of the country. Based on
those and other developments, the Panel of Experts
saw no reason to believe that the Government or the
opposition had made a strategic commitment to peace.

Thirdly, with regard to the humanitarian situation,
the Panel stressed that the relentless war carried out by
the parties had created an ever-worsening humanitarian
disaster. More than 2.3 million people - one-fifth ofthe
population - had been displaced since December 2013.

Over 3.9 million people are facing severe food insecurity
and the obstruction of the flow of humanitarian aid
is still widespread and systematic. The operations of
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan, which we
have just heard about from Mr. Soumare, were severely
limited owing to the obstructive measures constantly
taken by the parties, with at least 450 violations of the
status offorces agreement having been committed by the
Government and several dozen similar acts committed
by opposition groups since March 2015. The Panel of
Experts also reported that 43 humanitarian workers had
been killed since the war began in late 2013.

Fourthly, the Panel based its investigations to
determine the command responsibility on the definition
contained in Additional Protocol I to the Geneva
Conventions, to which South Sudan is a party. The
definition states that command responsibility not only
includes the planning and execution of violations, but
also extends to the failure to prevent or punish those
acts when the commander knew or had reason to know
that his subordinates had committed or were likely to
commit those acts.

The Panel indicated that in investigating the acts
that the Council had defined in resolution 2206 (2015)
as grounds for sanctions - such as acts intended to
extend or prolong the conflict, violations of ceasefire
agreements, violations of international humanitarian
law and international human rights law, deliberate
attacks against civilians and against the United Nations
missions and humanitarian personnel - it focused its
attention on those who planned and oversaw major
military operations, namely, those who held strategic
and operational responsibility for the military.

In doing so, the Panel insisted that those who
planned and oversaw major military operations may not
have ordered each and every human rights violation,
but that does not absolve them from their responsibility
under the internationally accepted standard of command
responsibility, and especially since the violations
were systematically and continuously perpetrated,
and no action was taken to investigate them or punish
those responsible. The Panel determined that the
complex, multi-pronged military operations in Unity
state and elsewhere would not have been possible
without careful planning, particularly of logistics,
from headquarters in Juba, and without the approval
of the most senior leadership of the Government. The
Panel also reported that no commanders overseeing the
violation of human rights abuses had been investigated
or punished by the Government. The Panel further
noted that its findings about the nature of the violence
during the war and the responsibility for that violence
perpetrated by both sides was consistent with the
findings of the African Union Commission of Inquiry.

With respect to the Panel's four recommendations,
in its first recommendation the Panel proposed that, in
order to achieve the Council's goal of an inclusive and
sustainable peace in the South Sudan, the Committee
should designate high-level decision-makers
responsible for actions and policies that threaten the
peace, security and stability of the country and who
have the power and influence to change the course of
the war. In that connection, on 12 January the Panel
conveyed to the Committee a confidential annex with
the names of four individuals. During his briefing on
14 January, the Coordinator noted that there was clear
and convincing evidence that the majority of acts of
violence committed in the course of the war had been
carried out under the direction of or with the knowledge
of senior officials at the highest level of Government
and within the opposition.
In its second recommendation, the Panel reiterated
the proposal, set out in its interim report, that the
Council impose a general arms embargo on South
Sudan. The Panel determined that such an arms
embargo was not a punitive measure, but was in fact
essential to the stabilization of the security situation in
the country, and that the lifting of the embargo could
therefore be tied to progress in the implementation of
the peace Agreement in order to provide an incentive
for the parties.

In its third recommendation the Panel suggested
that the Committee call on companies engaged in
business activities in South Sudan, especially in the oil
and natural resource sectors, to adhere to the principles
of the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative and
to abide by the due diligence guidelines established
by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development in order to reinforce the implementation
of the provisions of chapter IV of the August 2015 peace
Agreement, in particular those regarding transparency.
The Panel noted in its response to questions during
the presentation of the report that some actors in the
oil sector in South Sudan were already paying due
attention to these guidelines in other countries.

In its fourth and final recommendation, the Panel
proposed that the Committee invite all humanitarian
actors participating in the Monitoring and Reporting
Mechanism and in the Gender-based Violence
Information Management System in South Sudan
to collaborate with the Panel in order to identify
perpetrators of violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law.

With regard to the Committee's consideration of the
Panel's report of 14 January, the ensuing discussion was
lively. The Panel heard many comments and responded
to many questions, particularly those relating to its four
recommendations. With regard to the Committeee's
consideration of the proposed actions in connection
with the Panel's four recommendations, three of
which were directed to the Committee, no consensus
was reached on the proposed actions regarding the
four recommendations.

As I briefly mentioned in the discussion under
the item "Other matters" during the Committee's
consultations on 14 January, it is my intenation to
visit South Sudan and several States of the region in
the early part of this year. I will inform the members
of the Committee of the details of my planned visit in
due course.
During the 14 January consultations, I also
expressed my intention to convene a formal meeting of
the Committee with the representatives of South Sudan
and the regional States in connection with the Panel's
final report. During the meeting held on 12 February,
the Committee members stressed the importance of
South Sudan and the regional States implementing the
travel ban and assets freeze imposed by the Security
Council against six individuals starting on 1 July 2015.
For their part, the invited delegations provided their
views on the findings and recommendations contained
in the final report.

