Mr. Mukerji (India): We take it as a sign of the
awareness that all is not well in the world of United
Nations peacekeeping when the Russian Federation,
which is a permanent member of the Security Council
and its current President, decides, in our view with
good reason, to hold this open debate on new trends
in United Nations peacekeeping operations. The
debate could not have come at a more opportune time
for reasons that we will enumerate today, especially
when many of the 106 United Nations peacekeepers
who lost their lives in 2013, including those from
India, died amid uncertainties faced by United Nations
peacekeeping operations, including while using force
to protect civilians.

At the outset, we express the hope that other
permanent members of the Security Council will
continue to organize such open debates on United
Nations peacekeeping during their presidencies of the
Council so that Member States that contribute troops
to United Nations peacekeeping operations, such
as India, can see a glimmer of hope for the eventual
implementation of Article 44 of the Charter of the
United Nations. As you are aware, Mr. President,
Article 44 clearly calls on the Security Council to invite
Member States not represented on the Council

"to participate in the decisions of the Security
Council concerning the employment of contingents
of that Member's armed forces".

However, that hardly ever happens in practice. The
Council's views and expectations of troop-contributing
countries (TCCs) that have been expressed this morning
would call for holding such meetings with TCCs in the
Chamber under Article 44.

We thank the Russian Federation for the concept
note circulated to assist our debate today (S/2014/384, annex). We will focus on a few points in the concept
note on the basis of our experience as a major United
Nations troop-contributing country, having sent more
than 170,000 Indian troops to 43 of the 68 peacekeeping
operations mandated so far.

First, the concept note underscores the impact on
United Nations peacekeeping operations of the increase
in the number of crises that are armed conflicts of a
non-international character, also referred to as internal
or intra-State conflicts. In our view, that is an important
issue. By mandating United Nations peacekeeping
operations to deal with such internal conflicts, the
Council is effectively impinging on the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, in which the principles
for peacekeeping operations are firmly rooted. As my
colleague from China mentioned this morning, those
principles include the consent of the parties to the
operations, impartiality and the non-use of force except
in self-defence.

Our apprehension is exacerbated by the emerging
proclivity of the Council subsequently to mix the
traditional original mandate of United Nations
peacekeeping operations with a new interventionist
mandate for a small portion of the troops in the same
peacekeeping operation. We have already experienced
that with regard to the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) under resolution
2098 (2013) of March 2013. The Council is well aware
that India contributes more than 4,000 troops to
MONUSCO.

In our view, such a mixing of mandates directly
affects the operational effectiveness of the peacekeeping
operation, exposing traditional peacekeepers to
unnecessary threats from armed internal conflicts not
instigated by the United Nations itself. Furthermore,
by being asked to be party to an internal armed
conflict, all United Nations peacekeepers, not only
those of the interventionist peace enforcement brigade,
become liable to be treated as enemy combatants under
international law and, as such, effectively forgo both
their impartiality and their immunity from prosecution.
Most significant, by resorting to the use of United
Nations peacekeepers to tackle what are essentially
internal political conflicts, we feel that the Council is
effectively endorsing a short-sighted and unsustainable
approach to the maintenance of international peace
and security. That approach will lead to unprovoked
and unnecessary casualties among United Nations
peacekeepers and will ultimately erode the credibility
and effectiveness of the Council itself.

The second important point highlighted by
the concept note is the presence of elevated risks
to United Nations peacekeeping oerations from
non-governmental armed groups. We completely
agree with that point. Earlier this year, in the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping we substantiated with
facts and figures our views on such a threat, as faced
by us in the peacekeeping operations of MONUSCO,
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan and the
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force, where
our troops are deployed. It is a matter of concern that
the Security Council has failed to take any effective
action to address such risks.

Thirdly, the concept note points to the increasing
trend ofUnited Nations peacekeeping operations having
to operate alongside other foreign military forces in
the same theatre but with separate mandates that may
differ from those approved by the Security Council. We
assume that that point relates to the so-called hybrid
United Nations peacekeeping operations, which have
emerged out of the attempt to synergize the provisions
of Chapter VIII and Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations.
In that context, we would note that, before acting
under the provisions of Article 53, paragraph 1, of
the Charter to mandate peacekeeping operations, the
Security Council is required by the Charter to satisfy
itself that all attempts at the pacific settlement of
disputes set out in Article 52 have been exhausted by
the Member States belonging to regional arrangements
or regional agencies.

A fourth point made in the concept note relates
to the resource implications for the new mandates
of United Nations peacekeeping operations and the
emergence of multidimensional mandates. That is
a very important issue. On the one hand, the new
mandates of United Nations peacekeeping operations
are ambitiously drafted, running to many pages, as
good governance templates. On the other hand, the
very same penholders that are drafting those new
mandates cavil at having to pay more money for the
peacekeepers tasked to implement such mandates. The
irony is that some members of the Council appear to
expect to continue to pay 1992 prices for the services
of peacekeepers required to serve in more complex
multilayered mandates in the year 2014. That is
tantamount to turning economic theory, not to mention
morality, on its head.

The concept note ends with the tantalizing
suggestion that there could be an outcome document
as a result of this open debate. We strongly support
that idea so that the valuable contributions made by all
Member States in the Council today will be known and
acted upon. My delegation is ready to contribute in any
manner deemed fit to the creation of such a document.
With that objective in mind, we offer the following
specific proposals for the Council to consider including
in such an outcome document.

First, we call on the Council to reconsider the use of
intervention mandates for United Nations peacekeeping
operations until all Member States that are contributing
troops have been given the opportunity, under Article
44 of the Charter, to participate in the Council's
decisions on such operations in the Chamber.

Secondly, we call on the Council to ensure the
mandatory inclusion in all mandates for United
Nations peacekeeping operations of legally binding
provisions for prosecuting, penalizing and neutralizing
any non-governmental armed groups and armed
militias causing or threatening to cause harm to those
operations.

Thirdly, we call on the Council to conduct a
transparent and rigorous assessment in an open debate
of whether or not the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations favouring the pacific settlement of
disputes have been fully and sincerely complied with
by the regional arrangements or regional agencies
before the Council acts under Article 53, paragraph 1,
to mandate United Nations peacekeeping operations,
using the powers under Article 42 of the Charter. In
our view, that must be an essential prerequisite for
the deployment of United Nations peacekeepers in the
so-called hybrid peacekeeping operations.

Fourthly, we call on the Council to take the initiative
to unanimously agree to increase the reimbursements
to United Nations peacekeepers on the basis of the
rates proposed in the survey commissioned under
the mandate of the General Assembly. That will send
a strong signal from the Council to the international
community that it is fully prepared to pay for the new
mandates of United Nations peacekeeping operations
that it has approved.

Fifthly, we call on the Council to engage with
troop-contributing countries under Article 44 of the
Charter when drafting new multidimensional mandates
of United Nations peacekeeping operations. We believe
that we can play a role in assisting the Council, under
the provisions of Article 44, in determining the kind and
number of troops required for the proposed mandate, the
nature of equipment required and the costs of operating
in the specific terrain of the theatre of operations.

Finally, we call on the Council to consider the role of
other United Nations entities, such as the Peacebuilding
Commission, the United Nations Development Fund,
UN-Women, the World Health Organization and the
Food and Agriculture Organization, which can play
an implementing role in the civilian components of
the multidimensional mandates being approved for
United Nations peacekeeping operations. On that basis,
different components of those mandates should be
clearly earmarked to the appropriate United Nations
entity.

