Mr. Ipo (C6te d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): I would

like to take the opportunity of this briefing on the United
Nations Mission of Support in Libya to congratulate the
Russian Federation on its assumption of the presidency
of the Council and to assure you, Mr. President, of our
support. I also wish you every success. I would also like
to thank Poland for the quality of its presidency over
the past month. We congratulate Mr. Ghassan Salame,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, on
his excellent and, as always, informative briefing.
Lastly, I also thank Ambassador Juergen Schulz for
his briefing on the periodic report on the activities of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011), concerning Libya, and Ms. Marwa Mohamed
for her enlightening presentation on the work of the
non-governmental organization Lawyers for Justice
in Libya.

On 21 May, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General drew the Security Council's
attention to the possible consequences of the clashes
between General Khalifa Haftar's troops and the forces
of the Government of National Accord, led by Prime
Minister Faiez Serraj (see S/PV.8530). After nearly six
months of hostilities for control of the capital, Tripoli,
the Libyan crisis is increasingly at an impasse, with
almost no prospects for an early settlement.

Like other members, Cote d'Ivoire has repeatedly
expressed to the Council its deep concern about the
security and humanitarian consequences of the fighting
and their impact on the political process to resolve the
crisis. While hoping that the stakeholders recognize
that there will not be a just and lasting peace in their
country without an inclusive, viable and credible
political process, the international community must
unfortunately continue to count the tragic number of
victims ofthose clashes, which has reached 1,093 deaths
and more than 105,000 displaced persons, according
to estimates by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees as of 9 August.

Ofequal concern is the fate ofsub-Saharan migrants,
victim to all kinds of human rights abuses and violations
in detention centres, 53 of whom died in the bombing
of the Tajura detention centre on 3 July. Cote d'Ivoire
would like to reiterate its strong condemnation of that
attack and calls for the immediate implementation of
a credible and independent investigation to identify
the perpetrators and hold them accountable before the
law for their acts. In addition, my delegation strongly
hopes that the migrants rescued off the Libyan coast
will be treated with humanity and dignity and that their
repatriation to their countries of origin, if they agree,
will be carried out in conjunction with the specialized
agencies of the United Nations, in accordance with the
relevant international standards.

The documented arms deliveries to the parties to the
conflict, in flagrant violation of the embargo, remain
another source of concern to my country, especially
since they are fuelling a conflict whose stalemate
seems to make the possibility for the resumption
of intra-Libyan dialogue increasingly remote. Cote
d'Ivoire therefore strongly supports the effective
implementation of resolution 2473 (2019), adopted
unanimously on 10 June, which mandates the strict
implementation of the arms embargo through the control
of vessels off the Libyan coast. Compliance with the
arms embargo would no doubt be a decisive factor in
the conclusion of a lasting ceasefire, which would ipso
facto create an environment conducive to the revival
of the political process to resolve the crisis. It is urgent
that the crisis see a swift political resolution that would
create the conditions for an extension of State authority
throughout the national territory and the reversal of
the dangerous trend towards the entrenchment of the
Islamic State in certain parts of the country.

Cote d'Ivoire would like to congratulate Mr. Salame
once again for his personal and steadfast commitment to
the quest for a return to peace in Libya and to encourage
him to continue his outstanding mediation efforts
with the warring parties despite the many and varied
obstacles he faces. My country remains convinced that
there can be no lasting peace and stability in Libya
without an inclusive, credible political dialogue and calls
for a lasting ceasefire under the auspices of the United
Nations. To that end, the international community, in
particular the Security Council, must use mediation
and good offices to convince the parties to lay down
their weapons and engage in direct dialogue on all the
issues fuelling their differences.
In that connection, my delegation welcomes the plea
ofthe African Union and the Group of Seven (G-7), made
on the margins of the recent G-7 Summit in Biarritz,
France, for a truce and an inter-Libyan conference. The
organization of such a conference, which Cote d'Ivoire
avidly hopes will take place, can be made possible only
through the joint efforts of the United Nations and the
African Union in keeping with the strategic framework
signed in April 2017.

In that regard, my country would like to recall
the communique of the African Union Peace and
Security Council following its meeting of 5 July,
which emphasizes the role of the African Union and
its readiness to work closely with the countries of the
region to find lasting solutions to the Libyan crisis. It
is also worth recalling the concerns expressed by the
African Union High-Level Committee on Libya as to
the ongoing foreign interference that further polarizes
the positions of the actors in the Libyan crisis, thereby
compromising efforts to achieve a much-desired
ceasefire and establish a fruitful dialogue, which is
essential for the return of peace and stability to Libya.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate, once again,
my country's support to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and the staff of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya for their continued
efforts to find solutions to the multiple challenges
facing Libya. My country is convinced that, however
complex they might seem, the obstacles to peace and
stability remain surmountable, but will be overcome
definitively only through the Libyan people's deep
desire for peace, strong national ownership of the
crisis-resolution process and sustained support from
the international community.

