Mrs. Haley (United States ofAmerica): I thank my
friends from the French delegation for allowing me to
speak, as I have to leave early. I thank the briefers for
updating the Security Council on elections planning in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In particular, I
would like to thank you, Madam President, for calling
this very important and timely meeting because we are,
in fact, running out of time.

Today, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
is 118 days away from election day. That is less than
four months for the Government to finish organizing
free, fair and credible elections. Fortunately, we have
already reached an important milestone. President
Kabila did not register as a presidential candidate before
the deadline, which guarantees that he cannot legally
stand for re-election or legitimately serve as President
past January 2019. The United States welcomes
reports of President Kabila's intent not to seek a third
term. That is an important step towards the peaceful
transition of power. History will look favourably on
President Kabila's decision if it culminates in free,
fair and credible elections that translate into a lasting
democracy for the Congolese people i a legacy that we
hope he earns in the coming months.

While we recognize progress, we cannot deny the
red flags and unanswered questions that remain. With
less than four months to go, how will the Independent
National Electoral Commission transport elections
materials to more than 90,000 polling places? Will there
be enough voting machines or will authorities extend
voting by days, or even weeks? Can the authorities
recharge voting machines with only a 12-hour battery
life? Have election organizers widely tested the
machines? Will voters, many of whom have never used
a touch screen, know how to use them? Are organizers
preparing paper ballots as a backup if the electronic
voting machines fail? Those questions raise problems,
but there are solutions.

The Congolese authorities should permit the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
to provide logistical and transportation support.
MONUSCO has the available assets that the Mission is
ready and willing to deploy. The Congolese authorities
should also let voters use paper ballots. That is a trusted,
tested, transparent and easy-to-use voting method. The
Democratic Republic of the Congo can and should use
the same operations that it successfully implemented
in 2006 and 2011, including with support from the
United Nations. Paper ballots were good enough to
get President Kabila elected, and they should be good
enough as a fail-safe means to elect his successor.

I had the opportunity to meet with President Kabila
last year. If he were here today, I would tell him that
it is admirable that the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo wants to self-finance and self-
support its elections. But is it doable? Is it realistic? Is
it even necessary? It does not insult the Democratic
Republic of the Congo's sovereignty for the Independent
National Electoral Commission to accept logistical
support from MONUSCO. Instead, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is wasting precious resources to
buy capabilities that are already available to it.

Meanwhile, my Government and others are devoting
tens of millions of dollars to life-saving humanitarian
assistance for the country. It is troubling that President
Kabila and the Independent National Electoral
Commission refused the assistance. We respect the
Democratic Republic of the Congo as a sovereign
State Member of the United Nations, but it cannot help
but raise suspicion when the Congolese Government
refuses the assistance that would help make free, fair
and credible elections a reality, while at the same time
it continues to accept the humanitarian assistance that
so many of us continue to provide it with.

Other red flags add to our suspicions. We are deeply
concerned about the Independent National Electoral
Commission's decision on 24 August to disqualify
some opposition presidential candidates for what appear
to be political reasons. This is not how an electoral
process or any independent electoral commission
should function. We also praise those candidates who
feel that they have been unjustly disqualified for using
the appeals process that was open to them. By abiding
by the rules of the domestic process, opposition and
civil society organizations further reinforced just how
much independence the Independent National Electoral
Commission has lost during Mr. Nangaa's tenure.

The National Assembly President also continues
to deny the wish of an opposition party to replace
its candidate for the Independent National Electoral
Commission, in violation of the 31 December 2016
agreement. The Minister of Justice continues to
detain dozens of opposition members and civil society
activists, again in violation of the agreement. There
must be a political space for candidates to campaign,
citizens to assemble and opposition members to speak
freely and without fear. There can be no violence,
intimidation, harassment or silencing of the opposition.
Political parties must be able to compete on a level
playing field.

We will never know the will of the Congolese
people without an environment conducive to elections.
We have 118 days. These problems are fixable.
There is still enough time. The suspicions we have
may amount to nothing. Ultimately, however, the
Congolese Government must choose. The hopes for
self-determination of more than 80 million Congolese
citizens are riding on the decisions that President Kabila
and the Independent National Electoral Commission
will make in the days and weeks ahead. Now is the
time for choosing. We ask them to choose support from
MONUSCO, choose free fair and credible elections on
23 December, and choose a peaceful transition of power
in January 2019, and in so doing choose a better future
for generations of Congolese people to come.

