Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
At the outset, I would like to highlight Kazakhstan's
consistent and responsible approach to advancing
issues that are priorities for Central Asia and its
focus on solving specific problems facing the region.
We welcome the initiative of our friends from
Kazakhstan in convening today's debate on an issue
that is an urgent one for many countries and takes on
particular significance against the backdrop of the
growing terrorist and narcotic threats emanating from
Afghanistan, which are having a destabilizing effect on
Central Asia and spilling over its borders.

Northern Afghanistan is becoming a base of
support for international terrorism, led by the Afghan
wing of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant,
which is establishing a springboard for realizing its
destructive ambitions in the region in the spirit of
the caliphate's notorious ideology. With the flagrant
collusion and sometimes direct support ofboth external
and local sponsors, thousands of fighters of various
nationalities are entering the region under the banner of
ISIL, including jihadists who escaped defeat in Syria.
They openly proclaim that their goal is overturning the
legitimate Governments of Central Asian States and
spreading their influence throughout Eurasia.

In the past year we saw unprecedented growth in
Afghan narcotics production, as my Polish colleague
just mentioned. It will be essential to take urgent
measures to curb this threat, which fuels international
terrorism, undermines the stability of States and
the health of young people and triggers crime and
corruption. The development of a comprehensive
strategy to combat drug trafficking was the focus
of an international conference of parliamentarians
against drugs organized by the Russian State Duma in
Moscow in December. We welcomed the participation
in the conference of representatives from the United
Nations, along with a host of Russian and international
non-governmental organizations.

The situation in Afghanistan requires a comprehensive
approach on the part of the States of the region and the
international community as a whole. The experience of
the past 20 years is vivid testament to the futility of
attempts to use force to solve the problems plaguing
Afghanistan. What is on the agenda is adopting practical
measures to launch a process of national reconciliation
on a basis of the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Guided by those views, we have launched a dialogue
in the Moscow format in conjunction with our partners
and like-minded stakeholders, reviving the work of
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization-Afghanistan
Contact Group. We are building a partnership
between Afghanistan and the Collective Security
Treaty Organization. We welcome the initiative of
Uzbekistan to convene a ministerial meeting this
spring on a settlement of the Afghan settlement. We
continue to assist Kabul in training national civilian
and law-enforcement personnel to strengthen the
military capabilities of the Afghan armed forces. We
consistently advocate for starting direct talks as soon as
possible between the Government of Afghanistan and
the Taliban movement, based on criteria approved by
the Security Council, in the interests of ending their
fratricidal war.

As security issues are addressed, one of the major
factors in stabilizing Afghanistan must be sustained
socioeconomic development. Both the Eurasian
Economic Union and the Commonwealth of Independent
States can contribute to the general efforts by opening
broad and promising markets in Afghanistan. Russia
is open to multilateral cooperation in implementing
major economic and infrastructure-based projects,
including the Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-
India gas pipeline project and the Central Asia-South
Asia Electricity Transmission and Trade project.

At the heart of our alliance and strategic partnership
with the Central Asian States is shared history, a
high degree of mutual trust and unified approaches
to major current issues. Our trade and economic ties
provide a sound foundation. Russian investments
in the region total $20 billion, with more than 7,500
Russian companies and joint ventures with Russian
capital working productively in the area. During the
past decade the aggregate volume of our assistance
to Central Asian countries exceeded $6 billion, both
bilaterally and through international organizations,
including within the framework of the implementation
of the Goals outlined in the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.

We believe that the region's issues regarding the
energy supplies and access to water resources should be
addressed through constructive dialogue and a mutual
consideration of interests in the areas of hydropower
and agriculture in order to benefit all the peoples of
the region. The particular geographical location of
Central Asian countries determines the importance of
improving the effectiveness of making use of various
forms of transportation for providing reliable trade and
economic links with States in the Asia-Pacific region,
including South Asia and Europe. Russia stands ready
to contribute to that process through the development
of East-West and North-South international corridors.
In order to achieve that, we are working to establish a
single transit system through the Eurasian Economic
Union and its Chinese counterpart, the Belt and Road
Initiative. That approach will enable the Central
Asian region to strengthen its role in the continental
transportation system.

Eurasia today needs mutually beneficial cooperation
based on a balance of interests. External actors should
do everything they can to facilitate this without trying
to drag the countries in the region into a zero-sum
game, the notion of which appeared in the concept of a
so-called greater Central Asia, which it seemed might
happily have been forgotten but which has recently
reared its head again. Central Asian countries should
not be presented with a false choice between South and
North. The region needs a constructive environment
and partnership with all stakeholders, and certainly all
its countries must respect all their obligations within
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, the Collective
Security Treaty Organization, the Commonwealth
of Independent States and the Eurasian Economic
Community. The large-scale plans aimed ultimately
at improving the well-being of the peoples of Central
Asia and Afghanistan can become a reality only when
there is lasting peace and stability throughout the
Asian continent.

Russia has consistently worked to bring together
efforts in the interests of establishing an architecture of
equal and indivisible security that reflects contemporary
realities in the Asia-Pacific region. The prospects for
stability, peace and prosperity for States in the region
are closely linked to the ongoing development of a
fairer, more democratic and polycentric world order,
based on international law and respect for the cultural
and civilizational diversity of the peoples of the world.

