Mr. Serra (Italy): Atthe outset, I wishto congratulate

the Russian Federation on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of September. We are
deeply grateful to Special Representative Yamamoto,
Executive Director Fedotov and Ambassador Djani
for their comprehensive presentations. I also wish to
thank the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan
for her update on the situation in the country and the
electoral process.

Italy aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
by the observer of the European Union.

While the situation in Afghanistan remains
extremely volatile at present, these uncertainties should
not lead us to overlook the significant progress made in
recent months in the negotiations to achieve peace. In
this challenging context, the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan remains an essential point of
reference for prospects for stability and development in
Afghanistan, and we look forward to the renewal of its
mandate in the coming days.

I cannot continue my remarks today, however,
without first expressing our firm condemnation of
the heinous terrorist attacks that have again struck
Afghanistan and its capital in recent weeks. We are
horrified by the Taliban's latest attack in Kabul and
convey our deepest condolences to the families of
the victims.

Italy's sincere hope is that this current phase
constitutes an inevitable but necessary moment for the
parties to reflect - an opportunity to develop a shared
awareness of the deeper significance that lies behind
a peace negotiation. Such talks require a great sense
of responsibility on the part of all stakeholders, whose
behaviour shouldbe in keeping with the spirit ofdialogue.
Above all, laying the foundations for a successful peace
process requires the patient rebuilding oftrust, which is
impossible in an environment of escalating violence. It
is therefore cynical and unacceptable for the Taliban to
resort to indiscriminate violence against civilians as a
tool to gain leverage.

What the negotiations need to do instead is to
reassure all stakeholders 4 and first and foremost
the Afghan people - that the cycle of violence that
has prevailed in recent years can indeed be reversed.
Efforts made thus far in order to advance peace talks
should not be dispersed. On the contrary, they should
constitute the basis for reviving debate and dialogue
between the parties. We therefore hope that the window
of opportunity for peace - pursued so resolutely and
tenaciously in recent months - will remain open.
Peace is the only guarantee of a stable and prosperous
future for Afghanistan.

Italy therefore reiterates its full support for those
diplomatic initiatives that can facilitate the start of a
reconciliation process in Afghanistan under Afghan
leadership and ownership, including a primary role
for Afghan women in order to ensure that their
constitutional rights and hard-won civil and social
gains are adequately safeguarded. In this regard,
we also reaffirm the importance of the contribution
that the main regional stakeholders can make to the
peace process.

Addressing the constant threats to security entails
high costs, draining precious resources and energies
that are urgently needed for institution-building and for
the economic and social development of Afghanistan.
Italy continues to stand shoulder to shoulder with our
Afghan partners and, within the framework of the
Resolute Support Mission, with the Afghan National
Defence and Security Forces, which bravely fight every
day against terrorism and violent extremism in order to
restore stability and security.

In closing, Iwish to refer to the imminent presidential
elections scheduled for 28 September, which must be
credible, transparent and inclusive. The upcoming
election must provide the Afghan people with a tangible
demonstration of the progress made towards democratic
maturity and a framework for further strengthening
Afghanistan's political institutions. Above all, the
election will constitute an opportunity for the people to
reaffirm their strong desire for peace, which is shared
by all Afghans. Building a broad-based consensus for
peace through elections can also be a crucial means to
improve prospects for intra-Afghan dialogue.

