Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank you, Mr. President, for
having convened this debate. I also wish to thank the
briefers for their valuable input.

Japan, during its presidency ofthe Security Council
in December 2017, hosted a discussion (see S/PV.8144)
addressing the complex contemporary challenges,
including climate change and natural hazards, to
international peace and security.

As we stated during that discussion, in order for
the Security Council to more effectively address
complex challenges, the Council needs to increase its
focus on the whole conflict cycle, namely, preventing
the outbreak, escalation, continuation and recurrence
of conflict.

At the same time, attention should be paid to the fact
that peace and security, development, human rights and
humanitarian elements are closely interlinked. Climate
risks, including disasters, which can act as a threat
multiplier, are increasing in small island developing
States and least developed countries, inter alia. Japan
itself experienced record torrential rain last July, as
Mr. Kabat mentioned in his briefing.

Accordingly, the importance of adaptation
measures is also increasing. From that perspective,
Japan is leading the discussion on climate-change
adaptation within the framework of the Group of 20. We
have also contributed directly to building societies that
are resilient to climate-related risks through continued
assistance to developing countries, including through
climate-change impact assessments and climate-risk
information development.

Japan, itself a disaster-prone country, has been
committed to mainstreaming disaster risk reduction
into the international arena, including guiding the
adoption of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk
Reduction as well as through various forms of tangible
and intangible assistance made under the Sendai
Cooperation Initiative for Disaster Risk Reduction.

What is most important in this context is for
each Government to make disaster risk reduction a
policy priority, introduce the disaster risk reduction
perspective into all development policies and expand
investment in this area. Collective efforts under such
policies, including continued discussion, resource
mobilization and planning and implementing measures
to address emerging risks, can lead to the realization of
a resilient society.

We believe that such efforts, as supported by global
awareness on disaster-risk reduction, can eventually
contribute to international peace and security. In that
regard, we welcome today's debate. Let me express our
continued commitment to contributing to the discussion
on these related issues, including at the United Nations,
in a positive and constructive manner.

