Mr. Moura (Brazil): The initiative of the
Jamaican presidency to convene several open meetings
is very welcome. It epitomizes the commitment of the
Jamaican Government to the transparency of the
Security Council and its working methods. Your
presence among us, Mr. President, is an unequivocal
sign of the importance attached by your Government to
conflict prevention. Indeed, it is high time to start
building on the conclusions of the open debate that
took place last November.

In fact, the issue of conflict prevention has
generated a spate of in-depth research activities, the
publication of a number of studies and the renewed
interest of Member States. Since the issuance of last
year's report of the Secretary-General on the work of
the Organization, prevention has become a sort of
buzzword in the United Nations.

Think-tanks are devoting resources and energy to
the problem so as to come up with both conceptual
frameworks and blueprints for action in the area of the
prevention of armed conflicts. The media is becoming
increasingly interested, thus giving heightened
visibility to this issue.

All of these developments are positive and
reinforce our common understanding that prevention is
always a better strategy than mending the damage or
healing the wounds after the outbreak of conflicts. I
should like to mention a recently published study
entitled "Breaking Cycles of Violence" as one example
of the kind of debate in academia that can help us.
Among its conclusions, the study stated very clearly
that conflict, and its prevention and resolution, are
multidimensional and multilevel in their causal
structure.

The academic jargon notwithstanding, it seems
clear that there is no single cause of conflict. The root
causes may include cultural, economic, developmental
and institutional dimensions, as well as societal and
international ones. This is the reason why effective
measures concerning conflict prevention go far beyond
the Security Council's exclusive competence, involving
other United Nations and international bodies.

There is no single formula for conflict prevention.
Preventive action should, therefore, be taken after an
assessment of the specifics of each situation. If we are
to develop an encompassing strategy, it will no doubt
have to be based on a deep understanding of the
multiple roots of conflict. At the same time, there must
be an effective division of labour so that we can tackle
the different aspects of each situation.

It is to be hoped that the conditions for a strong,
concrete basis for a comprehensive, long-term conflict-
prevention strategy will be created when the
eradication of poverty is no longer a vague ideal. In
this regard, respect for human rights must also become
a universal concern in daily life in all countries of the
world. Lack of development should never be used to
justify the horrors and atrocities we have seen in recent
conflicts.

We are convinced that any comprehensive
strategy of prevention should take into account the
need for promoting and protecting human rights,
fostering development and eradicating poverty. Of
course, the Security Council has a key role to play,
since it has the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of peace and security.

The draft presidential statement that the Council
is about to adopt points in the right direction. It
recognizes quite appropriately that one of the most
powerful and least controversial tools at the disposal of
the Security Council is diplomacy. Guided by the
provisions of Chapter VI of the Charter, the Security
Council is in a unique position to promote, through
negotiation and persuasion, the ascendancy of reason
where intolerance and misunderstanding prevail.

As a contribution to prevention, Article 99 of the
Charter offers the Secretary-General a most valuable
instrument for engaging the Council in preventive
action. The role played by the special representatives
of the Secretary-General and by his good offices
missions should also be underscored.

Preventive deployment, such as occurred in
Macedonia, and disarmament, are equally useful means
of prevention. We know well the destabilizing
consequences of the illicit trafficking in and excessive
accumulation of small arms. We should not forget the
need to re-establish a global atmosphere propitious to
the exercise of preventive diplomacy. The
strengthening of all disarmament treaties can be a
decisive factor in that direction.

Conflicts are often caused by an abuse of power
on the part of those in positions of authority. Justice is
therefore very important for the maintenance of a
climate of compliance with basic human values. The
Tribunals for Rwanda and for the former Yugoslavia
are having an impact as instruments of deterrence. We
are hopeful that this positive impact will soon be
greatly enhanced by the entry into force of the Statute
of the International Criminal Court.

Unfortunately, the examples of frustrated peace
accords have become all too frequent. Hostilities
sometimes resume after short periods of ceasefire due
to the lack of adequate political and financial support
for peace agreements. Efforts in the areas of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration must be
coupled with a clear commitment of the international
community to reconstruction, rehabilitation and long-
term development.

This means that funds must be made available in
due course to projects capable of generating an
environment conducive to development and
reconciliation while strengthening the institutions in
charge of upholding the rule of law and human rights.

Conflict prevention cannot be considered to be an
exotic theme. It is an integral part of the international
agenda and is no longer an uncharted field. We may
need from now on to have a systematic account of
concrete examples of good practices and lessons
learned, so that the Council and other organs of the
United Nations can benefit from past experience and
better plan their future actions.

Rather than rhetoric, what is most needed is the
replication of positive examples and the correction of
past failures. We are convinced that the report to be
elaborated by the Secretary-General will constitute an
important contribution in this regard.

