Mr. Sparber (Liechtenstein): Liechtenstein wishes
to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this
timely debate.

As the number of conflicts increase and their
humanitarian consequences reach unprecedented
dimensions, the world expects the United Nations to
find better ways to prevent conflict and sustain peace.
Today's discussion is driven by a growing awareness
that the complex challenges of today's conflicts need to
be addressed in a consistent manner across the entire
conflict cycle. A comprehensive approach to peace and
security includes the rule of law, fundamental rights
and freedoms and sustainable development. The 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development is itself such a
comprehensive approach, most prominently Sustainable
Development Goal 16. The Sustainable Development
Goals concretely address the interdependence between
security and development and offer a powerful
prevention tool.

Along the same lines, implementation gaps in
development commitments and disregard for human
rights obligations are important early warning signs
that provide relevant information for preventive action,
from which the Security Council should benefit to
the largest extent possible. With respect to conflict
multipliers, such as climate change, food insecurity,
water shortages and organized crime, thematic debates
and their outcomes, these can help inform the Council's
decision-making, which has generally paid insufficient
attention to those phenomena. However, that requires
systematic integration of the findings of those
discussions into the Council's consideration of specific
crisis situations.

Contemporary security challenges tend to be
complex. They require tailor-made solutions that are
attuned to a particular context. At the same time, they
also share important characteristics, including, in
most cases, an erosion of the rule of law. One aspect
of sustaining peace, which has been neglected rather
systematically by the Council, is the importance of
accountability for lasting peace. Transitional justice
is an indispensable part of consolidating peace and
preventing conflicts. It contributes to deterrence,
strengthens the rule of law and allows traumatized
communities to come back together and move forward.

The International Criminal Court (ICC) is a tool at
the disposal of the Council in that respect. Beginning
in July next year, the ICC will also be able to exercise
jurisdiction over the crime of aggression, which goes to
the very core ofthe Council's mandate and the purpose of
the Organization. However, in the past year the Council
has shown half-hearted engagement with the Court and
failed to follow up on the two referral decisions it made.
It is therefore crucial that other accountability options
be considered, such as the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, which
was the General Assembly's response to a vetoed ICC
referral in the Council. At its core, the challenge that the
Council faces to embrace justice as a key ingredient for
creating lasting peace. We see that reflected as a core
message in the 2030 Agenda, but it is largely lacking in
the work of the Council itself.

The situation in Libya is a sad showcase about
how the absence of the rule of law provides a breeding
ground for one of the most complex security challenges
of our time. The horrific reports of slavery and gender-
based violence, including against men and boys, are not
only a symptom of conflict but also a driver of further
violence. Slave markets provide financing for terrorist
and other criminal activities, thereby further increasing
instability in Libya and the broader region. We recall
that those crimes fall under the jurisdiction of the ICC,
and we welcome the announcement of the Court on
conducting investigations. The Security Council should
support such efforts, both politically and financially, as
a tangible contribution to addressing the complexity
of the challenge and to improving the situation on
the ground.
