Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I have the
honour to report to the Security Council on the work of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011). The report covers the period from 1 March to
10 May 2012. For the sake of brevity, I will focus my
remarks on the most relevant aspects and read out an
abridged version of my statement, as a hard copy of the
entire report will be distributed and posted on the
Committee's website.

As the Council knows, two important documents
were before the Committee. The first was a working
document (S/2012/178, annex) put together by the
Panel of Experts - reflecting the contributions of the
Panel, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate, the International Civil Aviation
Organization, the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL), the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs, the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and the International
Atomic Energy Agency - on the threats and
challenges of arms proliferation from Libya to the
region. The second was a final report (S/2012/163, annex) by the Panel on its monitoring of the
implementation of the relevant measures, including the
arms embargo, the travel ban and the asset freeze. Both
documents are now publicly available on the
Committee's website. Allow me to refer to the
document on arms proliferation, which I believe should
constitute a main area of concern. Key findings
included the following.

First, at the time of the writing of the report, no
man-portable air defence systems (MANPADs)
originating from Libya had been seized outside the
country. Nevertheless, significant threat variables
existed, justifying further measures to mitigate the risk
that MANPADs might pose.

Secondly, there was clear evidence that
significant quantities of weapons other than
MANPADs had left Libya during the conflict, in
particular small arms and light weapons and associated
ammunition, as well as explosives, and that certain
existing factors could encourage further proliferation.

Thirdly, the increased supply of weapons and
related materiel in the Sahel region was likely to have
fuelled pre-existing insecurity, particularly in northern
Mali.

Fourthly, all levels of authorities in Libya needed
to be engaged in the overall efforts to control weapons
and combat illicit trafficking.

Finally, at the regional level, attention had to be
given to strengthening border control, enhancing
regional cooperation and coordination efforts,
increasing the exchange of information and curbing the
specific threat related to MANPADs. The document
concluded with specific recommendations to counter
the threat of illicit arms proliferation in the subregion
and the Sahel region.

Let me now turn to the final report of the Panel of
Experts in accordance with resolution 1973 (2011).
Among other things, it covers cases of transfers of
military materiel to and from Libya since the imposition
of the arms embargo, cases of non-compliance with the
travel ban and cases of non-compliance with the asset
freeze. In its report, the Panel of Experts made a total
of 21 recommendations, addressed either to the
Security Council, the Committee or Member States,
including Libya. Both the Council and the Committee
have already taken follow-up action on several of the
recommendations.

On 9 April, the members of the Committee agreed
to invite the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Libya and Head of UNSMIL, Mr. Ian
Martin, to a meeting of the Committee, in order to hold
an exchange of views on five of the Panel's
recommendations, as well as to discuss the working
relationship between UNSMIL and the Panel.
Yesterday, the members of the Committee held a
fruitful exchange of views with Mr. Martin. I look
forward to further exchanges of that nature with him. I
believe that close interaction among the Committee,
the Panel of Experts and UNSMIL is of particular
importance to ensuring efficient coordination and
avoiding overlaps. We have also scheduled a meeting
8
of the Permanent Representative of Libya with the
World Bank and the International Monetary Fund.

As of 9 May, the Committee had processed a total
of 38 notifications or exemption requests concerning
the arms embargo, a total of 154 notifications or
exemption requests concerning the asset freeze and a
total of 25 requests for guidance.

I would like to conclude by noting that, to date,
the Committee has received reports from 57 Member
States on their implementation of the relevant
measures. On 2 April, I dispatched a note verbale to all
Member States that contained a reminder for those that
had not yet submitted their implementation reports to
the Committee to do so without delay. On the same
day, the Committee updated its list of individuals and
entities subject to the travel ban and asset freeze,
incorporating the new information provided by the
Panel.

