Mr. Terzi di Sant'Agata (Italy): Let me first of
all welcome to the Security Council the Permanent
Representative of Georgia, Ambassador Alasania. Let
me also thank the members of the Secretariat for their
briefings on the most recent developments in Georgia.

Russia's decision to recognize the independence
of South Ossetia and Abkhazia has made an alarming
crisis even more complex. The Russian Government's
decision has no basis in international law, and Italy has
already expressed a clear position in that regard. The
territorial integrity of Georgia is an uncontestable
principle, as numerous United Nations resolutions have
underlined.

During this phase, the immediate goal is to
achieve a peaceful solution to the crisis and the
complete implementation of the six-point platform that
the French presidency of the European Union (EU)
agreed upon with the parties. The priority is to
implement the international monitoring system, which
represents an essential element of the platform. It is
important for the Security Council to continue working
towards a consensus resolution that incorporates the six
points and the appropriate clarifications needed: six
points whose full validity Russia does indeed
recognize. At the same time, negotiations should
continue within the framework of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) to finalize
a new ministerial decision, required to deploy
additional observers and to define their duties. My
country is part of OSCE efforts to send a monitoring
mission, and we intend to contribute to that mission.

We should seek a solution to the crisis in all
relevant international forums. The role of the European
Union is crucial, as underlined in recent European
Union declarations, to which my country fully
subscribes. From the start, my Government has
supported the French presidency in its efforts, efforts
which led to the approval of the six points. We expect
the European Council, at next Monday's meeting, to
express a firm position and to reiterate at the highest
political level the need to fully implement what has
already been agreed and to reaffirm the will of the EU
to contribute to the implementation of the agreement,
particularly as far as the international monitoring
system is concerned.

In the next few days, the Italian Minister for
Foreign Affairs will travel to Tbilisi and Moscow -
right after the meeting of the European Council. My
country, at this difficult juncture for Georgia, is close
to that country and intends to contribute actively to
international efforts to improve the difficult
humanitarian situation. In addition to sending
humanitarian flights, we have allocated funds for the
International Committee of the Red Cross, the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and the World Food Programme. We would
like to echo what our French colleague just said and to
draw attention in particular to the need to ensure
freedom of access for all humanitarian organizations
and entities operating in the region.

We appreciate the efforts made by the Secretary-
General; it is up to the United Nations to take every
appropriate measure to support the people affected by
the conflict.

It is in the international community's interest to
prevent the current crisis from jeopardizing global
stability at a moment when what is needed is the
greatest possible solidarity among States in addressing
the major challenges we are facing: the fight against
terrorism and nuclear proliferation, and the great
regional crises, first and foremost those in Iraq and
Afghanistan.

