The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina, in which he
requests to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite that representative to participate
in the consideration of the item, without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Prica
(Bosnia and Herzegovina) took a seat at the
Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2007/673, which contains the text of a
2
draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council's
prior consultations.

I wish to draw the attention of the members of the
Council to document S/2007/651, which contains a
letter dated 5 November 2007 from the Secretary-
General transmitting the thirty-second report on the
implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina. I also wish to draw members' attention to
document S/2007/632, which contains a letter dated 25
October 2007 from the Secretary-General transmitting
the eleventh report on the activities of the European
Union military operation in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall now put the draft
resolution to the vote.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show ofhands.

In favour:
Belgium, China, Congo, France, Ghana,
Indonesia, Italy, Panama, Peru, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Slovakia, South Africa, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America.


The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1785 (2007).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 10.15 am.
07-6082]

