I am grateful for this opportunity to address the Security Council. I would like to thank France, as President of the Council this month, for inviting me to share my perspectives on human rights in Afghanistan and on the Afghan peace process. The response to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has affected human rights around the world. In Afghanistan, the pandemic has made several segments of the population more vulnerable, including the poor and daily wagers, women and children, detainees, people with disabilities and the elderly, and has led to concerns about increasing poverty. Aware of the multidimensional impact of COVID-19 on human rights, the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission has adapted measures to enable us to continue monitoring and following up on violations of the human rights of women, advocating for children's access to vaccination and education, monitoring detainees' right to health and safety, calling for transparency, access to information, the right to protest and freedom from restraint by police, and actively participating in the provincial COVID-19 response committees in different parts of Afghanistan with a view to informing local Government authorities about human rights aspects of response measures. As Afghanistan faces the challenge of tackling the pandemic, the conflict rages on, despite repeated calls for a comprehensive ceasefire, taking a huge toll on the population with alarming number of civilian causalities and a worrisome trend of targeted assassinations. This conflict has raged in various guises for over 40 years. Today Afghans continue to suffer death or serious harm through a variety of types of violence including, but not limited to, suicide attacks, air strikes and night raids. Civilians experience violence while praying in mosques and gurdwaras, while at work, in farms, factories or at the office, while travelling to visit relatives or on the way to work, or while studying in primary and secondary schools in preparation for a better future. Mothers have been targeted by gunmen while giving birth. I want to draw attention to the extraordinary levels of violence civilians face, and the extraordinary degree to which civilians continue to be harmed. The peace process must begin with recognition of the degree of harm and suffering civilians face, and we must all work to bring about a comprehensive ceasefire as quickly as possible. Aware of the devastating impact of the conflict on human rights, the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission has called for a comprehensive ceasefire, launched our "put down the guns" campaign and welcomed steps to enable intra-Afghan negotiations. As an impartial, independent entity mandated to protect the rights of all Afghans, the Commission wants to play a clear role in the peace process in order to enable us to provide expert input into the discussions about human rights for both negotiating sides, namely, the Republic of Afghanistan and the Taliban, and to monitor respect for human rights in various stages of the process. The Commission's work and advocacy on the peace process focuses on contributing to an inclusive process, a durable outcome and mechanisms for the preservation and expansion of human rights. The Commission and the broader Afghan civil society and public are calling for transparency, victim-centred justice, accountability and the meaningful inclusion of women and minorities in the process. We are also calling for specific measures acknowledging the voice and rights of victims to be endorsed by both sides. To this end, the Commission has raised the issue of victims' rights and accountability in relation to prisoner exchange, is continuously engaging with the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan's negotiation team, has reached out to the Taliban on human rights issues and has put forward four concrete mechanisms to enable broader public participation in the peace process. The mechanisms for the consideration of both negotiating teams include victims' testimonies, ongoing consultation with a select reference group of civil society and human rights activists, the negotiation teams' openness to receiving specific proposals and expertise, and nationwide consultation and outreach on human rights and victims' issues. The aim of these mechanisms is to bring the issue of victim-centred justice to the fore, which we believe is essential for achieving lasting peace in Afghanistan. Afghans have long suffered from the conflict, and the country's progress and prosperity has been paralysed by the ongoing war, which has impeded our potential to be a peaceful and contributing member of the global community. Like many Afghans, I experienced war and migration as a child, and I am now raising my son in a war-torn country. In the past 19 years, Afghans have made strides in our struggle to secure the basic human rights involved in leading dignified lives as equal citizens who can hold their Government accountable. Much remains to be accomplished, and the progress has been uneven. However, peace should provide an opportunity for expansion of access to human rights and should not lead to backsliding. To end the conflict in Afghanistan, we have a much-needed sense of urgency, but we also need to acknowledge that only an inclusive process with human rights at its heart can lead to lasting peace and prevent a return to conflict. Any compromise on the basic human rights of Afghans will not lead to peace. To achieve lasting peace, we will need the United Nations and the global human rights community to stand with Afghans to stop the violence, preserve human rights - particularly the rights of women and minorities - and ensure that the voices of victims will be heard and that their demands will not be overlooked.
