Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): My delegation is
indeed honoured to participate in this important debate
and wishes to acknowledge the presence of the
ministers who are with us in the Council Chamber
today. We also welcome the presence of the Secretary-
General and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Somalia with his delegation.

It is a good day for Somalia today, and Somalia
does not have too many good days. But I am brave
enough to say that today is a good day for Somalia,
having listened to the concrete proposals that have
been made in the statements made before mine. But let
me begin by acknowledging that there is no doubt that
piracy in Somali waters has caught the world's
attention.

The resolution that the Council adopted today
comes shortly after resolution 1846 (2008), which
deals with the same issue. The Monitoring Group on
sanctions with regard to Somalia concluded that piracy
had already become a multi-million-dollar industry
involving over 2,000 people and using over 60 small
boats and several mother ships. The Monitoring Group
told the Council that the pirates had earned enormous
amounts of money, estimated to be more than $100
million in the past years.
Yet, as my delegation has always argued, piracy
is only one of the symptoms of the root causes of the
Somali conflict. There are other Somali grievances,
including illegal fishing in Somali waters by foreign
ships and illegal dumping of toxic waste off the Somali
coast, which have been invoked by the pirates to build
general support for their activities among Somali
society.

Clearly, what Somalia needs urgently is for its
tragic situation to be addressed in a comprehensive and
holistic manner. In other words, Somalia needs a
political solution that will lead to the establishment of
a reliable Government authority in that country. Of
course, we should at the same time address piracy as
we have done today. We should also address the
proliferation of arms, impunity and other serious
violations taking place in Somalia.

The Djibouti Agreement that brought together the
Transitional Federal Government with the Alliance for
the Re-Liberation of Somalia is an important building
block in the political process. It is now up to the
international community to support the Djibouti
Agreement in order to allow the political process to
take root in Somalia.

Regarding security stabilization on the ground,
the Security Council must fulfil its Charter
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security in Somalia. As one who has always
accused this Council of avoiding its responsibility,
listening today I am beginning to change my mind.
Maybe because I am about to leave I am becoming
nice.

The African Union has contributed to the African
Union Mission to Somalia (AMISOM) to help support
the Transitional Federal Government. We call on the
international community to support AMISOM. if it is to
make a difference in the lives of the Somali people.
Without strengthening AMISOM, we will not achieve
the results that we need. That must include predictable
and reliable resources, beyond voluntary contributions,
that can increase or decrease depending on the
economic climate of the time. That is why I support the
statement by United States Secretary of State Rice
calling for consideration of a United Nations
peacekeeping mission in Somalia. I think that this is an
important issue that this Council would need to debate.
I heard one speaker say today that we need a trust fund.
How can a war be fought with a trust fund, which can
grow or decrease, depending on the contributions that
are made?

Otherwise, the Council can adopt the toughest
resolutions possible on piracy; it can even strengthen
the arms embargo and aim the most stringent measures
at individuals and entities that may be seen as
obstructing the process in Somalia; but such
fragmented efforts are unlikely to succeed without a
comprehensive solution for the country. And without
Council action - without the Council even looking
into the possibility of deploying a peacekeeping force
in Somalia - Somalia will continue to sink further and
further into despair. Surely, the people of Somalia
deserve better than that.

