Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the timely convening of this meeting and the
valuable briefing delivered by Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations.

Peru welcomes the recent political developments
that have been taking place in the Sudan. We hope
that the recent political agreements reached - such
as the agreement of 17 August on the establishment
of a new civilian-led transitional Government, the
Constitutional Declaration and the Juba Declaration for
Confidence-building Procedures and the Preparation
for Negotiation of 11 September - mark the beginning
of a new era of peace in the history of the Sudan. We
believe that for peace to be possible, the commitment
of all Sudanese people will be necessary. In this regard,
we value the efforts of the Sovereign Council and the
Government aimed at bringing all armed groups that
are not yet participating in the negotiations to the
negotiating table. We wish to emphasize that until an
inclusive agreement is reached, it will be very difficult
to transition towards peace and the achievements made
to date will not last long.

We are concerned about the security situation in
Darfur. We note an increase in the levels of crime,
particularly in internally displaced persons camps, the
destruction of farmland and the illegal occupation of
land, as a result of security gaps and the lack of effective
civil authorities in Darfur. We regret that the violence in
the J ebel Marra area continues to represent a challenge
for the Government. The Sudan Liberation Army-
Abdul Wahid faction (SLA-AW) continues to count
civilians among its victims, including personnel from
non-governmental organizations and humanitarian
organizations. In the same vein, the special report
(S/2019/816) indicates that, in general, the humanitarian
and human rights situation has not changed in the period
since the previous report. Intercommunal violence and
clashes between the Government and the SLA/AW have
caused numerous displacements and led to subsequent
humanitarian repercussions.

We condemn the recurring violations and abuses
of human rights. Incidents of sexual violence continue
unabated against women and children, who are not safe
from these horrific actions, even within the camps for
internally displaced persons. In this context, we wish to
stress the importance of the agreement to open a United
Nations human rights office in the Sudan, and we hope
that its operationalization will succeed in curbing the
human rights violations taking place in Darfur.

We commend the joint work being carried out by
the United Nations and the African Union with the
Sudanese authorities. The peace process in the Sudan
will require the support of both organizations, as well
as of the international community as a whole, in order
to ensure that the people of the Sudan can address the
root causes of the conflict and achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals. We support the prioritization
of gender equality, the empowerment of women
and youth as well as respect for human rights in the
plans to carry out a peace process in the Sudan. We
believe that the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) could contribute to
this process through a renewed mandate that is tailored
to current circumstances.
We wish to highlight the responsibility of the
Security Council in ensuring a successful drawdown
of UNAMID that does not create a vacuum leading to
tensions or new risk factors and that does not jeopardize
the achievements made in the areas of protection,
the rule of law, human rights and the realization of
lasting solutions for internally displaced persons and
communities throughout Darfur.

Finally, we encourage the African Union, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
United Nations and international partners to provide
the necessary support to the transitional Government
of the Sudan in this vital phase for the country's future,
as well as to continue to pool efforts so that the Sudan
may achieve peace and reconciliation.

