Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): I wish
to begin, Mr. President, by congratulating you on your
skilful stewardship of the Security Council's work this
month and by extending our gratitude to the Secretary-
General, his Special Representative and all their
colleagues in the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) for their dedication to the
consolidation of peace and stability in Afghanistan.

Since you are to leave us soon, Mr. President, I
join other colleagues in wishing you all the best and
every success in your future endeavours. You are
known for your friendship, professionalism and
kindness. We will surely miss you a great deal.

I would like also to thank Mr. Kai Eide for his
comprehensive briefing to the Council today and for
his tireless efforts and sincere dedication to help
coordinate international efforts in Afghanistan. Our
thanks also go to all the men and women in UNAMA
for their praiseworthy endeavours in Afghanistan. I
also extend our thanks to the Permanent Representative
of Afghanistan for his impressive statement this
morning and for his update on the situation.

As the latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2009/323) clearly indicates, we are yet again facing
a mixed picture of both achievements and causes for
continued concern in Afghanistan. The report stresses
that during the reporting period progress has continued
to be made in such important areas as the expansion of
the Afghan National Army and the Afghan National
Police. The report also indicates that the agricultural
sector and the private sector continue to blossom, while
there has also been encouraging progress as far as
overall development and capacity-building issues are
concerned. Moreover, it is encouraging to learn
through the report that donor coordination has
improved, including through a more effective use of
the Joint Coordination Monitoring Board.

The Afghan people and Government deserve our
collective admiration for their steadfastness on the path
they have chosen and for the remarkable achievements
they have made in the past several years towards a
stable and prosperous Afghanistan.

Despite those positive developments, causes for
concern remain in other areas. The security situation
has continued to deteriorate and the number of security
incidents and the level of violence have increased
compared to the same period last year. The menaces of
poppy cultivation and drug trafficking have continued
to pose a serious threat to Afghanistan, the wider
region and beyond.

We are of the view that, to address insecurity in
Afghanistan, adequate attention should be given to the
genuine needs and views of the Afghan people and
Government. The "Afghanization" of security and
reconstruction efforts and greater seriousness in paving
the ground for home-grown security and full national
ownership by Afghans over their country's issues are
needed and are of paramount importance if we want to
see real improvement in the situation in Afghanistan.
The Afghans have made it clear that they will not
accept the indefinite presence of foreign forces in their
country. And the increase in the number of foreign
forces there, if it is done based on past approaches, will
not help to improve the security situation.
We concur with the report that capacity-building
and the utilization of regional potential for the
reconstruction of Afghanistan can contribute a great
deal to the improvement of the situation in the country.

Afghanistan's constitution is of vital importance,
since, among other things, it underpins the unity of
Afghans from all walks of life and from all religious
and ethnic backgrounds. We support the position of the
Afghan Government that Afghan-led dialogue can be
considered only with those groups that are committed
to the constitution of the country, have not and will not
act against the country's security and have not
perpetrated terrorist acts. Any effort in that regard
should also be without prejudice to relevant Security
Council resolutions particularly resolution 1267 (1999).

The upcoming presidential and provincial council
elections in Afghanistan will be among the most
important political developments in the country this
year. We are confident that Afghans will turn this
opportunity into another milestone on their path
towards stability and prosperity.

Regional and international initiatives and
gatherings in the reporting period, particularly the
Tehran trilateral summit of 24 May 2009, the Hague
Conference on 31 March 2009 and such initiatives as
the joint cooperation of Iran and Japan in Afghanistan,
demonstrate the regional and international potentials
and commitments in supporting Afghans in their
journey towards peace, security and development. We
must build upon these initiatives in our endeavours to
help Afghans.

The cultivation and production of and the
trafficking in narcotic drugs in Afghanistan pose
another daunting challenge that not only adversely
affects that country's economic reconstruction and
undermines its stability and security, but also poses
serious threats to the whole region and to the entire
international community. Despite the presence of
military forces from various countries in Afghanistan,
the international community has not left a satisfactory
record in fighting this threat in Afghanistan. This is a
threat to all of us and therefore requires a collective,
resolute and serious response in all its aspects.

The Islamic Republic of Iran has been and
continues to be unwavering in its war against heavily
armed drug traffickers originating from Afghanistan,
and we encourage others to join us in this important
fight in order to save present and future generations
from the devastating impact of this calamity.

Afghanistan's security and stability are of vital
importance for the Islamic Republic of Iran, as they are
for the rest of the region and beyond. We have always
been clear in our condemnation of all heinous terrorist
acts committed by terrorist groups, particularly
Al-Qaida and the Taliban, in Afghanistan, and also in
our condemnation of attacks on civilians through air
raids by foreign forces, and we have extended our full
support to the efforts of the Afghan Government to
improve the security and economic situation in the
country.

We have displayed our sincere and serious desire
to help our Afghan brothers and sisters through the
concrete steps that we have taken in various
reconstruction activities in Afghanistan, as I mentioned
in my previous statement. As the Secretary-General
and his Special Representative have stressed on various
occasions, regional potentials should be more seriously
explored in addressing the challenges that Afghanistan
is facing.

The Islamic Republic of Iran not only has
attended various international and regional gatherings
on Afghanistan, but has also taken the initiative to host
or propose several regional meetings in this regard,
including the first trilateral summit of the Presidents of
Afghanistan, Iran and Pakistan, which was held in
Tehran in May.

As the report of the Secretary-General mentions,
a declaration was adopted at the end of the summit in
Tehran, in which the three countries expressed their
commitment to joining efforts to fight terrorism, support
trilateral economic projects and counter the production
and trafficking of narcotics.

I wish to conclude by stressing that we support
the central role that the United Nations has played and
continues to play, through UNAMA, in coordinating
the international community's assistance to Afghanistan
and in helping the Afghan people and Government
tackle the challenges they have faced over the past
several years. Under Afghan ownership and leadership,
we should focus our attention on the four priority areas
described in the Chairmen's Statement issued at the
end of The Hague Conference in March this year:
strengthened security, improved economic growth,
good governance and enhanced regional cooperation.
The journey towards a stable and prosperous
Afghanistan may be long. It may also be difficult, but
we are confident that the Government and people of
Afghanistan will make it. They will succeed.

