Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): Permit
me at the outset to echo what the representative of
Costa Rica said regarding the paramount importance of
the establishment of the International Criminal Court. I
should also like to thank Prosecutor Luis Moreno-
Ocampo for the report that he has provided us on the
progress made in the investigations being conducted in
Darfur pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005).

Through resolution 1593 (2005), this Council
took the historic decision to refer a specific case to the
International Criminal Court for the first time. The
Court and its officials have shouldered that
responsibility with all the rigour required for such a
lofty duty, as demonstrated by the progress made in the

investigations into the situation in Darfur, as presented
to us this morning. However, after the presentation of
three cases to the Court's judges and the issuance of
two arrest warrants against alleged perpetrators of
crimes against humanity, those arrest warrants have yet
to be carried out. Impunity cannot and must not be an
option.

In resolution 1593 (2005), the Security Council
stipulated that the Government of the Sudan was
obliged to cooperate with the Court and with the Office
of the Prosecutor. However, Panama is concerned at the
lack of constructive responses to the two arrest
warrants issued 20 months ago by the International
Criminal Court against Ahmad Harun and Ali Kushayb
for allegedly having participated in committing crimes
against humanity. Panama, as a member of the Security
Council and a State party to the Rome Statute, feels
obligated to reiterate the appeal to the Government of
the Sudan to meet its responsibilities towards the
international community.

The International Criminal Court represents the
will of 108 nations that have decided to exchange the
arbitrariness of the past for a system of transnational
justice that does not permit to go unpunished the most
horrendous crimes of which humankind has proved
capable. The same will for change is what motivated
the Security Council to adopt resolution 1593 (2005).
We are aware of the challenge that that entails.
Therefore, both the Council and the United Nations
membership must be prepared to take the measures
required, even if that affects the highest authorities of a
country.

We recognize that it is important that the
Prosecutor has concluded the investigations related to
the attack perpetrated on 29 September 2007 against a
military base of the African Union Mission in the
Sudan at Haskanita. We also appreciate the expressions
of willingness to cooperate with the Court on the part
of some rebel groups. The Security Council must
continue to focus its efforts on ensuring that the 17,000
humanitarian workers providing aid to 2.7 million
Victims of the Darfur conflict can carry out their noble
mission without putting their lives at risk. We cannot
allow humanitarian personnel to continue to be
subjected to such indiscriminate attacks.

If we are to resolve the difficult situation in
Darfur and ultimately attain the objectives of
resolution 1593 (2005), the Government of the Sudan
must fulfil its national and international obligations.
The solidarity and continued cooperation of the entire
membership of the Organization, in particular the Arab
countries and the members of the African Union, are
also essential. Panama views as positive the intention
shown by the Government of the Sudan to raise the
standards of its justice system to acceptable
international levels. We also consider the mediation
proposed by the State of Qatar as a way to create an
atmosphere of peace and sustained justice. That
initiative should have the Council's support.

