Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I
welcome the presence of Mr. Ivica Dacic', Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and thank him for his
briefing. I congratulate his country on his accession
to the chairmanship-in-office of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in 2015.

Exactly one year ago, we addressed the situation
in Ukraine for the first time in the Security Council
(see S/PV.7117). The crisis that had begun there
required the OSCE to play its full role, as it was in
a unique position to overcome the concerns of all
involved. In the circumstances, the OSCE was able to
assume its full responsibility by deploying the Special
Monitoring Mission and becoming a party to the Minsk
agreements, which were signed by OSCE Special
Representative Heidi Tagliavini.

Faced with a security and humanitarian situation that
remains alarming, we have a collective responsibility to
spare no effort in silencing the weapons and achieving
an agreement. That was the objective of the approach
chosen by the German Chancellor and the President of
the French Republic a few weeks ago. Last week, in
adopting resolution 2202 (2015), the Council endorsed
the Minsk agreements, putting its full weight and
authority behind the commitments undertaken by the
parties. The OSCE must continue to play its full role
by ensuring the good faith implementation of all of the
Minks agreements, which now from part of a Council
resolution.

Yesterday the OSCE received the document
that was agreed to by both the Ukrainians and the
separatists, which disclosed the details with regard to
the withdrawal of heavy weapons. The agreement is a
first positive step in terms ofimplementing that element
of the Minks agreements. It must be immediately
implemented with the full involvement of the OSCE
Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine, which will
have to control, verify and monitor the withdrawal
of heavy weapons. Its role cannot be limited to joint
patrols along the line of contact, as requested by the
ceasefire control commission, according to information
transmitted by the parties.

This morning in Paris, at a Normandy format
meeting of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
Ukraine, Russia, Germany and France, the four
Ministers asked that the OSCE Special Monitoring
Mission be strengthened and its mandate extended
with additional personnel, equipment and financing. It
is quite normal that the OSCE should be able in this
task to count on United Nations support. After all, the
United Nations possesses the necessary expertise and
recognized capacities. Channels already exist for both
organizations to offer each other mutual support. We
stand ready to assist both organizations in exploring
ways to improve that cooperation. Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations provides an ideal format
for that dialogue, which the Council has successfully
used in other circumstances.

Above and beyond Ukraine, cooperation between
the OSCE and the United Nations covers a broad field
of action and various situations - from Central Asia to
Bosnia to Georgia and Kosovo - in which the OSCE
and the United Nations have demonstrated their ability
to work together harmoniously. That complementarity
is primarily based on the multidimensional concept of
security held by the OSCE. Through its field missions, the
OSCE is present in the Balkans, the Caucasus and Central
Asia, and it often works alongside the United Nations in
a number of areas.

In the Balkans, the OSCE, in full cooperation with
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo, enabled voters in Kosovo to participate
peacefully in the elections of June 2014. In addition,
we support the priority Serbia has granted to water
management, a central issue in an area affected by
flooding. The OSCE will tackle that issue during a
forum on economic and environmental issues.

In the Caucasus, the OSCE works to promote
dialogue and confidence-building. France is especially
committed as a co-Chair of the Minsk Group, alongside
the United States and the Russian Federation, and stands
ready to help Armenia and Azerbaijan to find a peaceful

solution to the conflict in Nagorno Karabakh. We take
note of the commitment of the Serbian Chairperson-in-
Office to contribute to the task by promoting dialogue
between the parties.

Concerning Georgia, France has lent its support
to the Geneva talks, in which a very important role is
played by the OSCE, side by side with the European
Union and the United Nations. We reaffirm our support
for the territorial integrity of Georgia and reject the
reconciliation agreements signed with the separatist
regions of Abkhazia and South Ossetia. We urge the
parties not to undermine, by any further actions or
words, the dialogue format that has been established.
We also welcome the willingness of the Serbian
chairmanship-in-office to relaunch a discussion on
the OSCE presence on the ground, the institutional
organization of which remains to be determined.

Beyond all those issues, we welcome Serbia's
determination to fully exploit the capacities of OSCE
field missions to ensure that assistance is tailored to the
host country's needs and provided in a cost-effective
and environmentally friendly manner.

Secondly, reflections on the political-military
aspects within the OSCE framework contribute to an
overall improvement in security, of which the Council
remains the cornerstone. We welcome the commitment
of the Serbian chairmanship-in-office following
Switzerland's chairmanship, to modernize the 2011
Vienna Document on confidence-building measures and
strengthening security. At the same time, we welcome
its intention to update the OSCE code of conduct on
political-military aspects, which are essential to ensure
democratic control of armed and security forces.

We note with satisfaction the desire of the Serbian
chairmanship to continue discussions on the issues of
reform and governance of security systems, which are
also being evaluated at the United Nations. Similarly, we
impatiently await the events organized by the Serbian
chairmanship on the fight against transnational threats,
a topic on which the Council has also been seized.

The future of the OSCE and its dialogue with the
United Nations will be marked this year by an important
commemoration, the fortieth anniversary of the Helsinki

Accords. France fully supports the dialogue initiated at
the ministerial meeting in Dublin on the political future
of the OSCE within the framework of the Helsinki+40
process. France subscribes to the analysis ofthe Serbian
chairmanship on the need to strengthen efforts in the
areas of of the rule of law, the freedom of expression,
the freedom of the media and the protection of national
minorities, all issues that the participating States of the
OSCE have been working on for 40 years.

The OSCE covers a vast area from Vancouver to
Vladivostok, an area of shared values, marked by the
conviction that Euro-Atlantic and Eurasian security
are closely linked with the promotion of human rights,
democracy and the rule of law. All those values are
also at the very heart of the United Nations. I wish to
reiterate to Serbia our wishes for success during its
tenure and to ensure it of France's support.

