Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
and Ambassadors Baso Sangqu and Peter Wittig, for
the detailed and full reports to us in your capacities
as Chairs of the Committees on the Council's agenda
today.

Terrorism in all its forms and the proliferation of
weapons of mass, in addition to the danger that they
pose were they to fall into the hands of non-State
armed actors and terrorists, remain a serious threat to
international peace and security. Close and effective
cooperation is therefore needed among the Committees
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001),
concerning counter-terrorism, resolution 1540 (2004)
and resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities and
their respective groups of experts.

We welcome the outreach activities carried out by
those Committees and their groups of experts that, within
their respective mandates, have helped to strengthen
cooperation with subregional, regional and international
organizations, to optimize information-sharing and to
increase their level of participation in joint meetings
with reciprocal representation when needed.

The national capacity-building of States in order
to overcome new challenges in countering terrorism
remains one of the main concerns, in particular given
technological developments and their use by non-State
actors and terrorists. In such circumstances, we can see
the important and decisive role that the Committees
and their groups of experts can play in advising States.
Taking into account the different but complementary
roles of the Committees and their groups of experts,
their coordination and joint participation should help
to promote cooperation among and within them and to
support the full implementation of the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

To achieve strict compliance with resolution 1989
(2011), the quality of information provided by Member
States with regard to adding, keeping or removing
names of individuals or entities to, on or from the list
must be improved. In order to respect due process and
the transparency of the Committee, we believe that it is
very important that the designation criteria established
and agreed in paragraph 4 of resolution 1989 (2011) be
observed.

As we have stated on previous occasions, in order
to effectively implement sanctions, the Committee
must continue to develop strategies that help provide
technical assistance and cooperation to Member States.
There have been positive developments with regard
to the updating and impact of the list. However, it is
necessary to continue strengthening areas such as the
observance of procedures on time frames set out in the
resolution.

We recognize the significant contribution of the
Office of the Ombudsperson. We believe it necessary
to continue strengthening its functions and capacities
in order to ensure respect for due process. With regard
to the renewal ofthe Office's mandate in December, we
must make progress on aspects such as communication
and the provision of information by States, including
confidential information, and in approving a permanent
mandate. That mechanism must be extended to all
sanctions committees.

We welcome the special meeting of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee that will take place on
20 November. For Colombia, preventing and suppressing
the financing of terrorism is a particularly important
topic. We will therefore contribute constructively to
that debate. My delegation underscores the work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee in further supporting
and facilitating the implementation of resolutions
1373 (2001), 1624 (2005) and 1963 (2010). Through
its Executive Directorate, the Committee has worked
tirelessly in developing analysis tools to monitor and
assess the progress of Member States in implementing
resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005). We very
much welcome the fact that the Committee has created
two tools for assessment: the general implementation
review and the inquiry implementation details.

The proliferation of all sorts of weapons of mass
destruction, their delivery systems and associated
material, as well as the risk that they may fall into the
hands of non-State actors and terrorists, continues to be
a serious threat to international peace and security, That
is why the 1540 Committee and its group of experts
play a fundamental role in enabling Member States
to fully carry out their obligations and commitments
regarding the control of armaments, disarmament and
non-proliferation in all its aspects regarding weapons
of mass destruction and their delivery systems.

By means of its coordination and facilitation role
in providing assistance and cooperation, the 1540
Committee and its group of experts contribute to national
capacity-building and the promotion of the exchange of
best practices, bringing together Member States so that
they can determine what responses to give to requests
for assistance. In that context, we believe that it is of
the greatest importance to take into account regional
organizations, as they play a decisive role owing to
their proximity to, and understanding of, the situation
on the ground in their countries. Colombia appreciates
the efforts being made at the regional, subregional and
international levels to strengthen the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). For that reason, we have
organized several meetings and workshops aimed at
capacity-building at the national level.

Colombia once again reiterates its commitment to
combatting terrorism in all its manifestations regardless
of its motivation and/or perpetrators. We believe that
the effective implementation of the resolutions we
are discussing today is an unavoidable commitment.
Effective coordination will make it easier for Member
States to fulfil their obligations when it comes to
combating terrorism.

