Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): Let me begin by
thanking the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Ms. Helen Meagher La Lime, for her briefing,
and in particular for the mandate-implementation
benchmarks dashboard of the United Nations Mission
for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH), which is
very useful and helpful. I hope that we will see similar
dashboards for other United Nations peacekeeping
missions in the future.

It is now approximately 18 months since the
Security Council visited Haiti under the leadership
of the Permanent Representative of Bolivia, and it is
encouraging to hear that progress has been made in
a number of areas. The United Kingdom continues to
appreciate the work of MINUJUSTH and its support
for the Government of Haiti to strengthen the rule of
law and further develop the capacities of the Haitian
National Police. I also wish to recognize the efforts of
President Moise to finding a constructive solution to
the recent tensions. It is clear that the situation on the
ground remains fragile. I will limit my statement to
three main points.

First, with regard to the progress made against
the benchmarks, I want to specifically acknowledge
some of the important milestones reached. The United
Kingdom has been greatly encouraged by the progress
made, ranging from the promulgation and roll out of
the legal aid law to the recent graduation of 692 police
cadets and an increase in the number of women police,
which is now close to the benchmark's target. Both
MINUJUSTH and the Government of Haiti can justly
celebrate those successes.

However, progress is still needed in critical
areas. With legislative elections on the horizon, the
promulgation by Parliament of the draft electoral
law - already highlighted today by the representatives
of France and Sweden - remains vital, as does the
reconstitution of the permanent electoral council and the
updating of the electoral roll. If the professionalization
of the Haitian National Police is to be sustained, then
its oversight and accountability mechanisms need to be
properly functional. That is paramount to increasing the
trust between the State and the Haitian people in order
to cement the social contract. And if Haitian rule-of-
law institutions as a whole are to stand up effectively
and turn new laws into a better reality, then budgets and
implementation plans need to be finalized.

Secondly, if political and security efforts to build
peace are to succeed, they will need to be accompanied
by efforts to address the structural issues that have
exacerbated or sustained the grievances of the Haitian
people, including with regard to economic opportunities
and access to basic services. Dialogue at all levels is
essential, and the United Kingdom encourages the
Haitian Government, together with its international
partners, to intensify dialogue among all stakeholders,
including the private sector and civil society, in order
to reach greater consensus on shared peacebuilding
priorities, including the adoption of measures that can
respond to the immediate needs ofpeople and minimize
the risk of destabilization or relapse into violence.

Thirdly, and finally, with regard to the MINUJUSTH
transition, I want to say, quite simply, that it is critical
that we all get this right. We now have a little more
than nine months before MINUJUSTH is expected to
leave Haiti and be succeeded by a non-peacekeeping
United Nations presence. As others have already said
today, Haitian ownership and the delivery of critical
reforms are essential for the transition to be a success.
I was encouraged to note in the report (S/2018/1059)
the establishment of a joint commission by the Haitian
Prime Minister and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General. It is vital that all parties now
intensify their efforts to ensure that the benchmarks
are met.

I was also encouraged to learn that efforts are being
stepped up with regard to the MINUJUSTH-United
Nations Development Programme joint rule of law
programmeanditssustainabilityinthepost-peacekeeping
phase. The United Kingdom would welcome similar
efforts to ensure the sustainability of MINUJUSTH's
community violence-reduction programme.

With the United Nations strategic assessment
process now under way, we look forward to engaging
closely with all stakeholders on how to make that
transition a success. We continue to urge the Secretary-
General to be realistic and clear about the division of
responsibilities across the United Nations system and
to support the United Nations to fill the gaps identified
in the capacities and capabilities of the United Nations
country team, which is key to a successful transition.

