The President: I apologize for the delay in calling
this meeting to order, which was occasioned primarily by
a conversation with President Chiluba concerning next
week's events in the Security Council on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

Because time is so short, I want to stress that we have
previously unscheduled Security Council informal
consultations at 3 pm. today to consider another matter of
great urgency to the Council. I would ask everyone - I
repeat, everyone - to bear in mind that we are starting 35
minutes late and that we have an important agenda item this
afternoon. Some of us, at least, have a very important set
of obligations at the lunch hour concerning the departure of
our esteemed colleague from China. I hope everyone will
take this into account as we proceed.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Angola

The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Angola, in which he requests to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the Council, I welcome the Vice-Minister
of External Relations of Angola, Mr. Georges Chicoti.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Chicoti
(Angola) took a seat at the Council table.


The President: In accordance with the understanding
reached in the Council's prior consultations and in the
absence of objection, I shall take it that the Security
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Kieran Prendergast,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Prendergast to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in
its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Office in
Angola (UNOA), document S/2000/23.

We will start with a report from Mr. Kieran
Prendergast, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
then move directly to a report from Ambassador Robert
Fowler of Canada, Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 864 (1993),
then ask the Vice-Minister of Angola to speak, and then
the floor will be open. Once again, I urge everyone to
consider the issue of brevity.

I give the floor to the Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, Mr. Kieran Prendergast,


