Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates the Lithuanian initiative to hold an open
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
I wish to thank the High Commissioner for Human
Rights Pillay, Under-Secretary-General Ladsous and
Under-Secretary-General Amos for their briefings.
China also listened carefully to the statement made by
the representative of the International Committee of the
Red Cross.
This year marks the fifteenth anniversary of the
Security Council's adoption of resolution 1265 (1999),
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict. In
the past 15 years, the Security Council has adopted
multiple resolutions and presidential statements and
laid down the legal framework for strengthening the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. Protecting
civilians has become one of the mandates of United
Nations peacekeeping operations.

As the nature and characteristics of conflicts evolve
over time, civilians of some countries and regions
continue to suffer from the impact of armed conflict.
The protection of civilians remains an arduous task for
the international community. China supports holding
in-depth discussions in the Security Council on the
challenges faced in the protection of civilians in armed
conflict and making pragmatic and effective efforts to
achieve constructive results to that end. I should like to
focus on the following four points.

First, all parties in an armed conflict must comply
with their obligation to protect civilians. The primary
responsibility in protecting innocent civilians from
the harm of conflict and wars lies with national
Governments. At the same time, other parties involved
in a conflict must also fully comply with international
humanitarian law and the relevant Security Council
resolutions and spare no efforts in protecting
civilians. The assistance provided by the international
community and external organizations must be in line
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and fully respect the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the countries concerned. In
addressing violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law, the first priority should be given to
the role of national judicial institutions, which are the
main channels in that field.

Secondly, in strengthening the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, it is necessary to start from
preventing and resolving conflicts and address the root
causes so as to ease the suffering that armed conflicts
inflict on civilians. The protection of civilians must
be a part of the political process in the resolution of
conflicts. Advancing political dialogue, reconciliation
processes, strengthening security sectors, economic
recovery and social development are comprehensive
means for creating an environment of durable peace.
The Security Council must make vigorous efforts
in preventive diplomacy to prevent and contain the
escalation of conflict and promote political solutions
so as to achieve lasting peace as soon as possible and
reduce the impact of conflicts on civilians.
Thirdly, in the protection of civilians, peacekeeping
operations must strictly comply with Security Council
mandates, respect the sovereignty of the countries
concerned, maintain objectivity and impartiality and
avoid becoming a party to the conflict. A peacekeeping
operation's mandate to protect civilians is one of the
important measures to help the countries concerned
better protect civilians. As such, it cannot be a substitute
for the responsibility and obligations to protect
civilians incumbent upon States' Governments and
parties to the conflicts. In developing the mandate to
protect civilians, it is necessary to give comprehensive
consideration to the situation on the ground and the
peacekeeping operation's ability and conditions and
ensure that the mandates are clear, realistic and feasible
and that the resources and equipment are adequate
and fully guaranteed. Missions should also draw
up their strategies and operational plans in the light
of the situation on the ground and enhance internal
coordination to ensure effective implementation of
their mandates.

Fourthly, humanitarian aid operations in conflict
situations must comply with United Nations guiding
principles on humanitarian aid, maintain their
humanitarian nature, neutrality, objectivity and
impartiality, and fully respect the sovereignty of the
countries concerned. All parties to a conflict must
ensure timely access to affected civilians in order to
provide humanitarian relief. That is a major premise
for the improvement of the humanitarian situation in
conflict areas and the protection of civilians.

Humanitarian aid agencies must enhance
communication with the countries concerned and,
on the basis of winning confidence and support from
all parties to ensure the effective implementation of
humanitarian aid operations.

