Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Onanga-Anyanga, Special Representative Nebie
and Commander Maio for their detailed briefings
this morning.

The United States expresses its deepest condolences
for the Tanzanian peacekeeper who died on 3 June and
the Burundian peacekeeper who died on 10 June. We
also extend our hope for a speedy recovery to those
injured in the latest attacks.

The collective goal of the international community
must be to achieve a political solution for durable peace
and recovery in the Central African Republic. We need to
work together to communicate positive progress where
it is occurring and to counter narratives by spoilers who
seek to de-stabilize the country for their own benefit.
We remain committed to President Touadera and his
Government. President Touadera continues to strive
for peace, justice and accountability and the prevention

of further atrocities, and we are pleased the Special
Criminal Court for the Central African Republic is
operational and ready to hold perpetrators accountable.

The African Union-led peace initiative offers a
reasonable starting point for the parties to discuss
and conclude a peace agreement. The United States
supports this effort and is eager for the African
Union (AU) to begin talks with and mediation among
the parties to the conflict. We want to invigorate the
process and believe the United Nations also needs to
increase its engagement in it. A conference is needed to
bring together the international community to develop
a common strategy for supporting the peace process
and the AU. We want to work to ensure that peace talks
advance. There is no way ahead in the Central African
Republic without a viable peace process backed by the
international community.

We commend the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) for its local reconciliation
efforts, and we highlight the need to harmonize those
efforts with broader and similar peace initiatives by
civil society organizations so as to ensure a coordinated
multitrack approach to peacebuilding in the Central
African Republic. We urge MINUSCA to work closely
with the AU as those processes make progress.

MINUSCA's support to the Central African Armed
Forces is important, and we remain focused on advancing
State authority in the Central African Republic. The
extension of State authority should continue to be closely
linked with ongoing effective security sector reform
and disarmament and demobilization programmes.

MINUSCA is a model for robust and proactive
peacekeeping, but the Mission is stretched thin
and struggles to fully implement its mandate. The
environment in which MINUSCA is operating is
incredibly complex. We hope that the upcoming
strategic review will offer an honest assessment
of the challenges facing the Mission. We cannot
improve MINUSCA without a thoughtful analysis of
the political and security environment in the Central
African Republic and of how MINUSCA can achieve
its objectives there.

We again offer our thanks to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, the Special
Representative of the African Union and the Force
Commander, and to the men and women of MINUSCA
for their service.

