We thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for their briefings. My delegation remains alarmed by the increasing number of coronavirus disease cases in Syria, in addition to the ongoing economic crisis and the deepening of humanitarian needs. As reported, the number of people in need of humanitarian assistance in Syria is expected to reach 13 million in 2021, with more than 9 million people currently food insecure and around 2.2 million more at risk of becoming food insecure. Undoubtedly, redoubling our efforts to meet the urgent needs of those people is extremely crucial, and ensuring timely and unimpeded access for life- saving aid is also critical. I wish to highlight the following points regarding humanitarian and political issues. First, humanitarian needs in Syria must be addressed as a matter of priority. We said that at the first meeting on this issue in January last year (see S/PV.8454), and today we wish to re-emphasize the urgency for all parties to prioritize addressing humanitarian concerns in the country. All parties to the conflict shall enable the safe, immediate and unhindered delivery of humanitarian assistance directly to people throughout Syria by the United Nations and its partners, on the basis of United Nations assessments of need and without any political prejudices and purposes. We take note that the cross-border delivery to the north-west through Bab Al-Hawa is continuing, and we thank the United Nations agencies for adjusting the work to overcome the operational challenges due to the reduction in border crossings. In that context, my delegation urges all relevant parties to agree on operational modalities for cross-line deliveries into the north-west. We also wish to urge all parties to the conflict to find a sustainable solution regarding the Allouk water station and to ensure access to safe drinking water for half a million people in Al-Hasakah, including thousands of internally displaced persons in Al-Hol and Arisha camps. On Rukban, we would like to underline the importance for all relevant parties to allow and facilitate immediate humanitarian access to people remaining at Rukban, since the last United Nations humanitarian convoy was in September 2019. My second point refers to a complete nationwide ceasefire throughout Syria. That is indeed imperative and more necessary than ever. We support the appeal for a ceasefire made by the Secretary-General and the Special Envoy and urge all parties to fully respect the ceasefire agreements. Weare pleased to note that the ceasefire in the Idlib de-escalation zone continues to hold; however, we are also concerned with the gradual increase in violations, including in other areas of the country. The hostilities must end permanently. We urge all relevant parties to protect civilians and fully respect international law and international humanitarian law. Again, avoiding the escalation of that unprecedented situation is key. Thirdly, I turn to the Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political process, facilitated by the United Nations in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015). We are delighted that the fourth session of the Constitutional Committee was held in Geneva a few weeks ago and that the next session is scheduled for 25 January 2021. As my delegation stated at the first meeting with Special Envoy Pedersen in February of last year (see S/PV.8475), the establishment of a Constitutional Committee is not an easy task but it is indeed doable. I wish to underline the same thing today with regard to advancing the work of the Committee: it is challenging and may be a slow-moving process; however, with strong and genuine commitment from all parties, it is doable. As Mr. Pedersen mentioned just now, we must be creative and find new and innovative ways to move the process forward. I have noted that different narratives and positions were presented during the last meeting. However, that is to be expected - as Special Envoy Pedersen also mentioned. We all know that the process is not going to be easy. There is also a need to improve the working methods, as Mr. Pedersen also said. But one important point, as I noted in his presentation, is that all three delegations underlined the impact of the conflict on the lives of Syrian women and the importance of their role in the political process. We should continue to build on that and ensure that there are more commonalities of interests and willingness so that they can forge peace in the country. To conclude, I would like once again to reiterate our full support for Special Envoy Pedersen in implementing his important mandates, along with his able team. We are convinced that, thanks to his active engagement with all key stakeholders, there will be progress in finding a peaceful solution to the conflict. We also thank Under-Secretary-General Lowcock and all humanitarian workers for their tireless efforts in meeting the humanitarian needs of the Syrian people. Although this may be the last scheduled meeting on the Syrian file for my delegation, our commitment to supporting sustainable peace in Syria will remain the same, both inside and outside the Council. My parting shot today is that it is our sincere hope that the Council will be more united next year on this file. What is at stake are the lives of the people of Syria, whom we love dearly.
