Mr. Neewoor (Mauritius): Mr. President, allow
me first to congratulate you warmly on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council. We thank
you for starting your presidency with this important
meeting on the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
also for placing that country and Africa high on the
Council's work programme during the month of
February.

My delegation joins the other members in
extending a very warm welcome in the Security
Council Chamber to His Excellency Mr. Joseph Kabila,
President of the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo.

First of all, on behalf of the Government of
Mauritius, I wish to present to the President, the
Government and the people of the Democratic
Republic of Congo the sincere condolences of the
Government and people of Mauritius on the tragic
death of the President's father, the late President
Laurent Kabila. We also wish to felicitate the
Government and people of Congo for the courage they
have demonstrated during the difficult time following
the recent tragic event in Kinshasa and for the
remarkable manner in which the transition is being
managed.

We have listened very attentively to the important
statement that President Joseph Kabila has just made
before the Security Council, and we feel greatly
reassured by it. We believe that he has the right vision
to achieve the goal of peace and security within the
framework of the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of his country. The road to peace and security there
requires, obviously, the participation of all the
Congolese people in an inclusive political process. The
Lusaka Accord that all the Congolese parties, as well
as the non-Congolese parties involved in the conflict,
signed in July 1999 remains unquestionably the
foundation upon which peace and normalcy should be
built in the Congo.

Unfortunately, so far the inter-Congolese
dialogue, which is an essential and integral part of the
Lusaka Accord, has not really got off the ground, and
in a significant measure this has resulted in the
stagnation of the Lusaka process. We are confident that
President Kabila will do what is necessary for the inter-
Congolese dialogue to begin without delay, in
accordance with the provisions of the Lusaka
Agreement. We urge all the parties to the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement to recommit themselves to
implementing this Agreement in all its aspects and to
comply with all its provisions.

In the wake of the recent events in Kinshasa, the
Security Council promptly received communications
from Rwanda and Uganda to the effect that they did not
intend to take any advantage of the situation. This has
been very much appreciated.

We have no doubt about the commitments of both
Rwanda and Uganda for the full and early
implementation of the Lusaka Agreement. In this
regard, we welcome the meeting earlier in Washington,
DC, between President Kagame and President Kabila.
That bilateral meeting will help build confidence for
the peace process. In the same vein, my delegation
would like to urge Rwanda and Uganda, the two
important neighbours of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, to take steps to implement the
disengagement plans which they signed in Harare a few
weeks ago along with the other parties. This important
step should mark the beginning of a process for the
withdrawal of all foreign troops from the territory of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, pursuant to the
Lusaka Agreement.

There is absolutely no question that the
deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping
operation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
necessary for the implementation of the Lusaka
Agreement. Indeed, the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo have already been waiting far
too long for the deployment to take place. There are
certainly many reasons why the Lusaka process has not
moved forward in the last year and a half since it was
signed by all concerned parties. The undue delay in the
deployment of the United Nations peacekeeping
operation has undoubtedly contributed to the stagnation
ofthe Lusaka process.

Today there are hopeful signs all around for the
implementation of the Lusaka Agreement. President
Joseph Kabila has stated his clear intention, both in
Kinshasa and in his important statement today in the
Security Council, to move the peace process forward.
We also have assurances in this regard from the other
capitals concerned. We have no doubt that all the
Congolese parties will also rally in a spirit of
patriotism and solidarity and will help bring peace and
stability to the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo.
The inter-Congolese dialogue can ultimately
determine the future political course of the country.
The United Nations, for its part, must fulfil its
responsibility and deploy the long-awaited
peacekeeping operation without any further delay, in
accordance with Security Council resolutions 1291
(2000) and 1332 (2000).

Before concluding, I wish to commend the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ambassador Kamel Morjane, and his small team of
observers for their remarkable work in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. I also wish to pay tribute to the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, the International Committee of the Red
Cross and the other relief organizations for their
important humanitarian work in providing relief and
assistance to numerous refugees, internally displaced
persons and other victims of the conflict in the
Democratic Republic ofthe Congo.

Finally, I wish to state that Mauritius wishes to
President Joseph Kabila every success in his
endeavours to bring peace, unity and democracy to his
great country.

