The Secretary-General: I thank Portugal for
convening today's debate on the protection of civilians.
I very much welcome the presence here today of His
Excellency President Mr. Anibal Antonio Cavaco
Silva - a clear sign of the commitment of Portugal to
this very important issue.

All of us share a fundamental responsibility to do
more to protect civilians caught up in the horrors of
war. In conflicts throughout the world, women, girls,
boys and men continue to be subjected to blatant and
frequent violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law. The violations include killing,
torture, kidnapping, rape and mutilation. We see forced
recruitment, including of children, and the denial of
access to medical care and life-saving assistance. And
we see displacement, which is so often the precursor to
lasting dependency, destitution and lost opportunities.

Let us remember that civilians suffer such horrors
not because they are in the wrong place at the wrong
time and become what is still euphemistically referred
to as collateral damage. Civilians suffer more and more
frequently because they are deliberately targeted. My
past two reports (S/2007/643 and S/2009/277) to the

Security Council on the protection of civilians sought
to guide the Council, Member States and parties to a
conflict on the steps they could, should and must take.
The five core challenges I identified remain painfully
relevant today.

First, we need to see enhanced compliance with
international human rights and humanitarian law.
Violations must be met with appropriate action from
the Council, including strong condemnation where
clearly warranted. Moreover, demands for compliance
should be backed by the threat of targeted sanctions
and intense scrutiny, including through commissions of
inquiry or referrals to the International Criminal Court.

Secondly, we need to more consistently and
effectively engage non-State armed groups in order to
improve their compliance with the law. Member States
need to recognize and accept the fundamental necessity
of this engagement.

Thirdly, we need proactive, well-trained and
appropriately resourced peacekeepers who can use a
full spectrum of tools - military, police, justice,
corrections and human rights * in a cohesive fashion.
Additionally, peacekeeping missions and other partners
must continue to strengthen national institutions so that
they are able to discharge their primary responsibility
for enhancing security and the rule of law by the time
the mission leaves.

Fourthly, we need improved humanitarian access
to affected populations. That means refraining from
attacks against humanitarian workers and eliminating
excessive bureaucratic requirements on the entry and
movement of assistance and workers. It means
cooperation between humanitarian actors and parties to
conflict. And it means action against those who
systematically obstruct assistance.

Last but not least, we must see enhanced
accountability. Those in breach of the law must be held
to account. Perpetrators must be able to see that we are
serious about that. I urge the Council to closely study
the recommendations that emerged from last week's
workshop on accountability convened by Portugal and
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs.

Protection is essential. Yet, we must not lose sight
of the need to address the causes of conflict, not just its
symptoms. Humanitarian actors can contribute to the
survival of affected populations. Ultimately, though,
only political solutions can end and prevent the vast
majority of conflicts and ensure the safety and well-
being of those who would otherwise bear the brunt.

