Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Since
this is the first time I am taking the floor in the Chamber
this month, I would like to congratulate you, Madam
President, on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council and to assure you of Chile's full support this
month. Moreover, I would like to congratulate the
delegation of Lithuania, in particular its Ambassador,
on its outstanding work last month.

My delegation thanks the Presidents of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia,
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, and
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, as well as the Prosecutors, for their briefings
on the implementation of the completion strategy for
both ad hoc Tribunals during the period from November
2014 through last May, in accordance with resolution
1534 (2004), as well as with respect to the operations
of the Residual Mechanism during the transition phase,
covering the same period and in accordance with
resolution 1966 (2010).

Their reports show the progress that has been
made by the Tribunals and the Mechanism in the
implementation of their judicial and administrative
tasks in The Hague and in Arusha. In this context, and
in the framework of the implementation of resolution
2194 (2014), we would like to acknowledge the work
carried out by Judge Sekule of Tanzania, Gijney of
Turkey and Robinson of Jamaica, who have completed
their respective terms of office.

In particular, we welcome the fact that the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
handed down appealsjudgements in the cases of Vujadin
Popovic' and Zdravko Toh'mir in January and April,
respectively. We also welcome the fact that in April
the Appeals Chamber of the Rwanda Tribunal heard
oral arguments in the Butare case, the only remaining
case, in which a decision is expected during the last
quarter of this year, and that the Mechanism handed
down its first decision in the Ngirabatware appeal last
December.

With regard to the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda, my delegation welcomes the fact that the
transition to the Residual Mechanism is to be concluded
shortly and that the completion strategy for the Tribunal
is proceeding in keeping with set timelines.

Chile reiterates its concern that a swift resolution
be found to both the situation pertaining to the 11
people in Tanzania who must be relocated and who are
living in a safe house in Arusha, with due consideration
being given to the humanitarian aspects of this case,
as well as to that of the nine people indicted by the
Rwanda Tribunal who remain at large, six of whom
fall under its jurisdiction and three under that of the
Residual Mechanism. International cooperation must
be intensified in both cases so as to ensure proper
accountability and to fully comply with the resolutions
adopted by the Council.

Almost 20 years on from the genocide in Srebrenica,
we recognize the contribution made by the Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia and the need to continue to
support its work until its envisaged completion date, in
2017. The debate on the closure of the Tribunals gives
us another opportunity to reflect on the ethical and
legal responsibilities undertaken by the international
community in the face of the most serious crimes,
which cannot go unpunished.

These bodies, through their judicial activities,
have made an effective contribution to reweaving
the social fabric, which is essential to comprehensive
national processes of post-conflict rehabilitation. They
have also, and this is the central point, contributed
to the progressive development of international
criminal law, providing the impetus for the creation
of the International Criminal Court as an independent
permanent criminal court linked to the United Nations
system, with jurisdiction over the most serious crimes
of major importance to the international community as
a whole.

In this context, and as Chair of the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals, I would like
once again to express the commitment of my country
to the work of the Tribunals and to the Mechanism.
We are convinced that cooperation in the completion
strategy represents one of the most direct ways for the
Council to contribute to the effectiveness of these legal
mechanisms.

