Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Ambassador Abulkalam Abdul Momen,
outgoing Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC), and his successor, Ambassador Ranko Vilovie,
for their briefings and their strong personal commitment
to the Commission.

A number of recent crises, such as that in Guinea-
Bissau last spring or that which began in December in
the Central African Republic, show the extent to which
the peacebuilding process is a hard road. The United
Nations and the PBC in particular face a number of
very complicated problems. The most recent report of
the PBC (S/2013/63) quite rightly underscores both the
potential and the limitations of the Commission - a
body which would be hard tasked to singlehandedly
address the underlying causes of instability. The
support that the Commission can provide must indeed
itself be accompanied by a strong commitment on the
part of national stakeholders - national ownership is
essential in that context - and lasting support from
international partners.

The PBC has, of late, achieved encouraging
results in a number of fields. First, in terms of
political assistance, the PBC has, for example, helped
in implementing a national reconciliation strategy in
Liberia and is supporting the Government as it resumes
its responsibilities, which are being transferred back
from the United Nations Mission in Liberia.

Secondly, with regard to partnership development
and resource mobilization, the poverty reduction
strategy in Burundi, for example, was able to make
progress, which was crucially the result of cooperation
between the PBC and the World Bank. That strategy
enjoyed the support of a donors conference held in
Geneva, which provided an opportunity for dialogue
between Burundi and its partners.

Thirdly, with regard to strengthening the coherence
of activities carried out in the field of peacebuilding, I
would refer to the example of the cooperation between
the Government of Guinea and the Peacebuilding
Fund, which allowed approximately 4,000 troops to be
retired, which has contributed to progress in security
sector reform in that country.

All of that progress is positive, but efforts must be
continued so as to ensure that the Commission be able
to play its full role. Among the principles in the field
of peacebuilding, set as priorities by the Secretary-
General in 2012, I would like to underscore two in
particular. First, a long-term approach is essential,
because peacebuilding is a difficult process that
requires solid foundations to be laid, starting with the
rule of law, a police force and a justice system. The
absence of those elements makes it impossible for a
lasting peace to be built.

The PBC must also enable a country to emerge from
a cycle of violence. In the absence of credible police or
military forces, it is too often armed groups that take
control of a region or a State. The current crisis in the
Central African Republic shows us the extent to which
peacebuilding is a process that is both very fragile and
reversible. The work of the PBC must therefore have a
long-term perspective.

Secondly, in order to be viable, peacebuilding
processes must be inclusive, that is, they should
bring together all sectors of society. The increasing
recognition of the role of women in peacebuilding
is positive. We welcome in particular the decision of
Nepal, which, on the basis of resolutions 1325 (2000)
and 1820 (2008), has drawn up a national action plan
to make women an integral part of peacebuilding. The
efforts of the PBC and of its Organizational Committee
regularly to address that issue should continue.

Beyond the general principles for implementing
peacebuilding, we believe that the PBC must also
improve its methods. In that regard, there are two
critical aspects.

First, the coordinating role of the PBC must be
strengthened in order to prevent the assistance provided
to countries on its agenda from being too fragmented
or inconsistent. Within the United Nations, exchanges
among the various bodies and relevant agencies should
continue. We welcome the Security Council's holding
of an interactive dialogue with the PBC. We are
interested in the conclusion of the Commission's report
that proposes considering areas in which the PBC could
more closely cooperate with the General Assembly. We
also underscore the fact that subregional organizations
play an increasing role in post-conflict periods. It
is therefore important that their views be taken into
account in the context of country configurations.
A more fluid dialogue with such organizations is
desirable.

Finally, the initiatives outside the United Nations,
such as, for example, the New Deal for Engagement
in Fragile States, also merit the Commission's
attention. The partnership between the PBC and the
international financial institutions, the private sector
and philanthropic organizations is also important. We
believe that the work in that direction must be pursued
in order to mobilize resources, identify financing gaps
and duplication and define priorities in partnership
with the State concerned.

Lastly, we believe that relations between the
Commission in New York and in the field must be
improved. For instance, there should be a more flexible
exchange of information between the Commission here
and its field offices. For example, there are regular
contacts between the Chairs of the PBC country
configurations and the Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General.

