Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): First of all, I thank the
members ofthe Security Council, as well as the briefers,
for their remarks. We have taken good note of them.

Nearly two months ago, on 20 May, the Security
Council clearly stated its position on the Russian request
to discuss Ukraine's language law by rejecting it (see S/PV.8529). At that time, the Russian representative,
however, demonstrated outrageous disrespect for the
Council's rules and its members by abusing its right to
speak in explanation of vote and delivering a lengthy
statement on substance.

Now Russia yet again wants to talk about Ukraine's
law on the functioning of Ukrainian as the State
language, as if it might threaten international peace and
security and as if there were no more important issue on
the Council agenda. In fact, this matter has no relation
whatsoever to international peace and security and has
nothing to do with the implementation of resolution
2202 (2015).

On 22 May, I sent a letter to the Council with a
detailed argumentation of the issue, contained in
document S/2019/422, which I cite for the convenience
of Council members. Ijust want to stress the following.

A country that, for centuries, suppressed the
Ukrainian language and forcefully replaced it with
Russian in all spheres of public life is not in a position
to tell us now what language we should speak and
write. Let us compare. There are Ukrainian schools
in Australia, Argentina, Slovakia and many other
countries. Russia, where about 3 million Ukrainians
live - that is according only to the official count, but
unofficially many more live there - does not have a
single Ukrainian school. Moreover, there were seven
Ukrainian and 15 Crimean Tatar schools in Crimea
before the Russian occupation in 2014. The occupying
authorities closed all Ukrainian schools and half of
the Crimean Tatar schools. I can only repeat the words
from the Sermon on the Mount:

"Thou hypocrite, first cast out the beam out ofthine

own eye; and then shalt thou see clearly to cast out

the mote out of thy brother's eye." (The Holy Bible, 
Matthew, 7:5)

As far as our language law is concerned, let me
say once again that is our own issue subject to our own
work, and we will sort it out ourselves with the help
of our partners, including the High Commissioner on
National Minorities, the Venice Commission and other
relevant international institutions.

Every time the Russian delegation raises this
subject, it pursues a double goal - to put political
pressure on Ukraine and to distract attention from
other issues. In May, it tried to impose its own agenda
on the newly elected President of Ukraine, who was
inaugurated the very same day, and to distract attention
from the anniversary of the deportation of Crimean
Tatars by the Stalin regime.

Today, by raising this spurious issue four days
before the parliamentary elections in Ukraine, Moscow
is trying to provide political support to the pro-Russian
parties. At the same time, Moscow is trying to divert
attention from the anniversary of the downing by the
Russian military of flight MH-17 on 17 July 2014 and
from the implementation of the Minsk agreements, or,
to be more precise, their persistent non-implementation
by Russia. That is why my delegation requested that
the Security Council consider developments related to
the ongoing Russian-Ukrainian conflict, and we are
thankful for today's discussion.

This is the first Council meeting on the Russian-
Ukrainian conflict after the presidential elections
in Ukraine. I therefore would like to reiterate the
unwavering commitment of Ukraine's new leadership
to the politico-diplomatic way of resolving the conflict.
The implementation of the Minsk agreements remains
among its top priorities.

Right after assuming his duties as Head of State,
President Zelenskyi took concrete steps towards
ensuring the potency of the Trilateral Contact Group,
the revitalization of the Normandy format and
achieving the disengagement of forces in Donbas.
Thus, the Ukrainian side has demonstrated in deed
its constructive approach in search of the conflict's
resolution. What have we received in return?

Despite the agreement reached by the Trilateral
Contact Group on the ceasefire starting on 8 March,
the Russian occupation forces in the Donetsk and
Luhansk regions have violated it almost 2,000 times.
Heavy weapons, prohibited by the Minsk agreements,
including tanks, heavy artillery and mortars, have
been used almost 800 times. Those provocations have
resulted in the death of 36 Ukrainian servicemen.
Approximately 200 servicemen have been wounded. In
June alone, Ukraine lost nine military personnel owing
to unprovoked enemy fire.

Since the new President took office, the Russian
forces and their proxies have almost doubled their
ceasefire violations. Is that what Russian peace
proposals look like? The Russian forces intentionally
target civilian infrastructure facilities throughout the
area. Is that an invitation to the direct talks that the
Russian Federation persistently calls for? Detailed
information on all such violations has been regularly
reported by the Special Monitoring Mission of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) for five years, but the Russian delegation
prefers to talk here about the language law.

The situation on the ground appears very bleak, as
Russia shows no indication of readiness to abandon its
aggressive goals in Ukraine. The implementation of the
Minsk agreements by the Kremlin, first and foremost
in the security sphere, remains stalled. The illegal
"passportization" continues. The security situation in
Donbas continues to deteriorate. The de-occupation of
Crimea has not started. Ukrainian citizens continue
to be used as hostages by Moscow in its hybrid war
against my country. The Charter of the United Nations,
the norms of international law and the binding orders
of international courts and tribunals remain dead letter
for the Russian Federation, which keeps denying that it
is a party to the conflict that it masterminded, initiated
and continues to fuel.

Let us return to the Minsk agreements, namely, to
the package of measures of 12 February 2015, on which
Ambassador Nebenzia so enjoys lecturing the members
of the Council.

With regard to paragraph 1 on an immediate and
comprehensive ceasefire (see resolution 2202 (2015),
annex), recently, the Russian forces intensified the
shelling of Ukrainian military positions and residential
areas, using l22-millimetre and 152-millimetre heavy
artillery. On 1 July, an ambulance, bearing every
indication of medical transport, was targeted by the
Russian occupation forces with an anti-tank rocket. As
a result, two Ukrainian medics evacuating a wounded
soldier near the village of Vodyane were killed, and one
died later in the hospital. Did the militants not know that
shelling a medical vehicle is a violation of the norms of
international humanitarian law? Of course they knew,

and the Russian delegation still wants to discuss the use
of Ukrainian language in the public life of my country.
For those who have forgotten, I will cite paragraph 1 of
resolution 2286 (2016):

"[The Security Council] strongly condemns acts
of violence, attacks and threats against the wounded
and sick, medical personnel and humanitarian
personnel exclusively engaged in medical duties,
their means of transport and equipment".

The Russian delegation persistently asserts that
Moscow has no obligations under the Minsk agreements
and that it is only an impartial observer and mediator.
Let us inject a dose ofreality into those delirious claims.
The 1st and 2nd Army Corps that constitute the main
fighting force in the occupied territories of Donbas
are part and parcel of Russia's 8th Army, which has its
headquarters in Novocherkask, in the Rostov region of
Russia. All weapons, arms, ammunition, equipment
and fuel are supplied to the occupied Donbas courtesy
ofthe 8th Army. All command posts of any significance
are occupied by Russian officers. Therefore, the
responsibility for upholding any ceasefire agreement
rests with the Russian military leadership and not some
fictitious local militias. The Russian military presence
and active participation in the war is an established fact,
no matter how strenuously Russia may try to deny it.

With regard to paragraph 2 of the package
of measures for the implementation of the Minsk
agreements, related to the withdrawal of all heavy
weapons with the aim of creating a security zone, the
OSCE Special Monitoring Mission continues to report
weapons in violation of the respective withdrawal
lines and outside of designated storage sites in the
Russian-occupied territories of Donbas and a constant
replenishment of fuel, lubricants and ammunition.
Hundreds of pieces of Russian heavy weapons continue
to pose a direct and serious military threat to Ukraine
and its defenders. Much more remains hidden from the
Mission's eyes.

With respect to paragraph 3 of the package of
measures, related to the effective monitoring and
verification by the OSCE of the ceasefire regime and
the pull-out of heavy weapons, as reported by the
Special Monitoring Mission, the Russian occupation
authorities restrict the activities of the monitors,
including by denying access of the Mission to border
crossing points in the occupied parts ofthe Donetsk and
Luhansk regions.

Concerning paragraph 10 of the package of
measures, related to the withdrawal of all foreign
armed formations, military equipment and mercenaries
from the territory of Ukraine under the monitoring of
the OSCE, reports from Donbas confirm that there
has been no withdrawal whatsoever. Instead, we see
a systematic and incessant flow of Russian-made
weapons, including the newest types, and ammunition
through the uncontrolled segment of the Ukrainian-
Russian State border.

Which of the security provisions of the Minsk
agreements can be considered to have been implemented
by Russia? None. Not a single one. Despite the progress
made on disengagement in Stanytsia Luhanska, the
OSCE Special Monitoring Mission still observes a
Russian military presence in areas where there should
be none. The OSCE Mission has reported men in
military-style clothing, who were illegally wearing
blue armbands with "Joint Centre for Control and
Coordination" (JCCC) written on them. We consider
such actions by the Russian side to be yet another
provocation, since, as of the end of 2017, only the
Ukrainian part of the JCCC has continued to discharge
its duties on site. As has already been mentioned in the
Council at previous meetings, the Russian Federation
has unilaterally and groundlessly withdrawn its officers
from the bilateral structure. No one is authorized to
replace them.

Despite ample proof of Russia's aggression against
Ukraine in Donbas, it remains in denial. That is
Moscow's usual tactic - to deny the obvious, despite
any evidence. It is the same way it denied the presence
of its troops in Crimea and its role in seizing the
peninsula. It is the same way it denied its role in the
downing of Malaysian Airlines Flight MH-17, which
killed almost 300 passengers. Tomorrow will mark five
years since that tragedy. I would again like to convey
Ukraine's deepest condolences to the families of all
of the victims and reassure them that the perpetrators
must and will be held to account, in compliance with
resolution 2166 (2014).

Ukraine fully supports the efforts by the Joint
Investigation Team, which includes investigators and
prosecutors from the Netherlands, Australia, Belgium,
Malaysia and Ukraine. The start of criminal prosecution
is an important milestone in uncovering the full truth
and ensuring that justice will be done. We welcome the
decision of the Netherlands and Australia to hold the
Russian Federation responsible under international law
for its role in the downing of flight MH-17.

Let me also remind the Council of an event that
took place on 25 November last year, when Russia
attacked and captured the Ukrainian navy ships
Berdyansk and Nikopol and the tugboat Yana Kapu,
as well as 24 Ukrainian servicemen. That was nothing
more than another act of aggression of the Russian
Federation against Ukraine. It was a blatant violation
of the core principle of customary international law
and international law of the sea - the immunity of
warships. Russian overtly neglects warship immunity
and creates a dangerous precedent that irreparably
harms the whole system of the freedom of navigation
on the high seas.

Russia has continued to deny that international
wrongful act, but today it has gone even further. It
denies the jurisdiction of the International Tribunal
for the Law of the Sea (ITLOS) and ignores its binding
orders. On 25 May, ITLOS ruled in the Case concerning
the detention ofthree Ukrainian naval vessels (Ukraine v. Russian Federation) by 19 votes to 1 that Russia
should immediately release the three vessels and ensure
their return to the custody of Ukraine, and release its
24 servicemen and allow them to return to Ukraine.
Russia has not implemented it.

We do not know the condition of those military
vessels. We do know the situation with the 24 servicemen
of those vessels. They are in a Russian prison - the
infamous Lefortovo. They are very rarely allowed to
be visited by the Ukrainian Consul and have not seen
their families for more than seven months. Tomorrow,
a Russian court will consider the continuation of the
detention of the 24 Ukrainian servicemen. We call
on the Russian Federation to comply, at last, with the
binding orders of ITLOS, release the Ukrainian sailors
and let them return to Ukraine.

Russia's general disregard for international law
is obvious as the Russian occupation administration
intensifies its repression of residents of Crimea under
the pretext of fighting terrorism. That is how Russia
reacts to hearings, which now take place at the
International Court of Justice, on the application of
the International Convention for the Suppression of
the Financing of Terrorism and of the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination, and the Arbitral Tribunal in the matter
of the Dispute Concerning Coastal State Rights in the
Black Sea, Sea ofAzov, and the Kerch Strait (Ukraine v. the Russian Federation).

The Russian occupation authorities continue to
deny proper medical assistance to Ukrainian citizens
in detention. They ignore the decision of the European
Court of Human Rights of 11 June and refuse to transfer
disabled Crimean Tatar Edem Bekirov to a hospital.
Russia must immediately and unconditionally release
all Ukrainian citizens illegally held by the Kremlin,
including in the Russian-occupied parts of Ukraine.
Until then, they must be given all necessary medical
assistance and legal protection.

Russia's blatant disrespect of international
jurisdictional bodies should receive an appropriate
response. We call for the strengthening of political
and economic sanctions on the aggressor State until
Russia stops violating human rights in the temporarily
occupied Crimea, releases all illegally detained citizens
of Ukraine and de-occupies the Autonomous Republic
of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol.

I do not have a recipe for a political settlement to
the conflict. Various ideas and initiatives have been
introduced to provide additional impetus. None of
them has worked so far. People are still being killed,
ceasefires do not hold and the humanitarian situation
continues to deteriorate. The best the Council can do
today is to express concern or call on the parties to do
something. That is very unfortunate, particularly as the
parties are present in the Chamber, even though one of
them pretends it is not a party.

Let us be practical. I would like to suggest very
specific, simple and doable measures that Russia can
implement, if Moscow really wishes to contribute to the
resolution of the conflict and make the lives of civilians
in the conflict zone at least a little bit easier.

First, it must ensure that the so-called harvest
ceasefire, which was agreed by the Normandy Four,
is sustained and withdraw heavy weaponry. Secondly,
it should unblock the process of prisoner exchange,
including in relation to the Ukrainian citizens detained
by the Russian occupation authorities; provide access
to them, including by the International Committee of
the Red Cross; and allow searches for missing persons.
Thirdly, it must unconditionally release the 24 Ukrainian
servicemen, as ordered by the International Tribunal
for the Law of the Sea. Fourthly, it must withdraw its
military from the disengagement area and dismantle its
fortification structures there. Fifthly, it should agree on
the opening of additional crossing checkpoints.

Of course, this is a very short list and I could go
on and on naming relevant measures. But we must start
somewhere. Let us make a difference. As the famous
Chinese philosopher Lao Tzu said, centuries ago: "A
journey of thousand miles begins with a single step."

