Mr. Dauda (Sierra Leone): At the outset, I join
previous speakers in congratulating you, Mr. President,
for assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of September. At the same time, I would like
to thank the members of the Council for giving me the
opportunity to participate in the discussion of the
agenda item under the Council's consideration, namely,
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL).

On behalf of His Excellency President Ernest Bai
Koroma and the people of Sierra Leone, I Wish to
convey our profound appreciation for the unremitting
support and active interest by the United Nations and
friends of Sierra Leone to consolidate our peace,
stability and development. In that regard, permit me to
single out the strong leadership and commitment in the
pursuit of peace and development in Sierra Leone
displayed by Ambassador John McNee as Chair of the
Sierra Leone configuration, and to express our sincere
gratitude personally to him, his Mission staff and the
Government and the people of Canada for the
exemplary and record-setting role they have played,
which is worthy of emulation and recognition. We wish
Mr. McNee well in his future assignments.

We look forward to continuing to work with
Canada in consolidating the gains made in the
transition from the post-conflict phase to a more
development-focused phase. We welcome Ambassador
McNee's successor, Ambassador Guillermo
Rishchynski, with open arms and high expectations and
greet him today with a very warm embrace. We thank
him for his instructive participation in this debate.

Our thanks also go to the Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Michael
von der Schulenburg, for his remarkable show of

understanding of the situation on the ground, as well as
to the United Nations country team for its strong
support in helping to consolidate peace and in
maximizing the gains of our post-conflict development
effort. I acknowledge the kind sentiments that Mr. Von
der Schulenburg expressed in my regard in his
statement. I would like to assure him of my continued
cooperation and support in the efforts to consolidate
our peace process.

The Secretary-General's seventh report on the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Sierra Leone (S/2011/554) accurately catalogues the
progress made and the challenges that remain in our
efforts to consolidate peace and transition towards a
more developmental phase. President Ernest Bai
Koroma and the Government of Sierra Leone remain
firmly committed to the Vision of our international
partners, including the United Nations and the
Peacebuilding Commission, for ensuring durable peace
and stability and in fostering socio-economic
development as mapped out in our Agenda for Change.
It is within that context that President Koroma
launched the idea of an all-inclusive and non-partisan
national conference during his speech celebrating the
fiftieth anniversary of our independence.

The concern for the implementation of the joint
communique of 2 April 2009, alluded to in the report,
is well noted. We would like to assure the Council that
the Government of Sierra Leone will continue to
engage with all stakeholders, as was demonstrated in
working with UNIPSIL to establish the All Political
Parties Youth Association and the All Political Parties
Women's Association, both of which aim at preventing
political violence, fostering inter-party dialogue and, in
the case of the Women's Association, further enhancing
women's participation in politics.

In the latter regard, I am happy to share with the
Council that we now have 14.5 per cent of women
holding political office, almost half of our target of
30 per cent. We also continue to make progress towards
the education of the girl child and towards providing
free health care to pregnant women, lactating mothers
and children under five years old.

We are also making steady progress in putting
structures in place to address youth unemployment,
corruption, transnational organized crime, the
participation of women in peacebuilding and public
service, and gender-based violence. In response to

youth unemployment, which remains a significant
challenge to the peace consolidation process, a new
Ministry of Youth Employment and Sports has been
established, along with a National Youth
Commission- whose commissioner and board
members have been appointed - to provide the policy
framework. These measures will pave the way for the
meaningful participation of youth in national
development.

The Government of Sierra Leone remains
committed to the conduct of peaceful, free, fair,
credible and transparent elections in 2012. We
welcome all the support of the United Nations and our
development partners to that end. President Koroma's
commitment to a peaceful political environment was
recently demonstrated by ensuring that there was an
atmosphere conducive to the main opposition party, the
Sierra Leone People's Party, being able to select its
party officials, including its presidential candidate for
the 2012 elections. Indeed, a successful outcome of
those elections will be a highly acclaimed benchmark
and indicator of whether meaningful peace and
stability has really taken firm root in our national
efforts, as will the realization of the much talked-about
idea of a transition process or a phasing out of
UNIPSIL into a United Nations country team.

The National Electoral Commission and the
Political Parties Registration Commission enjoy the
independence necessary to deliver effectively on their
constitutional mandate free of interference. Efforts are
also being made by the Electoral Commission, in
consultation with all stakeholders, including political
parties, to consider the reform of the electoral process.
The Sierra Leone Broadcasting Corporation, the
Independent Media Commission and the Editors Guild
continue to play a central role in providing equal
access to radio and television air time to the public,
and to political parties in particular.

We are equally committed to responding to
concerns raised in the report on the mining sector and
the management of our natural resources by taking
measures to improve the governance of the sector and
ensuring greater transparency and accountability in
order to maximize the value derived from the country's
mineral resources for the benefit of all Sierra
Leoneans. To that end, we have sought support from
our development partners in order to build the capacity
of the Ministry of Mines and Mineral Resources.

However, continued support from the
international community and our development partners
is still required to build on the gains made to further
consolidate peacebuilding in Sierra Leone. In
particular, such issues as support for the National
Electoral Commission, addressing youth
unemployment, support for the Anti-Corruption
Commission, the reparations process as recommended
by the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, and the
provision of vehicles to the Sierra Leone Police to
enhance their capability and make them more mobile
and visible during the elections and after, are issues
that require urgent attention and solutions in order to
consolidate the gains already made.

The successful conduct of peaceful, free and fair
elections largely requires all stakeholders to be
responsible and adhere to the electoral laws and other
relevant national legislation. In particular, there is a
need for all stakeholders, including international
players, to be biased in favour of consolidating peace
and stability in Sierra Leone and not to be seen to be
supportive of perpetrators of gross human rights abuses
and violations. At this stage of the peacebuilding
process, such conduct could tend to be misunderstood
and incite violence, which could then lead to a relapse
into conflict.

Furthermore, drug trafficking and organized
crime continue to pose a serious challenge to the
Economic Community of West African States
subregion. With support from the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, Sierra Leone, within the
framework of the West Africa Coast Initiative, has
gone far ahead of other affected countries in putting in
place the structures for the Transnational Organized
Crime Unit to be functional and effective. Additional
assistance to the Government in promoting good
governance and the rule of law; combating illicit drug
trafficking and organized crime; providing support to
the Human Rights Commission; and assisting in
strengthening national capacity-building in the areas of
law enforcement, forensics, border management,
money laundering and the strengthening of criminal
justice institutions is also required to consolidate and
build on the gains made in those key peacebuilding
areas.

On the socio-economic front, the prevailing
global economic and financial uncertainties, as well as
debt crises, are seriously undermining our efforts to
turn the economy around as quickly as desired. In view
of the severe impact of those uncertainties on our
efforts, and in support of the strides we have made in
socio-economic development, we look forward to the
adoption of effective ways and means by which the
international community and development partners
could respond to the needs of the funding gap in the
implementation of the United Nations Joint Vision for
Sierra Leone. We appreciate the positive response by
some of our development partners and friendly
countries, including the United Kingdom, Canada,
Australia, Ireland and Italy, in terms of their
contribution to the Multi-Donor Trust Fund. We appeal
for appropriate steps to be taken towards fulfilling
commitments with regard to the pledges made at the
Consultative Group meeting on Sierra Leone held in
London in 2009.

We are fully aware that attracting foreign direct
investment and establishing a conducive and
purposeful business environment remain key in
establishing a more secure Sierra Leone and in
protecting its citizens from fear and want. The
Government will relentlessly continue to pursue that
objective.

While we share the accolades for the progress
made, it is important to gently urge our friends, the
international community and the United Nations to
continue investing in success as we relentlessly work
towards achieving our shared objectives in peace
consolidation and development.

I would like to draw the Council's attention to the
increase in mercenary activities in the Mano River
Basin, which require our collective effort and support
so as to address the issue before it eventually gets out
of hand and undermines peace and stability in the
subregion. We welcome United Nations support to the
trial of Charles Taylor by the Special Court for Sierra
Leone.

Before concluding my statement, I would like,
with the leave of the Council, to provide a briefing on
recent developments in terms of political violence in
Sierra Leone. The flag-bearer of the Sierra Leone
People's Party (SLPP) for the 2012 presidential
elections, Mr. Jurius Maada Bio, scheduled a national
thank-you tour to personally express his gratitude to
SLPP members for having elected him as the
presidential candidate of their party. The party
secretariat is said to have duly requested the necessary
police clearance, which was granted by right, with the
understanding that Mr. Maada Bio was to deliver his
thank-you message to his audience at the B0
Coronation Field.

Mr. Maada Bio left Freetown on Friday,
9 September, made stopovers at Mile 91 and Moyamba
Junction and arrived in B0 without any incident. He
was welcomed by huge and jubilant crowds at all
points. On his way to the Coronation Field, the convoy
was routed along Mahei Boima Road, where the party
offices of the All People's Congress (APC) and the
People's Movement for Democratic Change (PMDC)
are located.

It is reported that, between the offices of the
PMDC and the APC, there was an incident of stone-
throwing, to which Mr. Maada Bio, who is said to have
been riding in an open-top vehicle and in a standing
position, fell victim with an injury to his head. It is
further reported that he was then rushed to a hospital
for medical attention. With that, violence immediately
erupted at the scene of the incident, which led to the
burning of the APC office building. An additional two
buildings at two different locations were also burned
down, as was the residence of Mr. Sheku Sillah,
APC-B0 District Chairman, and a rental building
housing the offices of De Pa In Yai.

Journalists are reporting that police efforts to
contain the rampage involved the use of tear gas and
live bullets, which is said to have resulted in one death,
while 17 people were injured and hospitalized. This
ugly political incident was starkly condemned in a
press release issued immediately after the incident by
the Office of President Ernest Bai Koroma, and in
many subsequent press releases by other political
interest groups, including the APC and the PMDC
parties, the Independent Media Commission, the
Political Party Registration Commission (PPRC) and
the Campaign for Good Governance.

Wide and unequivocal condemnation has also
been strongly expressed by the general public through
radio phone-in programmes and in print media
editorials. The President called a short security meeting
on Saturday, which was attended by invited executive
representatives of the PPRC, the media and civil
society. The meeting was also attended by the Minister
of Defence, the Minister for Internal Affairs, the
Deputy Minister for Information and Communications,
the Chief of Staff, the Chief of Defence Staff, the
Sierra Leone Police, the senior cadre of the Office of

National Security, the president of the fire force and
the Minister for Foreign Affairs.

In his opening remarks, the President thanked all
for responding in such good numbers on very short
notice. He firmly reiterated his personal condemnation
of the incident, which he said was sending very
undesirable and wrong signals ahead of the 2012
elections, and which could potentially negate and
derail the national gains made in terms of rebranding
the country's image, peacebuilding and peace
consolidation, which were so painstakingly achieved
with the help of our development partners and the
international community.

The President emphatically described the
unfortunate incident as ugly and unacceptable,
inasmuch as it portends possible violence during the
forthcoming 2012 elections. He added that it could
undermine the peace, security and stability of the State.
President Koroma then categorically stated his
personal commitment to nip this inimical tendency in
the bud, as he would not allow a recurrence of such
apparent re-emergence of political violence, be it
inter-or intra-party violence. In the light of what I have
described, the President then issued a series of stem
directives. He ordered an urgent investigation into the
entire political incident of Friday, 9 September and the
submission of a comprehensive report as soon as
possible. He also ordered that a competent committee
be properly and immediately constituted and stressed
the need to include members of the PPRC and civil
society organizations so as to ensure transparency and
the outcome of an objective report that would be
credible in the eyes of the nation and the international
community.

The President added that he would like to see the
investigation conducted in such a professional manner
as to leave no room for suspicion by anyone of being
unduly disadvantaged. He said that the committee must
engage in an extensive fact-finding exercise aimed at
producing a comprehensive report that is expected to
provide credible evidential basis for the prosecution of
10
all those found culpable, without exception, prejudice
or favour.

The President reaffirmed his determination to
ensure that, without exception, anyone found
responsible would bear the full penalty of the law. He
then implored members of the committee to be
constituted to keep in mind that their assignment is a
special national call for their patriotic service in a very
crucial situation affecting our national development,
image and pride. In thanking all of those in attendance,
the President said that he expected a speedy and
transparent investigation, as well as a very
comprehensive and credible report for the sake of
easing the anxiety of the nation.

It is to be noted that the investigation will be
conducted independently of, but simultaneously with,
the B0 police investigation, which may be seen as
political in nature.

A similar approach was taken in the case of a
recent incident in Kono during a visit by the Minister
for Internal Affairs. The committee was scheduled to
depart Freetown on Sunday, 11 September. On
realizing that Mr. Maada Bio cut short his tour and
returned to Freetown over the weekend, the committee
membership decided to seek an interview with him
before he departed the country for a medical check-up.
That is the end of that briefing.

Finally, allow me once again to reaffirm our deep
appreciation to the United Nations, the Peacebuilding
Commission, its Chair and the members of the Sierra
Leone configuration, as well as our development
partners, for their continued support to peacebuilding
and peace consolidation in Sierra Leone.

