The President (spoke in Russian): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.

After consultations among Council members, I
have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf:

"The Security Council welcomes the progress
made to date by the Federal Government of Somalia
on security sector, economic and political reforms.
The Security Council welcomes the peaceful
election ofa new Speaker ofthe House of the People
and the resumption of the Federal Parliament's
activity. The Security Council underscores the need
for the Federal Government of Somalia, the Somali
Federal Parliament and the federal member states
to work together in the interests of all Somalis.

"The Security Council notes with concern
recent fighting in the $001 region of northern
Somalia. The Security Council urges parties to
implement, without delay, their commitment to
international partners to an immediate cessation
of hostilities, including refraining from statements
or actions that may raise tensions, and further
urges parties to pull back their forces and engage
in dialogue. The Security Council notes with
concern that the fighting has exacerbated the
humanitarian situation and calls on all parties to
allow and facilitate full, safe, rapid and unhindered
humanitarian access.

"The Security Council welcomes the resumption
of high-level dialogue between the Federal
Government of Somalia and the federal member
states to make further progress on key priorities.
These include power- and resource-sharing,
the constitutional review, fiscal federalism,
preparations for one-person-one-vote elections in
2020/2021, support for regional security forces,
and finalizing the justice and corrections federal
model, all of which require political agreements
that can form the basis for legislation in the
Federal Parliament.

"The Security Council reaffirms its respect
for the sovereignty, territorial integrity, political
independence and unity of Somalia. The Security
Council notes with concern that internal and
external pressures risk undermining Somalia's
political unity. The Security Council underscores
the importance of working to prevent destabilizing
effects of regional crises and disputes from spilling
over into Somalia, and the need for all stakeholders,
including Somalia's international partners, to work
constructively to support the federal system and
its institutions and to respect Somalia's peace- and
state-building process.

"The Security Council stresses the importance
of the full, equal and effective participation
of women in the political settlement process
and in all efforts towards the maintenance and
promotion of peace and security, and urges the
Federal Government of Somalia and the federal
member states to continue to promote increased
representation and participation of women at all
decision-making levels in Somali institutions.

"The Security Council expresses serious
concern at the ongoing threat posed by Al-Shabaab,
and reaffirms its support for a comprehensive
approach to security in Somalia, consistent with
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law as applicable and with full respect
for the rule of law. The Security Council welcomes
recent progress on developing a conditions-based
transition plan with clear target dates for the
progressive transfer of security responsibilities
from the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) to the Somali security institutions, as
endorsed by the African Union Peace and Security
Council on 30 April 2018 and by international
partners at the Somalia Security High-Level
Meeting in Brussels on 2 May 2018. The Security
Council commends the Federal Government of
Somalia, together with the federal member states,
AMISOM, the police- and troop-contributing
countries, and international partners, for their
collaborative approach to developing this plan, and
calls for its effective implementation, starting with
phase one, with the full participation of all relevant
stakeholders. The Security Council underlines the
need to ensure resourcing for the transition plan.

"The Security Council furtherrecalls the critical
importance of accelerating the implementation of
the national security architecture agreement to
provide the foundation for a successful transition.
The Security Council urges the Federal Government
and federal member states to prioritize efforts in
this regard, including by integrating and providing
federal support to regional forces, as agreed by
Somalia's National Security Council. The Security
Council calls on international partners to support
the transition and the implementation of the
architecture, and to coordinate security assistance
in line with the existing Comprehensive Approach
to Security structures.

"The Security Council notes that AMISOM's
role in enabling the transition to Somali-led
security will be critical. The Security Council pays
tribute to the bravery and sacrifices of AMISOM
and its police- and troop-contributing countries to
advance peace and stability in Somalia, and looks
forward to the recommendations of the fourth
African Union-United Nations joint review of
AMISOM. on how AMISOM. should be configured
to support the transition.

"The Security Council reiterates the need
to enhance the predictability, sustainability and
flexibility of financing for African Union-led peace
support operations authorized by the Security
Council and under the Security Council's authority,
consistent with Chapter VIII of the Charter. The
Security Council further reiterates its call for
new and existing donors to support AMISOM,
and reiterates that regional organizations have the
responsibility to secure human, financial, logistical
and other resources for their organizations. The
Security Council welcomes the efforts of the
African Union and the United Nations to explore
options for AMISOM. funding.

"The Security Council notes that accelerating
Somalia's economic recovery to support livelihoods
and create jobs is an essential component of
building peace and stability and supporting
sustainable development. The Security Council
welcomes the commitment shown by the Federal
Government of Somalia to the current International
Monetary Fund staff-monitored programme, and
welcomes the outcomes of the Somalia round table
at the spring meetings on 19 April. The Security
Council urges Somalia to continue to demonstrate
progress in order to build the fiscal and monetary
track-record needed to advance the process
towards normalization with international financial
institutions and debt relief.
"The Security Council expresses deep concern
about the humanitarian situation in Somalia,
including the continued risk of famine and the impact
ofrecent flooding. The Security Council welcomes
the establishment of a national flood committee
by the Somali authorities to help coordinate the
response. The Security Council underlines the
importance of continued international support to
address humanitarian concerns and to build long-
term resilience.

"The Security Council expresses concern about
all violations of international humanitarian law and
violations and abuses of human rights in Somalia,
including the continued abduction and use of child
soldiers and sexual and gender-based violence.

"The Security Council stresses the importance
ofthe protection of civilians, and calls on all parties
to comply immediately with their obligations under
international law including under international
humanitarian law and international human
rights law.

"The Security Council notes that the Somalia
Partnership Forum (SPF) will take place in Brussels
on 25 and 26 June 2018 and looks forward to further
progress on political, security and economic
reforms. The Security Council further notes that
the SPF will provide an opportunity to advance
discussions on resilience and responses to the
humanitarian situation. The Security Council will
continue to follow progress closely, and reaffirms
its support for peace, stability and development
in Somalia."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2018/13.

The meeting rose at 10.15 am.
