The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the Minister for Foreign Affairs of New
Zealand.
Right across the Middle East, grave issues continue
to demand the Council's attention. The humanitarian
situation in Yemen continues to deteriorate. The civil
war in Syria rages on. In Iraq, sectarian divides provide
space for groups like the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant to prosper. A basis for lasting peace between
Israelis and Palestinians remains elusive.

Against that difficult background, this week is also
an apt moment to reflect on positive developments in the
region. The Security Council's adoption of resolution
2231 (2015), on Monday, following years of negotiation
among the permanent, the European Union and Germany
and Iran, represents a major victory for diplomacy.
While much work remains to implement the agreement,
and even more to build sustained trust between Iran and
the international community, reaching an agreement at
all represents a huge achievement. Great credit is due to
those most directly involved. The parties' willingness
to commit to political solutions and exercise political
courage in the face of significant challenges lies at the
heart of that diplomatic achievement.

The question now is whether the same political
courage and commitment can be brought to bear on
finding political solutions to the other issues afflicting
the region. Can stakeholders cooperate to end the
conflicts in Syria, Iraq or Yemen, or to create a pathway
towards a two-State solution for Israel and Palestine?
I believe the answers must be, "Yes". But the burden
of those expectations must not sit with those nations
alone. The Council must face up to its responsibilities;
it must show some political courage of its own.

We all know that the situation in Syria has remained
deadlocked for too long. The region cannot afford for
the conflict to continue - nor can the Council, for its
credibility is at stake. The human cost of the conflict
is unacceptable and unsustainable. We welcome the
Special Envoy for Syria's efforts and look forward to
hearing more from him next week. But New Zealand
believes that the Secretary-General's good offices
alone cannot broker a political solution in Syria. Key
players in the region and those on the Council need to
recognize their responsibilities to do so.

In Yemen, the humanitarian situation continues
to deteriorate alarmingly. The failure of the United
Nations-convened talks in Geneva to reach agreement,
followed by the failure represented by the recent
humanitarian hiatus, have had immediate impacts.
They risk undermining the Council's confidence in the
commitment of the parties to reach a political solution.
Again, we look forward to hearing from United Nations
Special Envoy for Yemen Ahmed about prospects for
progress. Above all, we need to find a way to stop the
fighting in order to address the massive humanitarian
needs.

We are mindfulthat Iraqis facing ongoing challenges
on a number of fronts. We support the Secretary-
General's request for a strategic assessment of how the
United Nations can extend support to Iraq. We believe
the Government's focus on further strengthening
national reconciliation efforts is essential.

In Libya, the recent initialling ofthe Libyan political
agreement by the Tobruk-based Libyan Government
and a significant number of Libyan factions represents
an important first step in what we hope will be a long
journey towards a lasting Libyan peace. We now urge
all members of the Tripoli-based General National
Congress to stand on the right side of history: to fully
commit to the Libyan political process and initial the
agreement. There must also be consequences for those
who decline to do so.

New Zealand has expressed its views on the Middle
East peace process in this Chamber since January.
The status quo is unsustainable and doing nothing
is not viable. To that end, the Middle East Quartet's
re-engagement in capitals on that issue in recent
weeks is encouraging. The Security Council must also
reengage. New Zealand has stated clearly that it sees a
window of opportunity in the latter part of this year,
when the Council should create a return pathway to the
negotiating table and support the parties once they are
there. That time is now close at hand.

Therefore, in this month's Middle East debate, the
Council can reflect on a truly significant milestone on
the Iran nuclear issue 4 the result of patient diplomacy
and a commitment by all parties to reaching a political
solution to settle differences. Those very same qualities
urgently need to be applied to the other pressing
challenges in the region. My country, New Zealand,
believes that the Council has a responsibility to settle
for nothing less.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

