Mrs. Odera (Kenya): When we last discussed the
situation in Afghanistan, my delegation expressed
disappointment at the stalemate in the peace process and
expressed the fear that the Taliban had determined that a
military solution was the only way to resolve the many
political, religious and cultural differences in Afghanistan.
That determination has increased the already great suffering
of the people of Afghanistan. The Security Council's calls
for restraint and negotiation and its appeals for an end to all
foreign involvement in the form of overt military and
financial support, have fallen on deaf ears.

We meet again today under even more disturbing
circumstances. The will to negotiate a peace has given way
to an overwhelming need to impose a military solution on
a political problem. This approach by the Taliban may seem
successful in the short term, but history teaches us
otherwise. Indeed, if the Taliban insist on a military
approach these short-term gains will eventually unravel,
leading to even more turmoil in the country and the region.
This is a cause of great concern for us.

Kenya has joined in sponsoring the draft resolution
before us because we believe that the Security Council
must again convey a clear, unequivocal message to the
combatants that the problem in Afghanistan has to be
resolved by peaceful means, through negotiation, and not by
military means. We are also fully aware that the flow of
arms, money and other supplies into Afghanistan has
definitely exacerbated the crisis in Afghanistan. Several
attempts to address this problem have not been successful.
Indeed, in his last report on Afghanistan, the Secretary-
General noted that this increasing support had made the
Taliban and the United Front believe that they could
achieve their goals by force. This deep concern is well
expressed in the preambular section of the draft resolution,
which deplores the fact that despite repeated pleas by the
Security Council, the General Assembly and the Secretary-
General for a halt to the involvement of foreign military
personnel and the supply of arms and ammunition to all
parties in the conflict, such interference continues
unabated. We strongly urge those involved to stop in the
interests of long-lasting peace.

This military conflict and its attendant excesses has
injured two officials of the United Nations Special
Mission to Afghanistan (UNSMA), claiming the life of
one. We join in the strong condemnation of this terrible
act and join the international community in calling upon
the Taliban to investigate this crime. During this time of
sorrow Kenya conveys its deepest condolences and most
heartfelt sympathies to the family and friends of military
adviser Lieutenant-Colonel Carmine Calo of Italy, and to
Political Affairs Officer Eric Lavertu of France its best
wishes for a quick recovery.

We share the disappointment expressed by others,
that the Steering Committee adj ourned without completing
its work. We believe that the strategy the Secretary-
General has laid out, and which was being implemented
by Ambassador Brahimi and the United Nations Special
Mission to Afghanistan, is worth pursuing. UNSMA
should not give up in frustration, and we encourage it to
continue its efforts.

We support the Secretary-General's approach in
encouraging the international community to speak with
one voice regarding the road map that needs to be
followed. We also think that UNSMA's idea of a step-by-
step process in confidence-building is worth following up.
In fact, the idea of convening a genuine Grand Assembly,
or Loya Jirgah, to promote a political settlement may also
need to be considered. We believe that the principles of
national reconciliation it embodies are positive and would
enhance a true process of healing and peace.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to thank the
Russian delegation for coordinating negotiations on this
draft resolution, which we will support. We hope that the
combatants will this time take heed and listen to the
unanimous voice of the international community.

