Mr. Mahugu (Kenya): For the first time in many
months, the Security Council is having an open debate on
the situation in Somalia. Today's meeting is particularly
significant because it comes at a time when the people of
Somalia are once again attempting to establish dialogue
among themselves.

Somalia has travelled a long road. My delegation
recalls that in October 1996, the main factions, led by
Hussein Aidid, Osman Atto, and Ali Mahdi, meeting in
Nairobi, restarted the process of dialogue when they
agreed to reopen the ports and committed themselves to
establishing a broad-based all-inclusive Government.
Unfortunately, that agreement was short lived and
hostilities resumed soon after.

In December 1996, 27 political parties, meeting in
Sodere, Ethiopia, resolved to establish a National
Salvation Council which would form a transitional
authority for Somalia. Unfortunately, the 27 parties did
not include all the major factions, and as a result the
outcome was rejected by the Aidid faction, which refused
to join the process.

Other efforts by members of the international
community, and particularly the Government of Italy,

 

have sought to add to or complement these efforts. More
recently, meetings have been held in Cairo. We welcome
all these efforts since they encourage dialogue and political
negotiations among the people of Somalia. But they are not
enough and serve only as a foundation. We can only
remind the leaders of the Somali factions that they
themselves will have to resolve the problem of Somalia and
that no one else can solve their problem. They therefore
must go the extra mile and learn to accommodate and be
flexible as they proceed in the difficult task of finding
common ground. Any meaningful effort must be all-
inclusive to accommodate all parties.

We urge the international community to keep the issue
of Somalia on its agenda and to continue to respond to the
needs of the people of Somalia even in these difficult times.
The United Nations agencies have in particular continued
to monitor and respond to humanitarian needs. The need for
humanitarian assistance will no doubt remain as long as the
political problem remains unsolved. While my delegation
calls on the international community to continue to render
assistance to Somalia, we at the same time call on the
Somali leaders to respect international humanitarian law.
There have been many cases in which international
personnel have been killed, wounded or subjected to
kidnapping or extortion. The lack of security for relief and
rehabilitation operations remains an impediment to the
delivery of assistance to the populations in need and must
be carefully looked into by faction leaders.

As a member of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), which has been continuously
involved in the search for peace in Somalia, I wish to stress
the following points. First, the prospects for peace in
Somalia have never been greater and the international
community should seize this opportunity to facilitate
negotiations and dialogue. Secondly, all efforts aimed at
securing peace in Somalia should be complementary and
coordinated with the IGAD initiative that is already in
place. Thirdly, the planned Bossaso conference should be
provided with material and financial support to ensure its
success.

We must, all of us together, help the people of
Somalia to help themselves. A regional initiative is in place,
and we call on the international community to support it.
Kenya will continue to do all in its power to assist the
people of Somalia in the search for peace.

