Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I have
the honour also to speak on behalf of the European
Union (EU) and those countries that have aligned
themselves with this statement.

I should like to start by thanking the three
Committee Chairmen for their comprehensive
briefings.

Once again, recent events have shown us that the
threat of terrorist attack is ever present. It seems that
every time we gather for a meeting of this type, we
must face the harsh reality of recent terrorist action.
The European Union extends its deepest condolences
to the people and the Government of Indonesia and to
the victims in Bali. The terrible events that they and
others around the world have suffered have served only
to renew our determination to fight this battle and to
maximize our efforts to counter this global menace.

The European Union welcomes the steps that the
United Nations is taking in that direction. In particular,
we strongly support the measures outlined in the
summit outcome document (General Assembly resolution 60/1) and in Security Council resolution
1624 (2005). We fully expect and look forward to the
conclusion of a comprehensive convention on
international terrorism during the present session of the
General Assembly.

We are also highly appreciative of the
appointment of the new Commission on Human Rights
Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of
human rights and fundamental freedoms while
countering terrorism. The European Union firmly
believes that any strategy to counter terrorism must of
necessity be coupled with a concern for the rights and
freedoms of individuals.

The European Union welcomes the adoption of
the new Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions resolution -
resolution 1617 (2005) - in particular the clarification
it provides on the definition of association with
Al-Qaida, and its encouragement of Member States to
endorse the internationally recognized Financial Action
Task Force standards. We hope that, following that
endorsement, the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC)
now intends to adopt the standards as an example of
best practice for States.

We are also pleased to note that resolution 1617
(2005) tasks the Committee with furthering work on its
guidelines, including on procedures for delisting and
providing humanitarian exemptions. The European
Union strongly favours the creation of clearer and more
detailed guidance on those issues, and we urge the
Committee to begin its work in that area as soon as
possible.

The European Union also welcomes the adoption
of resolution 1624 (2005) and looks forward to the
Counter-Terrorism Committee's working to ensure that
States are doing all that they can to implement the
resolution. We are pleased that the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate (CTED) is now at full strength,
and we are glad to note that the resulting increase in
CTC and CTED capacity has led to the production of a
full and forward-looking programme of work.

In particular, the European Union places great
emphasis on the importance of the coordination and
facilitation of technical assistance, and we keenly
anticipate the expansion of the CTED's role in those
areas. We look forward to its increased engagement
with international, regional and subregional
organizations and with the donors in order to produce
tangible results. The EU has participated in CTED
visits to countries with which it has a close
relationship, and it looks forward to doing so again.

The European Union welcomes the ongoing work
of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). We are pleased to
learn that the Committee has now completed its
examination of the first reports submitted by States.
We welcome the beginning of more work on technical
assistance for States to implement the resolution, and
the EU stands ready to play its part. Our member States
are working hard to identify key areas of
implementation to address, from both national and
international perspectives, and we would be glad to
consider any requests for assistance or advice to such
States as might be required.

The European Union supports increased
coordination and cooperation among the three
Committees and their experts. Issues such as
information-sharing, visits and technical assistance are
relevant to the Council's work overall, and the work of
the Committees should reinforce one another as much
as possible in those areas. As a regional organization,
the European Union welcomes the adoption of Security
Council resolution 1631 (2005) and stands ready to
work with the Council to take forward close
cooperation in the area of counter-terrorism.

Implementing our regional strategy to counter
terrorist financing remains a high priority for the
European Union. Notable achievements include
progress towards adopting and implementing new
regulatory measures to tackle terrorist financing and
regulate wire transfers, alternative remittance systems
and cash couriers. We continue to work towards an EU
code of conduct for regulating the charitable sector by
improving financial information exchange and
investigation, as well as by improving asset-freezing
measures at both the EU and national level. We are
also working on a programme of assistance to priority
third countries and are actively considering to which
other countries the EU could usefully contribute. We
are in the process of drafting a Europe-wide strategy on
recruitment and radicalization, and as always stand
ready to play our part in the global response to
terrorism.

