Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): Russia is extremely concerned over the acute
humanitarian situation in Iraq, which has reached the
critical mark because of the effects of sanctions, and we
believe that those sanctions must be eased in response to
the constructive steps already taken by Iraq, so motivating
Baghdad to comply fully with the resolutions of the
Security Council. We believe that it is necessary for urgent
and effective measures to be taken to ease sanctions and
alleviate the situation of the Iraqi population. With this in
mind, our delegation played an active part in the
elaboration of the resolution that has just been unanimously
adopted by attempting to ensure that it really achieves its
humanitarian objective. For it to do so, the resolution must
not be a mere instrument of propaganda; rather, it must be
implementable, which it can be only with the cooperation
of the Iraqi Government.

This was also the premise underlying our work with
the sponsors of the resolution, the other members of the
Security Council, and also Iraq. Together with a large
group of delegations, we proposed specific amendments to
the sponsors, and we note with satisfaction that, as a result
of consultations, we managed to have included provisions
ensuring that its noble objectives will be attained, and this
made it possible for us to vote in favour of the resolution.
It is of no small importance that the resolution affirms the
obligation of all States to respect the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Iraq and makes provision for the
Government of Iraq to participate in agreeing specific ways
of implementing this act of humanitarian relief. The text
clearly states that the measures proposed for Iraq are
temporary and do not substitute for any future agreement to
lift the oil embargo against Iraq under the terms of
paragraph 22 of resolution 687 (1991), once Baghdad has
fulfilled the disarmament requirements imposed on it by the
Security Council. We expect that if Iraq continues its
constructive cooperation with the United Nations Special
Commission, it will in the near future enable us to solve
this problem. We also note the constructive position taken
by the delegation of Iraq during the negotiations on the text
of the resolution adopted today. We hope that this is yet
another sign of Baghdad's policy as regards cooperation
with the Security Council on all relevant issues.

We feel that through the work carried out we were
able to improve the text of the resolution substantially.
Unfortunately, it did not prove possible to solve all the
problems. This had to do primarily with the fact that the
principles of Iraq's sovereignty that are reaffirmed in the
resolution are not always backed up by specific procedures
for giving practical effect to those principles, in particular
in respect of Iraq's northern provinces, where the
humanitarian situation is deteriorating and the fault is not
only Baghdad's.

A number of the resolution' s provisions, paragraph 6
in particular, touch on issues in the bilateral relations
between Iraq and Turkey, which issues should be resolved
within that framework.

We hope that these remaining problems will be
satisfactorily settled during the forthcoming contacts
between the Secretary-General and the Government of
Iraq, which are provided for in the resolution. In order to
begin the implementation of the resolution as soon as
possible, we urge the Secretary-General to negotiate
generally acceptable procedures so that the resolution can
really be effective and not remain so much paper, which,
unfortunately, has happened with previous Security
Council resolutions on this matter. At the same time, we
call on Iraq to cooperate constructively with the
Secretary-General in order to ensure that this useful
initiative is given practical effect.

