Mr. Mathai (India): Let me begin byjoining others
in congratulating you, Mr. President, on presiding over
this high-level meeting on peace and security in West
Asia and North Africa. I also want to thank the United
Nations Secretary-General and the Secretary General of
the League of Arab States for their valuable statements.

Developments in West Asia and North Africa have
played a major role in shaping the history of the world
since ancient times. The region has been the birthplace
of major religions and great civilizations. By virtue
of the genius of its peoples, its strategic location and
its natural resources, the region has been a focus of
considerable interest internationally. It is therefore not
surprising that the momentous transformation that has
taken place in several countries of the region since late
2010 has been of great interest to the world at large.
The general aspiration has been that those
transformations should be peaceful and should
lead to inclusive and democratic outcomes within
their countries. The League of Arab States, as the
most important regional organization, predating the
United Nations, has played a significant role in the
unfolding of events in the region and has guided the
involvement of the international community in them.
Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter recognizes
the importance of regional organizations and their role
in matters related to the maintenance of international
peace and security. The Charter also provides a broad
framework for the Security Council's cooperation with
such regional organizations, while clearly stating that it
is the Council itself that has primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security.

Cooperation between the Arab League and
the United Nations began in the early 19505. Both
organizations have benefited from the convergence of
their desire to maintain international peace and security,
despite occasional differences. Enhanced partnerships
between United Nations agencies and the Arab
League at the institutional level in the fields of human
development, capacity building and the empowerment
of women and young people have been of great benefit
to the region. That existing cooperation should now be
further strengthened to help the countries of the region
meet their peoples' aspirations to play a greater role in
shaping their destiny. India stands ready to play its part
in that regard.

It is important to underline that the Council's
cooperation with regional organizations, particularly
the League of Arab States, should also avoid selectivity.
Cooperation with one regional organization should not
come at the expense of another. The goal of peaceful
resolution of conflicts should determine the Council's
actions. The international community should guide all
United Nations activities, including its cooperation
with regional organizations. Both the United Nations
and the League should use all the tools of diplomacy
to help the countries concerned in their transition to
an inclusive and participatory polity while maintaining
social stability and cohesion. Their cooperation should
encompass all the issues relevant to international peace
and security, particularly the fight against terrorism.
The principles of national sovereignty, political
independence, unity and territorial integrity must be
respected. It is also important that the peculiarities of
each situation be kept in mind.

If there is one issue that requires the immediate
attention of both the United Nations and the League of
Arab States, it is the Arab-Israeli conflict, including the
Israeli-Palestinian issue. That issue cannot be ignored
while we focus on recent developments in the region.
There can be no durable peace in West Asia without ajust
and comprehensive settlement, based on the realization
by the Palestinian people of their inalienable right to
a State of their own with internationally recognized
borders, living side by side and in peace and security
with Israel. We therefore urge both the Council and the
Arab League to facilitate the resumption of the Middle
East peace process as quickly as possible.

The League of Arab States has been playing an
important role in resolving the Syrian crisis. We fully
support a peaceful settlement of the conflict through a
Syrian-led, inclusive political process, based on a firm
rejection of any military intervention. We urge all sides,
Syrian and foreign, to cooperate in good faith with the
Joint Special Representative, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi,
so that the Syrian crisis can be resolved without any
further bloodshed.

