Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Uruguay voted in favour of resolution 2310 (2016)
because of the intrinsic importance of the subject and
because we believe in the need to work towards the
entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty (CTBT). The CTBT, whose entry into force we
encourage today, is a keystone of nuclear disarmament
and the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. As such,
it will contribute to strengthening international peace
and security in addition to helping bring about a safer
world.

Promoting the universality and rapid entry into
force of the CTBT, which has been open for signature
for 20 years and which today still needs ratification
by the eight States listed in annex 2, is a priority in
order to address the danger posed by nuclear-weapon
tests to the international community. In that regard,
Uruguay once again urges States to ratify the text of
the Treaty, in particular those annex 2 States whose
ratification is required for the Treaty's entry into force.
We would encourage them to take this initiative and
ensure the appropriate ratification of the Treaty as soon
as possible. The greatest responsibility for the entry
into force of the Treaty falls on the shoulders of those
States possessing nuclear weapons.

Uruguay, as a country commited to strengthening
the disarmament and non-proliferation system,
advocates for a world that is free of nuclear weapons.
The mere existence of nuclear weapons is itselfa threat
to peace and security in the world, and their total
elimination is the only guarantee that they will not be
used.
This meeting is also an opportunity for us to
remember the humanitarian impact of nuclear weapons.
This is something that has been examined at various
international conferences, where it has been made clear
that there are limitations in terms of the prevention
of the use of nuclear weapons and that we are truly
defenceless, no matter whether they are used offensively
or accidentally. The humanitarian consequences of
destruction with these weapons is something that should
lead to an express and immediate ban, and for this
reason we appeal for the fulfilment and implementation
of all of the commitments undertaken in the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.

