Mr. Rahman (Bangladesh): Madame President,
let me begin by thanking your country, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and you personally for steering this very
important open debate on the situation in the Middle
East. My delegation would also like to congratulate all
the new members of the Council: Colombia, Germany,
India, Portugal and South Africa. We wish them all the
very best in their work in the Council. I also would like
to convey our appreciation to Under-Secretary-General
Lynn Pascoe for his comprehensive briefing this
morning.

I also wish to state that the delegation of
Bangladesh aligns itself with the statements delivered
by the representatives of Egypt and Tajikistan on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, respectively.
In addition, I wish to briefly make certain points that
Bangladesh believes to be of importance.

The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question, has always been of major concern
to the international community and the United Nations.
A durable and sustainable resolution of the Arab-Israeli
conflict, including the issue of Palestine, which is the
core of the long-lasting crisis, must therefore be our
collective strategic objective. All Member States
should pledge complete commitment to this objective
and throw their full moral, diplomatic, political and
economic support behind its early realization.

Bangladesh is always ready to play a constructive
role in this collective endeavour to achieve a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace in the Middle East
based on the two-State principle. Bangladesh unites
with the international community in reaffirming its full
support for the Palestinian people in their just and
legitimate struggle for self-determination and freedom
from continued occupation.

The people of Palestine are being denied their
fundamental rights to self-determination and right to
live freely in their own land, and displaced Palestinians
have been denied their rights to return home and to live
in dignity and safety. Unfortunately, this appears to be
a collective failure on the part of the international
community, and even more so of the people of Israel,
who suffer deprivation as they fail to rise to the
occasion by guaranteeing the people of Palestine their
fundamental right to self-determination and to a
sovereign State of their own, side by side with Israel.
In order to achieve a lasting solution in the Middle
East, it is very important to address the key issue,
which is the prolonged and illegal occupation of Arab
territories by Israel.

We are disheartened to see that, although Israeli
Prime Minister Netanyahu and President Mahmoud
Abbas of the Palestinian Authority pledged in
September 2010 to seek a framework agreement on
permanent status within a year, that process has
suffered a serious setback. This is because, regrettably,
Israel did not renew a 10-month settlement
moratorium, which did not include East Jerusalem,
when it expired at the end of September 2010, and
Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas has refused to
resume peace talks with Israel until it ends all
settlement activity.
My delegation believes that direct negotiations
will be successful only if there is sustained regional
and international support for the talks, the parallel
process of Palestinian State-building and the pursuit of
a just, lasting and comprehensive regional peace as
envisaged in the Fourth Geneva Convention and in the
relevant General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions, particularly Security Council resolutions
242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 425 (1978). Success also
requires regional and international support for the
principle of land for peace and the Madrid Conference
terms of reference, which guarantee Israel's withdrawal
from all occupied Arab and Palestinian territories back
to the line of June 4 1967, and for the Road Map and
the Arab Peace Initiative, which are the best guides for
achieving a two-State solution.
In conclusion, let me reiterate Bangladesh's long-
standing position that the continued illegal occupation
of Palestine over the past six decades is the root cause
of violence, unrest and destabilization in the region.
Let me also reiterate our full support for a lasting
peace for all inhabitants of the region, both Arabs and
Israelis, and our strong commitment for the realization
of an independent, sovereign and viable State of
Palestine with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, living
side by side and in peace with all its neighbours.

