Ms. Blakemore: I thank you, Ambassador Haley,
for inviting me to speak on this important topic.

My name is Sarah Blakemore and I am the the
Chief Executive Officer of Keeping Children Safe, an
international non-governmental organization (NGO)
that works with organizations in almost every country
of the world to protect children and adults at risk from
all types of abuse.

The issue of preventing abuse by peacekeepers is
a particular concern to Keeping Children Safe because
its establishment, in 2002, coincided with the exposure
of widespread sexual exploitation and abuse carried
out by peacekeeping personnel and staff, in more than

40 humanitarian aid agencies, of children in refugee
camps in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone.

Since then, in partnership with the University of
Reading, we have been researching evidence-based
solutions to addressing abuse in the context of
peacekeeping, with a particular focus on ensuring that
organizations do all they can to prevent abuse, and, if
abuse does occur, that they ensure that the rights and
wellbeing of victims are paramount. I am going to share
some of the stories of victims who have taken part in
that research.

The vast majority of peacekeeping personnel
perform their jobs with courage, dedication and
professionalism. Yet in conflicts and crises across the
world, peacekeepers have subjected people in situations
of extreme physical and psychological vulnerability
to rape, trafficking, violence and abuse, including
demanding sex for the basics of survival - food, shelter,
education and medicine. A significant proportion of the
victims have been children.

All organizations have the responsibility to
safeguard the people they serve, but the extreme
imbalance of power between peacekeeping personnel,
on the one hand, and the people whom they have been
sent to serve, on the other, makes it essential that robust
safeguarding systems be in place. Too often, however,
victims have no way of reporting the abuse, no medical
or psychosocial care and no access to justice. The
organizations that fail to protect them continue putting
them at risk, and the abusers go unpunished.

A mother in Haiti explained to us the desperate
situations in which this sexual exploitation takes place:

"We know which bars they go to. They come there
to buy sex. I need the money to feed my children.
Before we did not need to make money like this, but
now there is no work or food."

One woman in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo told us:

"Some of them pay money. But they also give you

food or tarpaulin or things we need. Where else can

we get these things?"

Another woman in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo told us:

"We stand near the bases because they come out
looking for us at night."

Sometimes babies are born as a result, and women
are left with little or no support for themselves or the
child. A young woman in the Central African Republic
told us:

"They say they will pay for the baby. Many do not,
but he did pay some money. But when he left the
money stopped. Now I cannot go to school. I cannot
afford to send my baby to school. What will happen
to us?"

Many women and their children suffer ongoing
stigma and discrimination:

"Everyone knows who is a MINUSTAH baby.
They say things about us. They treat our
children differently."

Child sexual exploitation and abuse by peacekeepers
is well known about within communities. Here is what
one 13-year-old girl in the Central Central African
Republic told us:

"Sometimes they just ask you to take your clothes
off so they can take photographs. But sometimes
they say you are their girlfriend. Those ones give
more money and help. But if you get pregnant they
find someone else."

Many of the children describe the ongoing impact
of being known to be exploited or abused:

"We can't go back to school because everyone
knows. The others, they won't come close to us.
The teachers don't want us there. Everyone knows
who has been with the peacekeepers."

That was from a 12-year-old girl in Haiti.

The abuse is not hidden. "Everyone knows who is
doing it", a little boy in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo told us. If everyone knows who is doing it, then
it is incumbent upon all of us to act to prevent it.

Keeping Children Safe calls on world leaders to
champion the safety of children at the highest levels by
requiring all organizations involved in peacekeeping
to implement robust international child-safeguarding
standards, including having advocates for victims'
rights, to prevent abuse, to protect the rights and dignity
of victims and survivors and to help bring perpetrators

to justice.

But if we are going to have any real and sustained
impact on this issue, then it is critical that we keep
listening to the voices of those victims. So I will end
with the words of a woman in Haiti, who told us:

"I told them what he [the soldier] did to me. But they
never told me what happened to him. Until I know
what happened to him, I will never have peace".
