Mr. Salam (Lebanon): Since the beginning of2016,
according to official United Nations statistics - let
me underline that those are official United Nations
statistics, not drawn from any Palestinian or Arab
source - the Israeli authorities have demolished
539 so-called structures in Area C of the occupied
Palestinian territory, as compared to a total of 453 for
all of 2015. Similarly, since the beginning of this year,
805 Palestinians have been displaced as a result of the
demolition of their homes, as compared to a total of
580 for all of 2015. In fact, statistics from the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs show that
from 50 demolitions per month in the period from 2012
to 2015, the average has risen to 165 per month since
January 2016, with 235 demolitions in February alone.
To put those figures into context, let me also recall that,
since September 2000, Israel has been responsible for
the killing of more than 9,300 Palestinian civilians,
including 2,100 children, and for the injury of more
than 87,000 persons. Moreover, since 1967, Israel
has been responsible for the demolition of 28,000
Palestinian homes.

Those facts are a clear reminder that Israel, the
occupying Power, has not only failed to meet its primary
responsibility under the Fourth Geneva Convention
to protect Palestinian civilians, but, on the contrary,
has been pursuing a deliberate and continuous policy
of strangulation against Palestinian civilians in total
disrespect for their lives and basic rights, with the aim
of perpetuating and consolidating its illegal occupation
of their territory. After nearly five decades of daily

violations of their basic fundamental rights - including,
among others, countless arbitrary arrests and detentions,
extrajudicial killings and torture - and after almost
five decades of confiscation of their private property,
the demolition of their homes and forcible displacement,
the least that the Palestinians of the occupied territories,
in both the West Bank and Gaza, can expect from the
Council, which under the Charter of the United Nations
is entrusted with the maintenance of peace and security,
is that, pending successfully ending the long-standing
Israeli occupation, it takes all the necessary measures
to ensure their protection, both as individuals and as
a people, including stopping all forms of settlement
activities on their land.

Let me now turn to the Syrian crisis. Last February's
agreement on a cessation of hostilities has given Syria
and its people a glimmer of hope that a settlement
of the conflict has become a realistic possibility. We
take this opportunity to commend Special Envoy De
Mistura for the tremendous effort and time he has
deployed to set the conditions for the achievement of
the cessation of hostilities, guided by the work of the
International Syria Support Group. We also recognize
the leadership of the co-Chairs of the ceasefire task
force, the Russian Federation and the United States, in
supporting the cessation of hostilities, which resulted
in a significant reduction in the number of civilian
casualties and cleared the path for the resumption of
the intra-Syrian talks in Geneva, which, based on the
relevant Security Council resolutions, should lead
to the achievement of a lasting political solution that
meets the aspirations of the Syrian people to live in
peace and dignity in a sovereign and unified country.
Only such a solution could turn the present cessation
of hostilities into sustainable civil peace by allowing
the Syrian people to begin the long and arduous task of
national reconciliation and reconstruction and paving
the way for the return of Syrian refugees and displaced
persons to their homes and livelihoods.

Having said that, until the eventual return of
the 1.2 million Syrian refugees currently residing
in Lebanon, we continue to reiterate our call to the
international community to meet its pledges and to
provide Lebanon with the necessary means to deal with
that massive responsibility. Only adequate assistance
that integrates humanitarian and developmental
funding can enable Lebanon to provide for the needs
of the refugees and offset some of the negative impacts
that the protracted humanitarian crisis has left on my

country's economic growth and unemployment levels
and the pressure on our infrastructure in the education,
health, energy, water, sanitation and housing sectors.

It was just last month that my country was privileged
to welcome the joint visit by the Secretary-General,
the President of the World Bank and the President of
the Islamic Development Bank. It was an important
occasion for them to assess such needs at first hand.
Five years into the conflict in Syria and after multiple
donors conferences, in particular the one held in
London in February, it is crucial to establish a follow-
up mechanism to those conferences. In our statement
before the General Assembly on 20 November 2015 (see A/70/PV.59), we detailed our proposal regarding such a
mechanism to enable follow-up with donors regarding
the fulfilment of their pledges. Today, we reiterate our
call for such action.

For Lebanon, the joint visit also provided a
significant message of international support and
solidarity to help it maintain stability and security. In
that context, my Government has stressed the need to
fully implement resolution 1701 (2006) and to put an
end to Israeli violations of my country's sovereignty
by land, air and sea. We would also like to point out
that paragraph 10 of resolution 1701 (2006) requests the
Secretary General

"to develop, in liaison with relevant international
actors and the concerned parties, proposals
for the delineation of the international borders of
Lebanon, especially in those areas where the border
is disputed or uncertain".

We also recall that, among the chief purposes of the
United Nations, as stated in Article 1 of the Charter of
the United Nations, is

"to take effective collective measures for the
prevention and removal of threats to the peace".

My Government has also sought the good offices of the
Secretary-General in the delineation of the disputed
maritime border and the exclusive economic zone
between Lebanon and Israel, emphasizing that the
non-resolution of the issue would remain a source of
conflict that threatens peace and security in our region.

Let me conclude by going back to where I started
in order to stress again the urgent need for the Council
to put an end to the settlement activities in the
occupied State of Palestine and to provide international
protection to the Palestinians living under occupation.

A failure to do so would not only constitute a moral
and political abdication, it would amount to granting
Israel permission to continue its blatant violation
of the numerous resolutions of the Council and the
General Assembly on the question of Palestine, let
alone the principles enshrined in the Charter and the
rules of international law. In fact, the Council's failure
to live up to its responsibilities made it possible for
Mr. Netanyahu to declare on Saturday,

"It's time that the international community finally
recognizes that the Golan will forever remain under
Israeli sovereignty."

Is it not, rather, time for the international
community, represented by the Council, to remind
Mr. Netanyahu of Israel's obligations under resolution
497 (1981), which reaffirms the inadmissibility of the
acquisition of territory by force, and to condemn his
declaration in the strongest possible terms?

