Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I wish to welcome Foreign Minister of
Afghanistan Mr. Rassoul for his presence at this

meeting, and I thank him for his statement. I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Mr. De Mistura for his briefing.

Through the efforts of the Afghan Government
and people, progress has been made in the Afghan
peace and reconstruction process. The results are
encouraging. However, challenges also lie ahead. The
security situation in Afghanistan remains unstable.
Terrorist attacks occur from time to time. Economic
development is slow. Comprehensive stability and
reconstruction will be a long process. It requires the
unremitting efforts of the Afghan Government and
people. It also needs the continued support and
assistance of the international community. In that
regard, I would like to underscore the following five
points.

First, China is seriously concerned about the
worsening security situation and the increasing number
of civilian casualties. We hope that, in the transfer of
security responsibilities to the Afghan Government, the
parties concerned will earnestly assume the
responsibilities to help Afghanistan strengthen its
security capacity-building in order to ensure a peaceful
and stable transition.

Secondly, China supports Afghanistan in its
continued efforts to push through the Kabul process. In
order to achieve Afghan peace, stability and
development, there is a need to fully respect its
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity so
as to genuinely achieve an Afghanistan run by
Afghans.

Thirdly, China supports the peace and
reintegration programme led by the Afghan
Government. In China, we express our shock and
condolences at the tragic death of former President of
Afghanistan Professor Rabbani following the attack on
him and condemn the attack. China fully respects the
Afghan Government and people in their choice of their
own accord and hopes to see progress in its peace and
reintegration programme.

Fourthly, the international community must
support Afghanistan in its comprehensive economic
and social development. Parties need to deliver and
meet their commitments to assist Afghanistan. The
priorities identified by Afghan themselves in the
context of the Afghan National Development Strategy
must also be respected and implemented. The relevant
initiatives for Afghan economic reconstruction will be
seriously considered. We believe that we need to fully
heed the views of the Afghan Government and people
and to respect their sovereignty and ownership.
Regional countries must become involved and their
Views be fully taken into account. The relevant
initiatives need to be implemented on the basis of full
consultations and consensus among the parties.

Fifthly, China appreciates the active efforts of the
United Nations to push through the Afghan peace and
reconstruction process. China supports the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
in its continued leading role in coordinating aid to
support the Afghan peace and reconstruction. We hope
that UNAMA will strengthen its communication,
coordination and cooperation with the Afghan
Government.

As a friendly neighbour of Afghanistan, China is
consistently committed to good-neighbourliness and
friendship between the two countries. China attaches
importance to and actively participates in the Afghan
reconstruction process. China will continue to provide
assistance to Afghanistan within its capabilities, and
will work with the international community to
contribute to an early achievement of peace, stability
and development in Afghanistan.

