Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres and
the African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security,
Mr. Sma'il Chergui, for their comprehensive briefings.

The State of Kuwait aligns itself with the
statement to be delivered by the representative of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

Today I will address three issues pertaining to
our discussion, namely, partnership, peace operations
and funding.

First, with regard to partnership, Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations provides us with an
umbrella for regional cooperation. Seventy-three years
after its adoption, the majority of States Members of
the Organization adopted the Declaration of Shared
Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations, which addresses many issues, including
partnership, as stated in the Secretary-General's Action
for Peacekeeping initiative. The best example of that
is the cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union (AU).
The Security Council should therefore promote
cooperation with the AU Peace and Security Council
in keeping with its resolutions 2320 (2016) and 2378
(2017). Those two resolutions highlight the commitment
to promote collective security and take steps to further
cooperation, including funding operations.

The 2017 Joint United Nations-African Union
Framework for Enhanced Partnership in Peace and
Security, in addition to the annual meetings between
the Security Council and the AU Peace and Security
Council as well as the United Nations membership in
the AU Peace Fund Board of Trustees, will provide
renewed opportunity to promote dialogue between the
two organizations and support political solutions and
their priority.

Achieving the noble objective of silencing guns,
although still a long way off, remains possible with our
concerted efforts. Kuwait became an observer at the
AU in 2001 and hosted the third African-Arab Summit
in 2013, based on our belief in the importance of
cooperation with the African continent and the specific
importance it represents for Arab countries and their
common security.

We thank you, Mr. President, for holding this open
debate, and we look forward to seeing the Security
Council continue to devote its attention to regional
cooperation. We rely on the unity of African States, in
both the AU and the Security Council.

Secondly, with regard to peace operations, there
is no doubt that the AU is willing and determined to
address the challenges facing the continent. African
countries bear the primary responsibility for their
security at the national level. They also possess great
knowledge and the capacity for rapid response to
urgent challenges.

Field cooperation between the two organizations in
peacekeeping is represented through two peacekeeping
operations in two Arab countries, namely, the African

Union Mission in Somalia and the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, Those two
operations provide a model that puts African States at
the forefront of defending the security of their continent
and building the capacities of host countries, especially
because African troop-contributing countries have the
advantage of rapid response in addressing emergency
challenges. They have also built up a great deal of
experience over the past 20 years. Their troops now
account for almost half of United Nations peacekeeping
contingents. Therefore, cooperation between the two
organizations to define clear peacekeeping mandates,
including exit strategies and the role of women, has
become a priority of our institutional work based on the
Charter of the United Nations and the Joint Framework.

Thirdly, with regard to funding, we have followed
the official launch of the AU Peace Fund at the AU
eleventh Extraordinary Summit three days ago. That is
a historic turning point and a step towards promoting
African solutions for African problems in cooperation
with international partners, including the United
Nations, which is represented on the Peace Fund Board
of Trustees.

We hope to secure predictable, sufficient and
sustainable funding for peace operations led by the
African Union and mandated by the Security Council.
Of course, we will not be able to reap the benefits of
such funding unless mandates are achievable. Mandates
must be implemented in accordance with the three
principles of peacekeeping and with priority given to
political and peaceful solutions.

In conclusion, we express our appreciation to
peacekeepers in Africa and around the world, and to
all those who have sacrificed their lives for peace. We
would like also to renew Kuwait's support for the efforts
of the African States of the Security Council, including
their determination to present a draft resolution on
peace support missions next month.

