Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda) (spoke in French):
I would like to begin, Mr. President, by thanking
you again for organizing today's debate and, most
especially, we appreciated your statement this morning.

Rwanda takes the floor again to respond to the
statement made by the representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. I would like to recall here that
this morning Rwanda made a statement in the context
of today's discussion about peace and the quest for a
lasting peace, for permanent peace. Basing ourselves
on your statement, Mr. President, in which you recalled
that in 1961 there were already United Nations forces
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United
Nations Operation in the Congo. Already in 1961,
United Nations forces were sent and 53 years later there
is still crisis and conflict in the country.

Our statement was made in the context of the debate
about the quest for permanent peace. Our criticism was
directed against the United Nations and its inability
to support the Congolese to find permanent peace.
But then we heard the unfortunate statement made by
the representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in which he accused Rwanda of all sorts of bad
things, of being the source of all evil, of supporting the
Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) without offering any
evidence whatsoever. We have seen the various reports
that have been distributed; none of them contained the
smallest shred of evidence.

It is important to understand the problems of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo correctly. We
need to ask ourselves questions on an ongoing basis.
Was it Rwanda that assassinated the Prime Minister
Patrice Lumumba in 1961? No. Was it Rwanda that was
source of the secession of Katanga? No. Was Rwanda
responsible for putting Mobutu Sese Seko, a billionaire
dictator with castles in the south of France and bank
accounts in Switzerland while his people were dying
of hunger, into power and supporting him? No, it was
not Rwanda. Was it Rwanda that, in 1994, welcomed
and supported the Interahamwe after they committed
the genocide in my country? No. Who in the Congo did
not separate the refugees? It was not Rwanda; it was the
regime in place at that time, and the United Nations was
incapable of separating and disarming the Interahamwe
militia, which continues even today to wreak havoc
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in the form
of the Forces democratiques de liberation du Rwanda
(FDLR). They are same people who fled Rwanda in
1994.

We were therefore a little bit astonished by the
statement made by the representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo for the very simple and good
reason that today the armed forces of that country
are cooperating with the FDLR, the very people
who perpetrated the genocide in Rwanda, who killed
Congolese in the east of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, and who even attacked Rwanda in several
periods in the 1990s and the following decade.

I therefore think that it is unfortunate for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to refer to a
movement such as the M-23, which has ceased all
activities, for the purposes of accusing Rwanda one
more time, while there is movement and activity on the
ground that is causing desolation and misfortune in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Rwanda has tried to support the Democratic
Republic of the Congo within the framework of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region in
order to reach a peace agreement with the M-23. Last
year, in February, we signed the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework agreement for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes Region
precisely to try to tackle the deep-seated causes of the
conflicts in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
namely and principally, poor governance, a lack of State
authority and security and the inequitable distribution
of resources. Rwanda is still committed to that path,
and we will continue to help the Democratic Republic of
the Congo in a bilateral or multilateral context, but we
would like our Congolese friends to help us help them
and we would ask that they take a positive approach so
that we can help them to resolve their issues.

