Mr. Shin Dong Ik (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, I should like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having convened this important debate to discuss the
working methods of the Security Council. My thanks
also goes to the Portuguese delegation for their extensive
work in chairing the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions, which
has been instrumental in moving that issue forward.

With regard to the implementation of the note by the
President contained in document S/2010/507, we believe
that the Council has undertaken commendable efforts
to enhance the participation of the wider membership
in its work over the years. We are particularly pleased
to note that the number of open meetings has been
steadily increasing, while other forms of interaction,
such as the monthly briefings for non-members by
the presidency and meetings with police- or troop-
contributing countries, have helped to promote a better
dialogue with the general membership.

Presidencies have also promoted useful practices
aimed at increasing efficiency and expediency, such as
holding video conferences in open briefings in order
to provide updates from the field. I would also like to
recognize the Secretariat's work in reorganizing the
Council's webpage and in enhancing the availability
of information, including on mandates, reporting
cycles and an analytical and statistical overview of the
Council's activities over the past years.

While my delegation welcomes the progress made
thus far, we believe that more can be done. Let me
focus on three key areas outlined in the concept paper
(S/2012/853, annex) for today's debate: transparency,
interaction with non-members and efficiency.

First, we cannot emphasize enough the importance
of enhancing transparency in view of the growing
interest of the general membership in the work of the
Council. The Republic of Korea hopes that the Council
will strengthen its efforts to provide regular public
briefings and ensure an updated forecast of its upcoming
activities. At the same time, the relevant Council
documents should be made available to non-members
in a timely manner, so as to keep them informed of the
Council's activities. Such actions by the Council would
be helpful in assisting interested members to contribute
to the work of the Council in meaningful ways.

Secondly, we believe the Council should endeavour
to make greater use of formats that allow for enhanced
interaction with the general membership and regional
stakeholders that may play a crucial role in resolving
a specific conflict. Informal interactive discussions
and meetings with troop- and police-contributing
countries should continue to form an important part of
Council activities. That would allow greater interaction
with concerned parties and garner meaningful input
from them. The Council can also make better use of
Arria Formula meetings, so as to allow civil society
and non-governmental organizations to enter into
meaningful dialogue with the Council. The Council
should also work on expanding its relationships and on
enhancing coordination with regional and subregional
organizations. Cooperation with regional institutions
has become all the more essential for finding
appropriate solutions to crises and conflicts and for
making optimal use of resources and capacities. The
annual consultation mechanism between the Security
Council and the African Union Peace and Security
Council is a good example that could be replicated with
other regional organizations.

Thirdly, to deal with the ever-increasing volume
and diversity of its workload, it is imperative that the
Council undertake greater efforts towards increasing
its overall efficiency. My delegation notes that Council
members have reaffirmed their commitment to
enhancing the Council's work in the president's note
contained in document S/2012/402 of 5 June 2012.
We welcome the fact that the Council has agreed to
continue its efforts with a view towards having more
focused discussions by minimizing the delivery of
pre-prepared statements and by increasing interactivity
within the Council's negotiation process. Moreover,
we believe that planning its work better by adjusting
mandate renewal periods and aligning the timing of
reports on related issues would enable the Council to
work more efficiently. Cost-saving measures, including
avoiding regularly scheduling formal Council meetings
on Fridays or avoiding the translation of documents
over the weekend also merit continued consideration.

All in all, my Government would like to stress that
improving the working methods of the Security Council
is indeed an important component in bolstering the
effectiveness and overall legitimacy of the Council's
work. As a non-permanent member of the Council
for the next two years, let me assure the Council that
the Republic of Korea will remain deeply committed
to improving the Council's working methods and will
work strenuously to that end.

