Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): As an
associate country of the European Union, Bulgaria
supports the statement made yesterday by the
Permanent Representative of Greece on behalf of the
European Union.

I would like to make a few comments in my
national capacity. Bulgaria very much regrets that the
diplomatic efforts of the international community to
disarm Iraq by peaceful means did not produce the
hoped for results. In recent months, my delegation
defended in the Council a clear, consistent position for
the full implementation of resolution 1441 (2002). My
country made every possible effort to find a
compromise among the various approaches within the
Security Council in order to preserve the Council's
unity.

Military action turned out to be the last recourse
for disarming Iraq. We confirm our position because
Iraq was in clear breach of its disarmament obligations.
The Government of Iraq is the sole party responsible
for the serious consequences that it is now suffering.
The Baghdad authorities did not take their last chance
to comply with the relevant Security Council
resolutions, particularly resolution 1441 (2002).

My country appeals to all parties involved in the
conflict to strictly comply with their obligations under
international humanitarian law regarding civilians and
prisoners of war. Bulgaria believes that the
international community should not give up its
responsibility to Iraq. To the contrary, it should make
every necessary effort at the humanitarian and financial
levels to rebuild the country following the conflict.

The main task we face is to provide urgent
humanitarian assistance to the Iraqi people, including
to refugees in neighbouring countries. Bulgaria is
prepared to participate in this effort. My country
expresses its gratitude to the Secretary-General and to
the United Nations humanitarian organizations for the
steps they have taken to ease the suffering of the Iraqi
people. We believe that the Security Council should
adopt as soon as possible - if possible, tomorrow - a
resolution on humanitarian aid to the Iraqi people,
which should adjust the oil for food programme and
expand the Secretary-General's authority in that area.

Reaching an agreement on this subject is
particularly important for the unity of the Security
Council and to reinforce its credibility. My country
unreservedly supports the proposals, put forward in the
Council by the Secretary-General, to adapt the
programme to the current situation on the ground.
Acting effectively, and particularly with speed, is
essential right now. The Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi
Annan, with his moral and political prestige, is the best
possible guarantor that such action can be successful.
The Council must give him the flexibility he requires
to achieve this task.

As soon as the coalition's military operation is
over, every necessary effort will have to be made to
safeguard Iraq's territorial integrity, facilitate the
emergence of democratic institutions, establish genuine
rule of law and promote the country's return to the
community of free States. This process should logically
lead to the lifting of sanctions against Iraq and the
restoration of normal political and economic conditions
for the Iraqi people. The matter of rebuilding the Iraqi
society after the conflict should be resolved with the
assistance of the United Nations, with respect for the
right of the Iraqi people to determine their political

future and to exercise full control over their natural
resources.
Continued monitoring of weapons of mass
destruction is particularly important. Monitoring must
be carried out through the resumption in due course of
the mandate of the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission and the
adaptation of its work programme to new
circumstances.

Despite the undesirable turn that events have
taken in Iraq, Bulgaria still hopes that the United
Nations will remain at the core of the international
order and that the Security Council will continue to
assume the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security and the
reconstruction of Iraq after the conflict.

