Mr. Garcia Gonzalez (El Salvador) (spoke in Spanish): Mr. President, we welcome your initiative to
convene this open debate of the Security Council on
the impact of climate change on the maintenance of
international peace and security.

The world is now facing one of the greatest
challenges in its entire history. Climate change is
directly affecting millions of people, all species and
ecosystems in general. Various international forums
and organizations have been warning us for many years
about the impact of climate change on agriculture,
livestock and fisheries, particularly in countries located
in tropical and subtropical regions. This had had
negative consequences for small-scale rural subsistence
economies in marginalized areas of Africa, Asia and
Latin America.

El Salvador and the other Central American
countries, owing both to their geographical location
and natural environment and to their poverty levels and
social deficit, are among the regions that are most
vulnerable to and threatened by climate change. Our
country is experiencing heavy rainfall, storms, drought
and extreme weather events, which are having a
negative impact on public resources, the social and
economic base of the country and its democratic
governance.

Just as serious is the situation of small island
developing States (SIDS), which are suffering as a
result of the direct impacts of climate change. They are
affected mainly by problems that include coastal
flooding, the disappearance of some islands into the
sea, a reduction in freshwater resources, severe
drought, crop losses and an increased incidence of
disease, as well as threats to fish stocks, which
represent the main food source for many communities
in those States. All of the foregoing was stated by His
Excellency Mr. Marcus Stephen, President of the
Republic of Nauru, speaking on behalf of the SIDS.
My country aligns itself fully with his statement.

In the face of such a situation, a greater
commitment is necessary on the part of developed
countries so as to make progress on negotiations to
adopt a second commitment period under the Kyoto
Protocol and hence to achieve its objective of reducing
greenhouse gases.

Developing countries are the most affected by the
adverse effects of climate change, and they are the
least responsible for creating this problem. One
example of this, according to scientific studies, is the
estimate that by 2030, Central America will produce
less than 0.5 per cent of greenhouse gases; however, it
is already one of the regions that is most vulnerable to
the effects of this phenomenon.

Here we should recall the commitment made by
the developed countries to provide technical and
financial assistance to developing countries to enable
them to fulfil their commitments in terms of adaptation
to climate change and with respect to the adoption of
low-carbon development models.

One of the principles of international law is that

no State can exercise its rights if doing so harms

another State. International environmental law

establishes limits on sovereignty in the sense that no

State can use its territory in such a way that causes

serious environmental damage to other States. The

Framework Convention on Climate Change goes

beyond this principle, declaring the change in the
Earth's climate a common concern of humanity.

In this context, we welcome the appeal made by
the Chair of the Group of 77 and China, Ambassador
Argiiello of Argentina, for the main bodies of the
United Nations, within their mandates as accorded by
the Charter of the United Nations, to devote greater
efforts to addressing the impact of climate change and
its security implications.

In this case, there is a crucial need for the
Security Council to clearly recognize the threat that
climate change poses for international peace and
security and thus be able to respond with appropriate
actions to the impacts of this phenomenon in this
specific area. Climate change conditions and reduces
economic growth and social progress, multiplies and
magnifies territorial vulnerability and exacerbates
environmental degradation, and thus constitutes a
human security problem.

El Salvador is participating in various projects
and initiatives at the regional level aimed at reducing
vulnerability and adapting to climate change. The
Regional Climate Change Strategy is a reflection of the
common objective and the position of the Central
American countries to tackle head on the challenge
posed by climate change and its impact on the
population of the region. We appreciate the initiative of
the Security Council to debate this important topic,
which will require a great deal of political will in
multilateral negotiations for positive results to be seen
in the medium and long terms.
