Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, for his
very useful briefing. I would also like to welcome the
presence of Mr. Tieman Hubert Coulibaly, Minister for
Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of Mali.

(spoke in Spanish)

Peru notes with concern the situation in Mali. As
a non-permanent member of the Council, we hope
to contrbute to strengthening the commitment of the
international community to national actors with a
view to supporting their efforts to achieve sustainable
peace in that country. We believe that the humanitarian
situation facing the civilian population is serious, as is
the recurrence of heinous Violations of human rights in
Mali, in particular in the central and northern regions
owing to the actions of terrorist groups, clashes between
the various armed groups and a lack of State presence.

Peru recognizes and supports the work carried out
by the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) amid
an adverse environment and in complex operational
situations. I would now like to briefly mention the
political and security aspects, in which it is urgent to
make progress with greater speed.

First, on the political front, almost three years
since the signing of the 2015 Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali, it is necessary to make it a
reality. The establishment of a timetable for that is a
step in the right direction. However, it is necessary to
accelerate the pace. The holding of free and transparent
elections is a central objective, which must have strong
regional and international support. An increased
participation of women and young people should help to
build and strengthen the inclusive institutions required
to sustain peace. We also believe it important to move
forward as soon as possible with the constitutional
review process in order to establish the necessary order
for national institutions to provide security and justice
in the country, in line with the peace and reconciliation
agreement.

Along those lines, we welcome the recent decision
of the Secretary-General to establish the International
Commission of Inquiry and to request the Malian
authorities to look into abuses and Violations of human
rights and of international humanitarian law, including
conflict-related sexual violence. We support the fight
against impunity and implementation of the rule of law
in Mali.

Secondly, in the area of security, Peru highlights
the importance of adopting a regional perspective
that addresses in an integrated and multidimensional
way the root causes of the conflict, including the link
between terrorism and drug trafficking, organized
crime, human trafficking and other criminal activities.
We also emphasize the need to move forward with
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes for former combatants and to create decent
employment to prevent the resurgence of violence.
Peru considers the mandate given to MINUSMA to
provide operational and logistical support to the Joint
Force of the Group of Five of the Sahel to be positive.
At the same time, we believe that the operational
capabilities of the Mission should be strengthened. We
note with concern that the entire authorized force has
not yet been deployed and that there is a significant
deficit in its equipment. In that regard, we highlight the
need to guarantee the safety of the Blue Helmets on
the ground. Mali represents one of the most dangerous
environments. That is why we support the Secretary-
General's decision to address that cross-cutting issue of
many peacekeeping operations.

To conclude, we believe that sustainable
development is inseparable from peace and security. In
that regard, it could be of interest to include in future
reports figures for economic growth, which have been
good, with social indicators that give a clearer idea of
the challenges facing Mali in the area of sustainable
development, which we all support.

