Mr. Verbeke (Belgium) (spoke in French): I first
wish to thank you, Madam Minister, for having taken
the initiative to organize this public debate on the
relationship between the Security Council and regional
organizations, particularly, today, with the African
Union. I also welcome the presence here with us of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Congo,
Mr. Rodolphe Adada.

Cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union, as well as with subregional
organizations in Africa, has increased considerably in
recent years. Belgium welcomes this development. The
same is true for cooperation between the United
Nations and the European Union.

How to better determine the respective roles to be
played by regional and subregional organizations and
the Security Council in the management of crises
remains an important challenge. In practice and on the
ground, the same questions arise again and again. Who
should take the initiative: the United Nations or the
regional organization concerned? How do we
incorporate the regional dynamic in the United Nations
management of a crisis, and conversely, how do we
take account of the United Nations dynamic in regional
action? The management of the crisis in Darfur
demonstrates the complexity of this exercise.

Belgium trusts that today's discussion will help in
the formulation of an answer to those questions, with
particular emphasis on the specific role of the Security
Council as a driving force. I would also underscore that
for Belgium, this exercise will also help clarify the
framework for the relationship between the European
Union (EU) and the African Union (AU), especially
with regard to the support that the EU can usefully
provide to AU peacekeeping operations, in particular
through the Peace Facility. Here I refer to the statement
to be made shortly by my German colleague in
Germany's capacity in the presidency of the European
Union.

Cooperation, coordination and capacities are the
key concepts determining the success of joint action
between the Council and regional and subregional
organizations.

In resolution 1631 (2005), the Security Council
underscored the importance of closer cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations in all phases of managing a
crisis. To that end, regional and subregional
organizations must be able to play their roles
effectively. It is in this context that the question arises
of reinforcing their capacities, especially military.
Clearly, better coherence between the action of the
regional organization and the action of potential
financial donors and contributors will reinforce the
opportunities for joint action that Chapter VIII of the
Charter offers us.

Regarding the coordination of joint efforts, it is
clear that the United Nations must not hold the
monopoly. Regional organizations have an important
and sometimes even the primordial role to play. The
question then is to determine what paths can be
explored in order to better coordinate our joint efforts.
Increased participation by regional and subregional
organizations in the work of the Security Council,
through their participation on a case-by-case basis in

Council meetings, is certainly one element to consider.
Prior consultation on the Council's output - such as
resolutions, presidential statements and others - can
also contribute to better coordination of efforts of all.

But, as others around this table have said this
morning, we must consider better coordination between
the work of our Council and the African Union Peace
and Security Council. However, any action by regional
and subregional organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security must, in accordance
with the Charter, have the prior authorization of the
Security Council. It is therefore essential that decisions
of regional organizations not prejudge any action by
the Security Council.

Coordination, cooperation and capacities are
certainly the three parameters of our discussion today.
Must these parameters be confined to rigid and
predetermined scenarios? We do not think so. Belgium
believes that a pragmatic approach that focuses on
practice rather than on doctrine and that takes
particular account of lessons learned from ongoing
operations can be used as a framework for continuing
to reinforce and refine the relationship between the
Council and regional organizations.

