Mr. Koenders (Netherlands): The Netherlands
welcomes this important initiative to hold a debate on
energy, security and climate. It has come at the right
time. The primary responsibility of the Security
Council is to maintain peace and security.
Understandably, the Council tends to focus on current
conflicts. Sometimes, however, we need to look
beyond the horizon of current conflicts to explore the
challenges and threats to security that the future may
bring. I refer here to the very useful discussion in the
Council on the impact of HIV/AIDS on peace and
security in Africa.

Millions of people will listen to and watch the
Live Earth concerts on 7 July. They will wonder what
world leaders are and will be doing to reduce the risk
of climate change. The discussion here today
underlines the Council's commitment.

The recent Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC) report clearly shows, more strongly
than ever before, that action is urgently needed. The
world is being exposed to the increasingly devastating
effects of climate change. Climate change may have
far-reaching and potentially dramatic consequences for

security in regions throughout the world, such as
shortages of water and food, health problems,
population movements, and environmental and social
stress. New sources of conflict may emerge. Disasters
might occur more frequently, with more devastating
effect.

According to United Nations estimates, by 2010
the world will have 50 million environmental refugees,
even without taking the impact of climate change into
account. The report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (IPCC) refers to an 80 per cent chance
that availability of water in subtropical areas will
substantially decline. By 2050, billions of people will
be coping with an inadequate or even non-existent
water supply. It is obvious that this will have not only
social, economic and humanitarian, but also security
implications.

Climate, peace and security are, in our view,
global public goods of crucial importance. Though the
poorest countries have contributed the least to climate
change, they will be the most seriously affected by it.
And they lack the knowledge, capacity and resources
to deal with it. That problem must be addressed. We
have to ensure that countries can cope with the risks
posed by climate change. This is of immediate
importance. Not only individual countries but also
United Nations agencies, the World Bank and other
institutions have an important role to play in ensuring
full-fledged disaster preparedness.

Now, in order for this to happen, the 2005
Summit called for a culture of prevention. Timely
addressing of climate change and identifying its
potential security risks can help prevent conflicts. We
urge the Secretary-General of the United Nations to
alert the Security Council of climate related crisis
situations which might endanger peace and security.

The two main priorities of today, in dealing with
climate change and related security risks, are to reduce
emissions and to adapt to the impact of climate change.
It is urgent, now, to mitigate current trends. In my
View, it is unacceptable and irresponsible that
negotiations for a post-2012 arrangement are
deadlocked. We cannot wait.
As the German European Union presidency just
stated, the EU has shown leadership in an effort to
overcome the deadlock. Without waiting to see what
other countries would do, the EU leaders decided this
spring that emissions must be cut by 20 per cent by
2020. The Netherlands even wants to achieve a 30 per
cent cut. That should reduce the risk of climate change
to an acceptable interim level, but efforts need to be
continued beyond that date.

However, everything will depend on the
commitment of every country concerned. I am
referring here not only to the large industrial countries,
but also to all economies that contribute to the growth
of C02 emissions. The United Nations negotiations for
a post-2012 arrangement will be crucial if we are to
make that commitment together, and we urge Member
Sates to take the political initiative to make that
possible.

Climate change is making it more difficult and
more expensive to achieve the Millennium
Development Goals. It means that poverty will prevail
longer, and that is unacceptable. We have to stand by
the goals we set for ourselves in 2000. Addressing
climate change means addressing the Millennium
Development Goals. The IPCC also points out that
sustainable development can make countries less
vulnerable to climate change by enhancing their
adaptive capacity and increasing their resilience.

As is well known, the Netherlands has a special
relationship with water. Much of the country is below
sea level. The Dutch Government will continue to take
action to secure it from the effects of further rises in
sea level. We are willing to share our knowledge with
other delta countries, particularly in the developing
world. But the Netherlands is not only preparing for
threats from the sea. We are also taking account of our
rivers - the Rhine, for instance - that flow into the
Netherlands from our neighbouring countries. Water
availability in catchment areas will change, and that
might well influence stability between countries -
even between regions. We are working with countries
such as those in the Nile, Zambezi and Mekong basins
to cope with climate change and ensure water-supply
stability. The aim is to build confidence and promote
peaceful, mutually beneficial solutions.

Mitigation and adaptation will require new
funding, based on the principle that the polluter pays.
Those who are most responsible for climate change
should also be the ones to pay the most towards
mitigating its effects. Carbon markets play an
important role here. As an innovative way of funding
adaptation, a levy on carbon dioxide emissions and
other innovative financing mechanisms might be
further studied. I propose that the World Bank and the
United Nations actively continue exploring ideas for
innovative financing.

International legal instruments are also needed to
deal with the consequences of climate change.
Extensive knowledge already exists in the field, and we
need to bring the experts together with the
policymakers, politicians, diplomats and
non-governmental organizations. The Netherlands will
be happy to facilitate conferences and policy debates in
The Hague, the legal capital of the world, and take a
political initiative to further that.

I highly appreciate the discussion today in the
Security Council. Prime Minister Tony Blair
underlined the mismatch between the global challenges
we face and the global institutions available to confront
them. The United Nations needs to be streamlined to
meet those challenges effectively. We wholeheartedly
applaud the decision of Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon to make climate change one of his priorities.
Climate change requires us to reassess security risks,
so that we can take adequate preventive and corrective
measures. I invite the Secretary-General not only to
alert the Security Council of risks to peace and
security, but also to instruct United Nations agencies to
support preventive measures. I strongly encourage him
to continue working towards a world summit on
climate change. Such a Summit and today's debate
must contribute to addressing the problems of climate
change. We owe it to our children and future
generations. The billions of fellow citizens who will
experience the huge Live Earth event on 7 July. They
will rightly ask us to do that.

